Title       : Reduction of Defects in Ultra-Thin SIMOX
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0072955

Award Number: 0072955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $527740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Supapan Seraphin Seraphin@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Poirier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juan C. Heinrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses fundamental research issues in formation mechanisms of
              structural defects in ultra-thin SIMOX-SOI (Separation by IMplanted
              OXygen-Silicon On Insulator) materials and into the correlation between these
              structural defects and processing conditions. Finding the cause of defect
              formation and providing effective solutions to minimize defect density in
              ultra-thin layers are significant challenges, being approached by integrated
              structural, chemical, and electrical characterization with modeling of
              diffusional, growth, and ripening processes of precipitates to gain greater
              fundamental un-derstanding. This involves (1) microstructural and chemical
              analysis of newly designed ultra-thin SIMOX samples, by employing transmission
              electron microscopy (TEM), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM),
              electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and Auger electron spectros-copy
              (AES); (2) determination of the buried oxide integrity by C-V and I-V
              measurements; (3) in-depth understanding of the formation and growth mechanisms
              of the defects; (4) systematic evaluation of the formation of defects as a
              function of growth conditions by identifying the factors that control defect
              formation and incorporation; (5) comparison of the samples before and after
              annealing to study the dif-fusion properties of Si interstitials; and (6)
              modeling of the precipitate growth and coarsening. An-nealing effects including
              temperature variations, annealing times, and ramping and cooling rates will be
              investigated. In situ experiments will be conducted in TEM by using a heating
              holder (up to 1200 C) to investigate the dynamic structural evolution in
              real-time. This research project is collaborative be-tween the Department of
              Materials Science and Engineering and the Department of Mechanical and
              Aerospace Engineering, University of Arizona.
%%% 
The project addresses
              basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
              technologi-cal relevance. Advanced characterization techniques allow greater
              understanding and control of ele-mentary processes involved in SOI (silicon on
              insulator) technology which will allow advances in fun-damental materials
              science and technology. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the
              research is expected to contribute to next generation microelectronic
              materials.  An important feature of the program is the integration of research
              and education through the training of students in a funda-mentally and
              technologically significant area. 
*** 

