Title       : Non-Local Electron Transport in Inductively Coupled Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0072854

Award Number: 0072854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Demetre J. Economou economou@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project uses analytical methods and numerical simulations to understand the
              near-collisionless electron transport in inductively coupled plasmas (ICPs) at
              low pressures - below 10 mTorr.  Collisionless heating and the anomalous skin 
              effect are studied with emphasis on the influence of the oscillatory magnetic
              field induced by the RF current and an externally applied static magnetic
              field.  Since the efficiency of power deposition profiles are important issues
              in the use of ICP discharges, particular attention is paid to resonances
              between the applied discharge frequency and the bounce frequency of electrons
              in the self-generated potential well, or the cyclotron frequency in the case of
              the applied static magnetic field.  In the latter case, low-intensity static
              magnetic fields are studied in an effort to contour the power deposition
              profiles.  The non-local approach, a powerful method for analyzing low-pressure
              plasmas, is extended to cover the near-collisionless regime in both
              electropositive (argon) and electronegative (chlorine) plasmas.  The insight
              from these studies of electron kinetics and transport are incorporated into
              self-consistent simulations of ICPs at very low pressures.  The models and
              simulations are tested experimentally by measurement of electromagnetic fields
              and electron distribution functions in well-characterized ICP reactors. 
              Methodology is stressed so that the approach can be extended to other
              high-density, low-pressure plasmas such as electron cyclotron resonance (ECR)
              and helicon plasma tools.

Low-pressure, high-density plasmas, including
              inductively coupled plasmas (ICPs) are necessary to maintain uniformity when
              processing large-area surfaces, a paramount goal of the microelectronics
              industry.  They also have relevance for materials processing, fluorescent
              lighting, and other plasma applications.

This project includes
              collaborations with Osram Sylvania, the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory,
              the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, and the University of
              Saskatchewan.

