Title       : A Computational Framework for Reduced Feedback Control Design for Spatially
               Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0072629

Award Number: 0072629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Belinda B. King bbking@icam.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072629
King

This goal of this project is to develop a framework that can be
              used to 
design spatially distributed control systems.  Specifically, the
              outcome of 
this project is to provide a methodology to optimally place
              sensors and 
actuators and to construct practical reduced order controllers. 
              The 
approach is based on a unique combination of computational mathematics
              
and distributed parameter control theory. The framework is based on an
              
integral representation of the optimal feedback control that arises from the
              
solution of the infinite dimensional control problem. Computation of the
              
kernel of the integral (feedback functional gain) may be accomplished by
              
solving a numerical approximation of the infinite dimensional algebraic
              
Riccati equation. However, this approach is intractable for even the two
              
dimensional heat equation on a fairly coarse grid. The approach proposed
              
herein is based on the use of computational methods to directly solve
              
Chandrasekhar partial integro-differential equations for functional gains. 
              
Recent results on the smoothness and support of these functional gains can
              
then be exploited to optimally place sensors and actuators.  Moreover,
              
initial studies show how the gains can also be used to design robust
              low-
order compensators.

The motivation for this work comes from the need
              to have efficient, 
practical controllers for complicated physical systems.
              The focus of the 
proposal is the development of an approach that is
              applicable to a wide 
variety of areas ranging from materials processing to
              flow control.  In 
applications from such areas, there are several issues of
              primary 
importance that must be addressed. Among these are where to place
              
sensors to obtain accurate measurements to be used by the controller, what
              
to measure, where to place actuators (which implement the control), and 
how
              to design the controller so that the system is controller in real-time.
              
Typically, the issues with respect to sensors and actuators are solved
              
through engineering intuition. However, the mathematical framework that 
we
              propose gives specific answers to these questions. Moreover, it 
provides
              motivation for real-time control which is nearly optimal (in the 
sense that
              the design comes from the solution to a mathematical 
optimization problem)
              and is robust, which means that it is effective in the 
presence of
              disturbances, or dynamics which may have been neglected in 
designing the
              controller.  The potential benefits of this work are enormous. 
It would be
              applicable to complicated (and varied) problems such as 
stabilizing
              vibrations arising from shuttle docking at the space station, 
reduction of
              drag in aerospace vehicles, and optimal control of 
semiconductor
              manufacturing. It would provide a systematic approach to 
reduced order
              controller design, eliminating much of the guesswork that 
currently takes
              place.

