Title       : Boundaries and End Structures for Non-compact Spaces and Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a0072786

Award Number: 0072786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77061              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig R. Guilbault craigg@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0072786 - Craig R. Guilbault

For the sake of simplicity and convenience,
              topologists 
often focus on compact spaces. Nevertheless, non-compact
              
spaces---with all of their associated complications---are 
frequently
              unavoidable. For example, the complement of a 
compact subset of a closed
              manifold is not compact. Hence,
a topologist studying embeddings is quickly
              forced to consider non-compact manifolds. In fact, much of the foundational
              work 
in the area of non-compact manifold topology was motivated by
              
questions about embeddings.  While non-compact manifolds and 
complexes
              continue to play a central role in topology, an 
important new source of
              examples has entered the picture.
Increasingly, the examples of widespread
              interest arise as 
covering spaces of compact manifolds and cell complexes.
              
In fact, progress on some of the most fundamental questions 
in geometric
              topology and geometric group theory demand a 
better understanding of these
              types of spaces---most of
which are non-compact.  With these examples in mind,
              this 
project aims to generalize and expand our understanding 
of non-compact
              manifolds and cell complexes. Of particular 
interest are Z-compactifications,
              structure theorems for 
ends of non-compact manifolds, and existence and
              uniqueness
questions for boundaries of groups.

Many objects encountered in
              geometry and topology---like 
the real line and the Euclidean plane---are
              "unbounded" 
or "open" in nature. These spaces are fundamentally 
different
              from bounded or "compact" spaces, such as a
line segment, a circle, or the
              surface of the earth. 
The extra flexibility permitted by unboundedness opens
              
the door to exotic behavior "near infinity". There are 
many examples of
              unbounded spaces that---although
they are constructed from simple bounded
              pieces---have 
quite complicated geometry and topology near infinity. 
One
              strategy for investigating such a space is to 
"compactify" it by adding a
              boundary at infinity---much 
as an artist mentally creates a horizon of
              vanishing points 
to help him draw in perspective. When this is possible,
              
properties of the boundary can reveal important characteristics 
of the
              original space. In some sense, the boundary represents 
a crystallization of
              the "topology at infinity".  Another 
strategy for studying an unbounded space
              involves breaking 
it into a manageable collection of bounded pieces. Ideally,
              
one would like to choose pieces that capture key properties 
of the space,
              thus allowing one to study the non-compact 
space---one compact piece at a
              time. 

