Title       : Algebraic and Geometric Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0072133

Award Number: 0072133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $667998             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. James Milgram milgram@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph L. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Kerckhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-0072133

Abstract:
This  project consists of research programs
              in a broad range of topics in Algebraic and Geometric Topology.  The principal
              investigators, Professors R.L. Cohen, S.P. Kerckhoff, and R.J. Milgram are
              senior topologists whose research interests cover a large
number of areas of
              topology and related fields.     The postdoctoral  researchers on this grant
              also represent a broad range of research interests.  J. Brock works in low
              dimensional topology and dynamics, and C. Schlictkrull works in homotopy theory
              and algebraic  K-theory.  Included in these projects are the study of core
              topological questions
such as the study of 3 - dimensional geometry, the study
              of the topology of complex and related structures on manifolds, and topological
              invariants of finite groups.  In addition it includes applications of
              topological methods to engineering questions in the field of Robotics.

The
              topology of 3-dimensional manifolds is intimately connected to differential
              geometry, particularly to homogeneous structures like Euclidean, spherical, and
              hyperbolic geometry.  Of these, hyperbolic geometry is the most prevalent.  On
              a closed 3-manifold a hyperbolic structure, if it exists, is unique by the
              Mostow Rigidity Theorem.  Thus, any geometric invariant is a topological
              invariant and can be used to distinguish different 3-manifolds.  When the
              3-manifold has boundary, it can have a large parameter space of hyperbolic
              structures; in this case, the qualitative properties of the structures as one
              varies over the parameter space are of particular interest.   Kerckhoff and
              Brock are studying hyperbolic structures on 3-manifolds, trying to describe the
              behavior of these geometric structures under a topological procedure, called
              Dehn surgery.  For manifolds with boundary, 
they are also trying to
              understand the limiting behavior of the structures as one moves to the limits
              of the parameter space.  R.L. Cohen is pursuing several projects that involve
              studying algebraic topological aspects  of questons stemming from geometry.   
              
These projects lie under the following general headings.   
1. The topology
              of moduli spaces of holomorphic curves in complex and symplectic manifolds.  2.
              The homotopy type of the stable mapping class group and the Mumford Conjecture.
               3. Properties and applications of  holomorphic K-theory.   C. Schlichtkrull's
              project involves studying the topology of the stable diffeomorphism groups  
              Diff(X),  when X is either a point or the circle.  To do this he  will use
              techniques from Algebraic K -
theory and homotopy theory.  R.J. Milgram will
              pursue questions involving the
cohomology of finite simple groups, as well as
              applications of the topology of configuration spaces to questions in the design
              and behavior of robotic arms. 




