Title       : Development of a CD-ROM Based Multimedia Teaching Package for Introductory
               Materials Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9455333

Award Number: 9455333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. McMahon cmcmahon@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455333  McMahon  A three-year program to develop a CD-ROM-based multimedia
              package  for the teaching of an introductory course in materials science and 
              engineering is proposed.  It is intended that this package will  serve most of
              the purposes of the lectures in a traditional course  so that the classroom
              time can be devoted to the activities  normally carried out in tutorial or
              recitation sessions.  The  motivation for this is the increase in teaching
              effectiveness of  such sessions compared to traditional lectures. The package
              will be  built around animations created with Multimedia Director and 
              ancillary programs and video segments showing excerpts from  videotaped
              laboratory experiments created in a separate project, as  well as videotaped
              lecture demonstrations.  The techniques  necessary for the creation of the
              animations and for computer-based  editing of video tapes have been developed
              at Pennsylvania during  the past year, and the equipment and software necessary
              for this  are already available. The first two years of the project will be 
              devoted mainly to creation of animations and video segments and to  evaluating
              them by classroom use. They will be exported to other  institutions via CD-ROM
              for their use and evaluation.  The  development of the technique of integrating
              these with text and  voice into an interactive teaching package will also be
              carried out  in the first two years, and the third year will be devoted to 
              completing this package and evaluating it in classroom use so that  final
              adjustments and modifications can be made during the period  of the project. 
              The teaching package will be based on a new  textbook, now being published,
              which is part of the development of  a new approach to the subject.  This is a
              departure from the  traditional type of course in that it reorganizes the
              subject into  two large case studies, one on structural materials, using the 
              bicycle, and the other on device materials, using the WalkmanTM.   Experience
              at Pennsylvania and elsewhere has s hown this to be more  effective that the
              traditional method in an introductory course,  especially for nonmajors in
              materials science and engineering.
