Title       : Institute in the History of Mathematics and Its Use in Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1996   
File        : a9455088

Award Number: 9455088
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438661             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Frederick Rickey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor J. Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Assn of America
	      1529 18th St NW
	      Washington, DC  200361358    202/387-5200

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the mathematics reform effort of the past decade, there has been  growing
              recognition that the history of mathematics should be an  integral part of the
              teaching and learning of mathematics at all  levels. National standards for the
              preparation of teachers of  mathematics in K-12 call for inclusion of history
              of mathematics in  pre-service programs.  Mathematicians who teach the history
              of  mathematics and who use this history to improve their teaching are  in need
              of more knowledge and resources to prepare to teach their  students.    The
              Mathematical Association of America (MAA), in cooperation with  The American
              University (TAU), is creating an Institute in the  History of Mathematics and
              its Use in Teaching (IHMT). The goal is  to increase the presence of history in
              the undergraduate  mathematics curriculum and teacher preparation in
              mathematics  curriculum.    Through intensive three-week programs in two
              successive summers, 80  mathematics faculty members are being prepared to teach
              courses in  the history of mathematics and to use history to improve their 
              teaching of standard undergraduate mathematics courses. Thirteen  historians of
              mathematics, all of whom are known to be excellent  teachers, lead explorations
              of the history of mathematics from  antiquity through the twentieth-century,
              stressing applications and  links between different areas of mathematics.   
              Specific techniques for incorporating history into undergraduate  mathematics
              courses are a central theme. Through presentations at  national and regional
              mathematics meetings, publications, and  electronic communications, the
              information and techniques of IHMT  are being disseminated nationally. The home
              institutions, the  students at those institutions for generations and the
              collegiate  mathematics community will benefit from this broader understanding 
              of mathematics and its teaching.  Through the inclusion of history  in the
              undergraduate mathematics curriculum, a new generation of  teachers, as a
              resulty of their undergr aduate experience, will be  able to enrich the courses
              they teach and benefit all students, at  all grade levels, with interesting and
              relevant courses in  mathematics.
