Title       : A Novel Mechanism for Introducing Human Genome Research in Freshman Biology
               Classes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9455075

Award Number: 9455075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark V. Bloom bloom@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Micklos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Muratore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This experiment uses the powerful new technique of polymerase chain  reaction
              (PCR) to demonstrate the variable nature of human DNA.   Although the DNA from
              one person to another is more alike than  different, certain areas of our
              genome exhibit a great deal of  diversity.  Such variable sequences are termed
              polymorphic (meaning  many forms) and provide the basis for paternity and
              forensic  testing of DNA.  Many DNA polymorhisms are found within the 
              estimated 90% of the genome that does not code for protein.  A  special class
              of these polymorphisms is called an Alu insertion.   Alu elements are short DNA
              sequences that have amplified to about  500,00 copies, distributed throughout
              primate genomes.  A few of  these Alu insertions have occurred within the last
              million years  and are not fixed in the human genome.    Students obtain
              samples of their own DNA using a simple mouthwash  procedure (bloodless and
              noninvasive).  PCR is used to amplify  across an intron of the tissue
              plasminogen activator gene that may  contain an Alu insertion.  If the Alu
              sequence is present, then a  400-bp PCR product will result, while a 100-bp
              product is produced  when the Alu sequence is absent.  Following amplification,
              student  samples are loaded into an agarose gel, electrophoresed, stained,  and
              photographed.  Each student will see one or two bands in their  gel lane,
              indicating whether they are homozygous for the Alu  insertion, homozygous for
              the absence of the insertion, or  heterozygous for the insertion.
