Title       : 3-D Solids Modelling and Manufacturing Design Workshop for Lower Division
               College Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1996  
File        : a9455076

Award Number: 9455076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95284              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Barr rbarr@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Davor Juricic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Concurrent engineering is a new approach to product development in  which all
              phases of the design paradigm are considered  simultaneously during the early
              stages of the design process. The  concurrent engineering paradigm is
              characterized by a 3-D solid  model data base that can be used directly for
              engineering analysis,  prototype manufacturing, and production of engineering 
              documentation. Engineering and technology curricula should be  modified
              accordingly to answer this modern need for concurrent  engineering design
              education. Of particular interest in this  project is the infusion of a
              meaningful concurrent engineering  experience in the lower-division curriculum
              where students need  motivation and encouragement to continue their studies.   
              The format of the project consists of two one-week workshops held  during the
              summer of 1995 at the University of Texas at Austin. The  workshops will be
              accessible to lower-division faculty from both  four-year schools and two-year
              colleges. A total of 48 faculty  participants will be accommodated and matched
              to one of the  workshops based on their background. Topics of the workshop will
               include: 1. 3-D solid modeling techniques; 2. application of solid  model data
              to design analysis such as mass properties and finite  elements; 3. application
              of the model data to manufacturing  simulation and rapid prototyping; 4.
              generation of engineering  documentation from the solid model; and 5.
              curriculum and  laboratory development issues. A highlight of the workshop will
              be  a short team design project in which a rapid physical prototype is  derived
              from a solid model of a mechanical part designed by the  team.    The project
              will prepare the participants to develop local  instructional material and
              modern CAD/CAM laboratories that will  afford their students a meaningful,
              early exposure to concurrent  engineering design concepts. In addition, the
              project will motivate  the participants to become active in making and
              publishing their  own contributions to eng ineering education.
