Title       : MIDDLE MATH: A Project to Improve the Undergraduate Preparation of Teachers of
               Middle Grade Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1998  
File        : a9455152

Award Number: 9455152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney L. Rachlin rachlins@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary B. Eron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To focus attention on improving the undergraduate preparation of  teachers of
              middle grades mathematics, the MIDDLE MATH Project  will host two Summer
              conferences and an academic year seminar.  Forty mathematicians and mathematics
              educators from across the  United States will work collaboratively to develop
              middle grades  certification or endorsement programs.    During the first
              conference, participants will: explore the NSF  Middle Grades Mathematics
              Curricula currently being developed;  hear and react to the developers'
              perspectives on how curriculum  change should affect teacher preparation;
              review past teacher  preparation projects; analyze the NCTM and MAA
              recommendations  for change; and reflect on relevant research.    Using
              electronic mail, a team of research mathematicians and  mathematics educators
              will guide seminar participants in a  focused look at the nature of the college
              mathematics that middle  grades teachers should experience. They will review
              the middle  grades text from the NSF-funded NCTM Research Interpretation 
              Project and will discuss the past NSF Middle-School Mathematics  Teachers
              Preparation Projects with their developers.    The second summer conference
              will serve as a catalyst for change.  Participants will explore ways in which
              to use research on the  learning of undergraduate mathematics to support and
              inform  curriculum development. Working groups will be established to  help the
              participants review and refine drafts of their proposed  program models, course
              syllabi, and related publications. An NSF  program officer will discuss
              potential sources for funding  continued reform efforts.    The MIDDLE MATH
              Project monograph will include edited  descriptions of selected teacher
              preparation programs, course  syllabi and related papers. It is hoped that the
              project will  serve as a catalyst for change. Participants will use knowledge 
              gained from learning of relevant NSF initiatives to create more  appropriate
              middle grades programs.
