Title       : Building Conceptual Frameworks with Synchronized Multiple Visualizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9455747

Award Number: 9455747
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel W. Russell russell@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Becker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Kozma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Awbrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed A. Zohdy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tamar Y. Susskind  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine M. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria M. Szczesniak-Bryant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    313/377-2100

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A common dilemma of first-year college chemistry is that the needs  of diverse
              student populations are not being met by the traditional  instructor focused
              classroom.  At College of DuPage, Oakland  Community College, and Oakland
              University this diversity includes  ethnicity, age distribution, aptitude,
              science background, and  learning styles.  In this project, classroom time is
              being used to  help students develop conceptual understandings that incorporate
               the ability to view phenomena from multiple perspectives.   Classroom
              activities stress active learning and scientific  exploration.  Topics and
              methods are used that reflect contemporary  science integrated with the
              personal experiences and interests of  students.  Interactive-multimedia
              materials, showing synchronized  multiple representations of chemical species
              and phenomena, are  being developed and used in classrooms and by groups of
              students.  A sense of ownership of new materials and commitment to their use 
              is being developed by involving faculty, from all institutions, in  their
              selection, design, development and evaluation.  Student  versions encourage
              group learning and exploration.  Training  workshops are aimed at assisting
              faculty in implementing the  multimedia materials in manners that promote more
              active learning  environments.  Evaluations assess: 1) changes in classroom 
              pedagogy, 2) achievement gains of students, and 3) changes in  students'
              attitudes toward science.  Project products will be nine  multimedia modules,
              student versions of each module, training  workshops and their support
              materials, assessment materials and  research analyses of the effectiveness of
              all products.
