Title       : A Multidimensional Computer-Assisted Course for Teaching the Fundamentals of
               Ethnographic Field Research Methods in a Laboratory Environment to
               Undergraduates in Anthropology...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1997   
File        : a9455699

Award Number: 9455699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel L. Carlos carlos@alishaw.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455699  Carlos   Cultural anthropology is grounded in field research. Most 
              undergraduates never get the opportunity to explore the  relationship between
              ethnographic theory and field methods by  applying research methods in a field
              environment. This project  addresses these limitations by developing an
              undergraduate course  that combines classroom-based instruction and
              computer-based field  research simulators used in a computer laboratory. The
              simulators  complement lectures, readings, and a course handbook that guides 
              students through the lesson objectives. These materials are  integrated into a
              year-long course on scientific field data  collection methods and analysis and
              their relationship to  ethnographic theory.  We propose to further develop
              interactive  cmmputer simulators (a prototype has been developed) to recreate 
              key aspects of the field research experience in an actual peasant  communities.
              These simulators allow undergraduates to actually "do"  fieldwork, use theory
              as a framework for field research, analyze  their own data, and manage limited
              resources in an interactive  research environment. Development of curricular
              materials and  simulators includes peer review and extensive consultation with 
              technical experts available on campus to the Pl. The materials are  scheduled
              for extensive off-campus evaluation.  The impact of this proposal is twofold:
              (1) scientific research  methods, analysis, and theory can be taught
              hand-in-hand with  actual field research assignments, and (2) students learn
              broadly  applicable and transferable social scientific research skills, 
              including the management and organization of computerized  ethnographic data.
