Title       : Educational Earthquake Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9455417

Award Number: 9455417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138133             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Wysession michael@wucore.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Despite the important role that earthquakes and seismology play in  the Earth
              sciences, there has been up until now no good way to  visualize the process by
              which an earthquake generates waves that  propagate throughout the Earth. These
              seismic waves are important  because they cause destruction in many parts of
              the world, are used  to determine the location and size of the earthquakes, and
              are the  means by which geologists have mapped out the interior of the  Earth.
              Without a way to visualize the process of seismic waves  spreading throughout
              the Earth after an earthquake, it has been  very hard to explain this
              phenomenon and for students to understand  it. The difficultly lies in the fact
              that the production of such an  animation requires advanced geophysical
              algorithms, high-speed  computational capabilities, and a strong dedication to
              use these  research capabilities for an educational purpose. This project 
              meets this need by producing a computer-graphics color animation  that
              accurately represents the propagation of seismic waves from an  earthquake,
              available to educators in both VHS-video and computer  formats.  The project is
              based on a prototype of such a  video-animation recently made by the PI.  The
              production of a  realistic visualization of earthquake wave propagation through
              the  Earth is computation ally intensive. The prototype took 5 months of 
              computation on a Sun Sparcstation 10/41.  The animation will not  only give
              viewers an intuitive feel for the internal structure and  layering of our
              planet, but also teach the principle of wave  physics applied to the Earth,
              showing waves reflecting, refracting,  and diffracting along the different
              layers within our planet. The  computer animation will be narrated, presenting
              an educational  discussion of earthquakes, their destructive capabilities,
              their  relation to plate tectonics, and their role in mapping the details  of
              the interior of the Earth.
