Title       : Multimedia Instructional Design for Engineering Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1995  
File        : a9455142

Award Number: 9455142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43926              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marion O. Hagler mhagler@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Marcy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn C. Wetzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen M. Harmeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Powerful multimedia authoring tools now becoming available permit  engineering
              educators to develop multimedia courseware with much  less effort than ever
              before. Without familiarity with the  principles of instruction design, it is
              easy for engineering  educators to run amuck and produce ineffective multimedia
               instructional materials. The goal of this workshop is to instruct  30
              educators who teach engineering or pre-engineering the basics of  instructional
              design, particularly as applied to multimedia  instructional materials in
              engineering. The workshop sessions will  be taught largely by an experienced
              instructional designer who is  also experienced in teaching mathematics and
              science in the  classroom, as well as commercial courses in multimedia 
              instructional design. SIMPLE, a powerful but easy-to-use software  construction
              environment developed with partial support from an NSF  Course and Curriculum
              Development Project, will serve as one of the  tools. Multimedia courseware
              from the NSF-supported coalitions will  be introduced as examples. The workshop
              team consists of members  from ExperTech, a small software company, Amarillo
              College, a two  year institution, and Texas Tech University, a doctoral 
              institution. The team members will interact extensively with the  participants
              throughout the 2-year period by means of a special  mailing list on the
              Internet. Besides communication at conferences,  an FTP site on the Internet
              will permit easy distribution of  developed software. The workshop participants
              will be instructed in  the basics of evaluation methodologies throughout the
              workshop so  that they can effectively evaluate the courseware they use or 
              develop.
