Title       : Curriculum for Chemistry in a Large Urban University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1995   
File        : a9455830

Award Number: 9455830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49929              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert O. Watts watts@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Kowalski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Parson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles T. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Reinhardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1046,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455830  Watts  A curriculum for chemistry at the undergraduate level is being 
              developed that will better prepare chemistry and biochemistry  majors for
              employment through a novel Joint Industrial Chemistry  Degree (JICD) which
              includes a two year work experience graded by  term papers and oral
              presentations.  Majors will also be afforded  extensive research experience
              through a new undergraduate degree  graded by thesis with an oral defense. 
              These changes will allow  the intensive industrial and research degrees to be
              conducted off-  campus, and facilitate the pathway to a degree by economically 
              disadvantaged students, by developing a module-based study sequence  at the
              junior and senior level.  The curriculum also introduces new  technologies
              through extensive use of computers, and it improves  opportunities for minority
              groups by using concepts adapted from  our existing Native American, Women in
              Science and High School  outreach programs.  Concurrent pathways at the
              freshman and  sophomore level for non-science majors, life science majors 
              including nursing and pre-meds, and physical sciences majors  including
              pre-engineering are being developed.  Close collaboration  with the chemical
              and biochemical industry, other departments  within the University, and
              Community Colleges and other four year  colleges in the Pacific Northwest is
              planned.  Program assessment  will be based on methods developed in
              collaboration with a  management consultant group.  Results will be
              disseminated by peer-  reviewed publications, monographs presenting upper level
              modules,  software publication and presentations at national meetings.
