Title       : Development and Evaluation of Internet-Based Hypermedia Chemistry Tutorials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1995   
File        : a9455382

Award Number: 9455382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Tissue tissue@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop and evaluate  internet-based hypermedia
              tutorials for undergraduate chemistry  courses. The specific objectives are (1)
              to develop hypermedia  resources that increase the effectiveness and efficiency
              of  student learning and retention, (2) to evaluate and refine  hypermedia
              designs for maximum student use and efficacy, and (3)  to evaluate the
              accessibility of hypermedia educational materials  via the internet for
              students and educators inside and outside  the university. The main advantage
              of hypermedia educational  materials is the ability to link a topic to related
              and/or  remedial material. Having immediate, in-context remedial help  will
              improve the effectiveness and efficiency of a student's  study time, and will
              also reinforce the understanding of basic  concepts. The links themselves
              illustrate the interrelatedness of  different topics and the importance of
              basic principles. Funding  of this project will allow expansion of our current
              hypermedia  tutorial for instrumental analysis to sophomore-level analytical 
              chemistry and freshman-level general chemistry classes. The  chemistry
              tutorials are viewed with NCSA Mosaic, which is an  internet-based hypermedia
              browser. It is a multimedia viewing  tool with versions for Unix, Windows, and
              Macintosh operating  systems. Since this project is accessible world-wide via
              the  internet, it will provide an educational resource for  undergraduate
              chemistry students; K12, vocational, and  college-level educators; and for the
              public at large. The  hypermedia design and internet access concepts that are
              learned  by evaluating and refining this project will facilitate the  creation
              and distribution of effective hypermedia resources for  science education in
              chemistry and other disciplines.
