Title       : Multi-Media For a "Hands-On" Oceanography Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9455758

Award Number: 9455758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85078              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Prothero prothero@magic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to continue to develop software  for a series of
              "hands-on" multi-media lab modules intended for a  lower division Oceanography
              course with a "Quantitative Science"  component. The emphasis is on individual
              and group discovery,  observation and analysis of the most current geophysical
              and  geographical data, and the communication and revision of ideas  through
              both group discussions and writing. Some of the tools  being developed for this
              project provide access to data that has  been previously accessible only to
              graduate students specializing  in a field related to that data.    Each module
              makes available a rich source of data so that the  student can explore
              according to his/her interests and abilities.  Module organization is easily
              programmable by the instructor so  that a wide range of course needs can be
              met. Thus, each student  may be exposed to a subset of the content available.
              This  encourages exploration and challenges the advanced student to do  more
              than the minimum. This programmability also allows modifying  the modules for a
              variety of courses and academic levels.    The modules are intended to be used
              in a Macintosh computer lab,  and are designed to be completed in lab sessions
              of 2 to 3 hours  each. They are designed in an "open-ended" way so that a range
              of  student abilities can be accommodated. The three modules that  will be
              completed on the currently funded NSF project are 1)  "Getting Acquainted with
              Maps and the Earth", 2) "Exploring the  Deep", and 3) "Understanding the Deep".
              New work to be performed  includes the continued evaluation, testing, support
              and revision  of the existing modules, as well as the creation of one or more 
              new modules.    Student writing is also supported in this project. The student 
              enters text in a writing field, and saves, retrieves, prints, and  "hands-in"
              writing to a common instructor's mailbox on the  network. A system of Random
              Anonymous Peer Review is also  available. Students submit their writing to re
              view by two others.  The others receive the text and make comments, after which
              the  commented text is returned. This is anonymous at both ends. An  important
              effect of this is the encouragement of normally  uninvolved students to express
              themselves, and the opportunity to  both give and get feedback, then modify the
              writing based on that  feedback.    In support of these modules, a system of
              managing images and data  related to images has been created. Slides are put
              onto PhotoCD  and automatically cropped and compressed using Apple Photo Flash.
               A HyperCard based "Image Librarian" supports the documentation  and creation
              of the image database files that determine the  locations of "clickspots"
              (symbols of various shapes and colors,  or PICT images) on a map or other
              graphic image. This system is  flexible and quick.    Preliminary testing has
              been done with 2 groups of 10 students  and 1 group of 5. Feedback has been
              quite positive. Students  uniformly praise the "hands-on" aspect of the
              material. From  these initial tests, modifications and improvements are being 
              made.
