Title       : Implementing Interactive Laboratory-Based Learning Techniques in Second-Semester
               Introductory Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9455732

Award Number: 9455732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173630             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gay B. Stewart gstewart@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455732  Stewart                                              Research shows
              that students use formula-centered problem-solving  strategies that differ from
              those used by experienced scientists,  and that the knowledge students gain in
              introductory physics is a  randomly organized set of facts and equations, with
              little  conceptual understanding and many misconceptions. Many approaches  have
              been developed to overcome these problems, and have met with  reasonable
              success in small institutions, or for a particular  professor. These approaches
              are often too expensive or complicated  to transfer to large comprehensive
              universities. Also, graduate  students, the future instructors of science, are
              in general  inadequately trained as educators. A teaching system designed to 
              overcome these problems in a method that could be standardized and  made
              available to larger engineering schools, as well as being  appropriate for
              smaller institutions, will be developed. The method  involves leading the
              student from concrete "hands-on" examples to  conceptual understanding through
              group discussion, in the idea  first, name afterward fashion. Quantitative
              experimental results  provide verification. Concepts are related to everyday
              phenomena  familiar to the student. Students are taught how to think about 
              physics problems. Cooperative learning, found to improve retention  of female
              and minority students, is emphasized. Graduate and  advanced undergraduate
              students are brought into the teaching  process as apprentices, with materials
              to acquaint them with the  teaching strategies to be employed. In a
              calculus-based  introductory physics course (>300 students annually), over a
              three  year period, the technique will be refined, using testing and 
              interviews to determine the most successful strategies. The results  will be
              made available in a format designed to facilitate  implementation elsewhere. A
              standard of evaluation for conceptual  understanding for electromagnetism,
              similar to the Hestenes  mechanics evaluati on, will be developed. The
              "hands-on" Activity  Guide would be useful in non-engineering courses,
              particularly  classes for educators, and could be adapted for use in lower 
              education.
