Title       : Project on the Language-Art Interface: Vision and Voice - Rethinking Human
               Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9455587

Award Number: 9455587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Bakewell Liza_ bakewell@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William O. Beeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bakewell                                           DUE 9455587  Brown University
                                                FY1995 $ 123,680  Providence, RI  02912      
                                     Course and Curriculum                                   
                               Psychology    Title: Project on the Language-Art Interface    
                      The Project on the Language-Art Interface (PROLARTI) focuses on the 
              development of a prototype of a CD ROM, with the title: The Origins  of
              Communication, the first part of a three-part series titled:  Vision and Voice:
              Rethinking Human Communication.  Designed for use  by undergraduates in
              introductory level courses (in both  traditional and long-distance classroom
              and home settings), Vision  and Voice aims to encourage the exploration of
              language within an  interactive, multimedia, interdisciplinary and
              cross-cultural  environment.  It links  together the methods, theories and data
              of  anthropology, biology, cognitive science, linguistics, literature, 
              neurology and the visual and performing arts.    In both its  prototype and
              future CD-ROM formats, The Origins of  Communication focuses on three broad
              areas of language: (1)  Evolution (2) Human Development, Language Acquisition,
              and Animal  Communication; and (3) the Brain.  All three areas of investigation
               include multidisciplinary material (theories, data, controversies)  on visual
              and verbal aspects of communication.  It is PROLARTI's  first undertaking,
              which promises to provide a model for truly  interdisciplinary research and
              teaching on language and to bridge  the widening gap between the sciences and
              humanities.  It plans to  do so by redesigning scientific investigations of
              human  communication to include the study of art alongside the study of 
              language.  When art is defined as "visual representation," its  presence in all
              aspects of human communication (e.g., gesture)  becomes apparent. Rather than
              simply emphasize similarities between  language and art,    PROLARTI's
              prototype for Origins of  Communication  will focus on their differences as
              well.  Language,  being primarily a symbolic system of signs, stands in
              contrast to  iconically-based systems, such as art.  The shift in emphasis as 
              exemplified by PROLARTI's prototype of The Origins of Communication  aims to
              not only broaden the study of language to include all  communicative
              processes--nonverbal forms (glossed here as "art") as  well as verbal--but to
              expand the teaching of undergraduate courses  on linguistics by incorporating
              multimedia and interactive material  from the life and social sciences as well
              as the humanities.
