Title       : Integration of Workshop Approaches into the Teaching of Mathematics to a Diverse
               Student Population: A SUNY Faculty Coalition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1994   
File        : a9455113

Award Number: 9455113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Y. Narayan narayan@oswego.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Winn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Landry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Oswego
	      
	      Oswego, NY  13126    315/341-2500

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The problems addressed by the proposal are: the lack of  participation of
              students from under-represented groups in  mathematics; an unsatisfactory rate
              of attrition among all  students in precalculus and calculus; lack of student 
              understanding and retention of fundamental precalculus/calculus  concepts;
              reluctance of faculty to develop and initiate  alternatives to the lecture
              format of teaching; and lack of  effective communication between two and
              four-year institutions,  especially among the faculty on the various campuses.
              A coalition  of thirteen SUNY schools, composed of two and four year colleges, 
              has identified three broad objectives to address these problems:  1) to develop
              methods for attracting and retaining students from  under-represented groups in
              mathematics; 2) to integrate workshop  approaches into the teaching of
              precalculus and calculus to a  diverse student population and, 3) to put in
              place a structure  for continued faculty and curriculum development across the
              SUNY  system.    The coalition, with the help of consultants, will work 
              cooperatively in a faculty enhancement workshop to develop  methods,
              strategies, and materials that will be implemented in  Fall 1995 to begin
              addressing the above stated problems.  Specifically Treisman type student
              workshops, based on academic  excellence rather than remediation, will be
              planned to engage  students in problem solving and problem posing experiences
              in a  cooperative learning environment that makes significant use of 
              technology. The basic themes of the highly successful Treisman  workshops will
              be tailored to meet SUNY's unique needs. The  student workshops will provide
              peer interaction and a sense of  community that is invitational, one that
              welcomes our students,  especially those from under-represented groups, to
              mathematics  and its challenges.    The first year coalition members and their
              campuses are committed  to pilot programs in the Fall of 1995. The second year
              program is  aimed at getting pilot programs at fourteen  more campuses. 
              Eventually the coalition, with the help of the SUNY Central  Administration,
              will effect systemic change in the way  precalculus and calculus is taught.
