Title       : Development of Lectureroom Demonstration Experiments to Improve the Computer
               Literacy Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9455314

Award Number: 9455314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59121              (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hamid Chahryar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marshall Univ Res Corp
	      401 11th Street
	      Huntington, WV  25701    304/696-4837

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455314  Walker  Lecture room demonstration experiments, which actually show how
               things work, are relatively new to computer science educators. In  most other
              fields of science, demonstrations have proven quite  effective in combination
              with a variety of teaching methods and  have been successfully used for many
              years. Such "live"  demonstrations, especially for introductory classes, awaken
              a keen  interest in the "chalk and talk" lecture and tend to be remembered 
              long afterward. We believe that lecture room demonstrations need to  be
              considered seriously as a teaching aid for helping to revitalize  introductory
              computer science courses. The real problem is that  very few instructional
              materials are currently available on this  subject.  This project addresses the
              need to develop computer  science lecture room demonstration materials. More
              specifically, it  concentrates on development of eight innovative, low cost, 
              computer-hardware-related lecture room demonstration experiments to  improve
              the computer literacy course taken by non-computer science  majors. These
              demonstrations help students to better understand  basic concepts of how
              computers operate and permits them to see  firsthand, a number of
              attention-grabbing, real-world applications.  Students learn that computers are
              used for more than just running  software applications. The demonstrations 
              show students how  computer and peripherals work; illustrate aspects of 
              telecommunications and networking; show actual business and  industrial
              applications; and present emerging computer related  technologies such as
              multimedia, hypermedia and virtual reality.  Details of how to build and set up
              the demonstration apparatus,  teaching techniques, and results from classroom
              trials are made  readily available via pamphlets, presentation at workshops,
              and the  Internet.  This project is expected to be of great interest and 
              benefit to all teachers of the computer literacy course.
