Title       : Pacific Northwest Environmental Studies Program: A Collaborative
               Interdisciplinary Curriculum Development Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9455726

Award Number: 9455726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121511             (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Becker beckerw@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy W. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa Bulman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Pacific Northwest Environmental Studies Program (PNESP) is an  undergraduate
              curricular collaboration among four Pacific  Northwest higher education
              institutions. The program addresses  the need to prepare students to enter one
              of the region's  principal growth industries, environmental technology. This 
              academic partnership allows the participating schools to pool  their resources,
              field work opportunities and expertise to  deliver a fully-transferable
              two-year curriculum in more depth  and with broader scope than is possible
              without the  collaboration.  The curriculum development process includes both 
              academic year meetings and summer faculty development programs  that engages
              faculty from all participating campuses and involves  professionals from the
              environmental industry.  Thus, the program  fosters the concept of an
              environmental teaching, learning, and  service community among the faculty,
              students and industry  professionals.  The PNESP opens an avenue of seamless
              transition  for students from precollege programs to upper division 
              coursework.  The PNESP core courses also serve to prepare  students to enter
              teacher education programs that are aligned  with Oregon's K-12 Natural
              Resource Systems Certificate of  Advanced Mastery.  The PNESP curriculum of
              introductory courses  and field experiences will become the core element in 
              environmental baccalaureate, associate and certificate degree  programs
              encompassing science, policy, technology, and  engineering on the participating
              campuses.
