Title       : An Interactive Introductory Astronomy Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9455293

Award Number: 9455293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Strom   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas T. Arny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzan Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George S. Greenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Five Colleges Inc
	      97 Sprint Street
	      Amherst, MA  010022324    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project is developing an introductory astronomy course  whose  primary goals
              will be (1) to develop quantitative reasoning  skills and independence in
              problem solving; (2) to expose  students to the scientific use of computers;
              (3) to  inculcate an  understanding of the power and limitations of
              experimental  data;  (4) to develop critical thinking through scientific
              writing;  and  (5) to build on the appeal of astronomy to attract and  retain 
              more science majors. The approach emphasizes hands-on  problem  solving
              experience gained by working on projects built  around a  few themes, rather
              than the more passive learning inherent  in  delivery of a comprehensive body
              of material by a single  professor in a traditional lecture setting. Students
              will be  active participants in the classroom both collectively,  through 
              critical discussions of project goals, experimental  techniques  and analysis,
              and individually, through use of interactive  software packages.    The project
              makes extensive use of the MOSAIC hypermedia  environment in developing
              software modules for the course,  and  eventually these modules will be
              available to colleagues at  other  institutions via the Internet. The course
              materials are  being  developed by a team of senior faculty and graduate
              students.  The  team approach benefits not only the undergraduates who are 
              enrolled in the class, but also the graduate students who  are  provided with a
              mentored experience in designing courses and  curricular materials, and thus a
              valuable introduction to  teaching. An introductory course based on these goals
              and  following this format will prove more successful than  traditional 
              classroom techniques in sustaining student interest in  science  and providing
              them with the basic skills they will need to  understand, address, and solve
              technically complex problems  throughout their lifetimes.
