Title       : Transferable Integrated Design Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1994  
File        : a9455158

Award Number: 9455158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557899             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denny C. Davis davis@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Crain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is flexible, consistent introductory  engineering
              design education for a diverse pool of students who  follow single-institution
              or transfer paths to their baccalaureate  engineering degrees. The project
              links universities to community  colleges to produce design education that is
              "integrated throughout  the curriculum" as needed for accreditation. Project
              objectives  are:    * Establish a curricular structure for well-defined,
              transferable  introductory design education in an environment of diverse 
              institutions, curricula, and students;    * Produce transportable curricular
              materials and instructional  methods that support effective "integrated"
              engineering design  education in transfer environments;    * Enable faculty at
              a variety of institutions to adopt, implement,  and evaluate exemplary
              materials and methods suitable for their  programs and their students; and    *
              Achieve increased enrollment and retention of students,  especially women,
              minorities, and disabled, in early engineering  design courses.    Curriculum
              materials are developed to meet learning objectives for  introductory design,
              to fit a variety of institutions, and to serve  students with diverse
              backgrounds and interests. Faculty workshops  transfer these learning
              objectives and strategies for achieving  them in a variety of settings, and
              they prepare faculty to adopt  materials and methods to use in classes with
              diverse student  populations. Exemplary curricular materials are packaged for 
              distribution.
