Title       : Project-Centered Physics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9455656

Award Number: 9455656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52248              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Laws LAWS@DICKINSON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil S. Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hans Pfister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Boyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Luetzelschwab  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455656  Laws  Funding from NSF would support the development of five new upper 
              level courses in a renovated physics curriculum. Since only about  3% of
              students in introductory physics courses nationwide continue  on to upper level
              courses, the curriculum must be made more  appealing and the aims broader.
              Traditional curricula have been  directed almost exclusively toward the
              training of undergraduates  for graduate school and thence to becoming
              "physicists." Without  sacrificing that goal, the aims of the undergraduate
              program can be  broadened to provide benefits to those who will apply their 
              conceptual understanding and logical problem solving abilities to  a wide
              variety of future activities.  Courses within the model  Dickinson College
              physics major curriculum will be  project-centered, dealing with real-world
              topics that appeal to  students' curiosity. Learning is thereby motivated not
              by a vague  possibility of future usefulness, but by an immediate need for 
              understanding in order to deal with the course projects. This  approach is an
              outgrowth of the Workshop Physics introductory  courses developed at Dickinson
              College, a program that has been  used at many other institutions. In a similar
              way, the new  curriculum, the newly developed courses, the project modules, or 
              supporting materials can be useful to other institutions.  Projects  included
              in the new courses will overlap topics covered in  traditional courses, but
              will provide new emphases. For example,  experiments with chaos will be
              incorporated into the dynamics  course; magnetic resonance imaging will join
              other modern physics  topics in Medical and Radiation Physics.
