Title       : Hands-on Engineering Homework: A New Approach to Out-of Class Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1994  
File        : a9455705

Award Number: 9455705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95796              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred J. Bedard ABEDARD@WPL.ERL.GOV  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455705  Bedard  This project pioneers a new way to provide experimental
              complements  to theoretical courses. The goal is to train students to use what 
              they learn to examine all that they see and as a result, to  question. The
              fundamental idea is to create a suite of simple  experiments which can be done
              in the home and assigned like  homework problems. Such simple, but elegant
              experiments are dubbed  Hands-On-Homework (HOH) which:  * encourages students
              to use engineering theory to explain everyday  phenomena, and to compare their
              observations to theoretical  prediction;  * provides open-ended opportunities
              to explore engineering  questions using readily available materials and
              familiar  experiences;  * trains students to conduct "reality checks" and
              naturally apply  theoretical analysis to experimental observations; and  *
              provides continuous opportunities for students to empirically  explore
              engineering questions throughout their college careers and  develop habits
              contpibuting to life long learning.  This project is tied to curriculum changes
              planned for the new  Integrated Teaching Laboratory. Hands-On Homework is
              liberally  sprinkled throughout the entire curriculum, primarily in the first 
              three years, including introductory mathematics and physics  courses. Initial
              disciplinary courses such as statics, dynamics,  thermodynamics, and circuits
              benefit, as well as more advanced  courses such as fluid mechanics, heat
              transfer, control theory, or  materials.  HOH problems are piloted in two
              courses while doing an  outreach to identify further courses. Evaluation is
              done by holding  consensus groups during the semester and comparing performance
              of  students with and without HOH. Results will be presented at  meetings and
              reviews. Ultimately, a user's guide will be produced  containing all the
              Hands-On-Homeworks as well as the performance  evaluations.  Because HOH's are
              low-cost, they can be easily rep-  licated and the results of the project
              widely exported.
