Title       : A Program to Enhance Faculty Development Through Participation in Regional and
               National Computer Science Education Conferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1994   
File        : a9455051

Award Number: 9455051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Reek   (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Paul Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet D. Hartman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc For Computing Mach
	      1515 Broadway, 17th Floor
	      New York, NY  100365702    212/869-7440

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is a cooperative effort between the Association for  Computing
              Machinery Special Interest Group on Computer Science  Education (SIGCSE) and
              the Consortium for Computing in Small  Colleges (CCSC) to provide outreach
              services to Computer Science  faculty. Each group has as its primary focus
              improving faculty  teaching skills, increasing awareness of current issues in
              Computer  Science education and providing opportunities for faculty to share 
              ideas.  The two-year project has two components: (1) to provide  outreach
              services by offering two SIGCSE Symposium workshops at  each of the five CCSC
              Regional conferences each year, and (2)  provide funds for a competitive
              resource grant program for twenty  faculty to attend the SIGCSE Technical
              Symposium each year. The  first component allows more faculty to take advantage
              of the high  quality workshops at the Symposium, but within the context of a 
              less expensive regional conference. The second component   encourages and
              allows a number faculty members to participate in  the national Symposium and
              its workshops who would not otherwise be  able to attend due to lack of funds.
              The grant program  supports  some faculty who will present at the Symposium as
              well as people  who will not. All are provided with the opportunity to
              participate  as a session chair and become more involved with Symposium 
              activities.    The effectiveness of this overall project will be ascertained by
               two separate evaluations from participants: one immediately  following the
              workshops/symposium, and one six months later to  determine impact on courses
              and curricula.
