Title       : An Innovative Course on Elements of Manufacturing Systems for Non-Engineering
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9455748

Award Number: 9455748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124286             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murali Krishnamurthi mkrishna@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed I. Dessouky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will involve the design, development, and  implementation of an
              introductory course on manufacturing systems  for non-engineering students.
              Innovative teaching and learning  styles suitable for teaching manufacturing
              concepts will be  identified and incorporated in the course to motivate
              students to  learn, understand, and appreciate the role of manufacturing in 
              today's society, its impact on the economy, and its career  potential. This
              course will build on the background and skills of  first- and second-year
              university students, to give them a better  understanding of the value of basic
              courses in mathematics,  physics, and chemistry, in learning engineering
              concepts. It will  also introduce non-engineering students, especially women
              and  underrepresented minorities, to manufacturing in a non-intimidating 
              manner. It is hoped that such an exposure will strengthen their  confidence,
              dispel their fear of technology, and motivate them to  choose an engineering
              career. A preliminary study conducted through  a pilot section of the course
              offered during spring 1994 to assess  the need for this course and its
              potential benefits has resulted in  positive outcomes and has given the impetus
              for developing this  course fully. The project methodology will involve the 
              identification of manufacturing life cycle concepts suitable for  this course
              and its target audience, and the design and development  of course activities,
              lesson plans, laboratory experiments, and  instructional aids that will
              accommodate different teaching and  learning styles so that the course material
              can be conveyed  effectively to a non-engineering student population. The
              progress  of the project and its outcomes will be evaluated by a team 
              consisting of members from academia and the manufacturing industry.  Course
              material that will be developed for this project, the  teaching and learning
              techniques that will be used in conveying the  material to students, and the
              results of this study will be of  great potential bene fit to educators
              everywhere interested in  offering similar courses to non-engineering students.
