Title       : Sweeping Change in Manageable Units: A Modular Approach for Chemistry Curriculum
               Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a9455924

Award Number: 9455924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3014994            (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelica M. Stacy stacy@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Bradley Moore  (Principal Investigator former)
              Susan E. Kegley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Bergman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7426      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND ADOPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1032,1046,7348,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this program is to develop new curricula, materials  and methods
              which will enhance the appreciation and learning of  science, especially
              chemistry, for every undergraduate student such  that all college graduates
              will command the knowledge and skills  necessary to permit continued learning,
              lead productive lives, and  make informed decisions.  To accomplish this
              mission, a modular  approach to teaching chemistry in the first two years of
              the  undergraduate curriculum is being developed and evaluated.  Modules  of
              one to four weeks present fundamental chemistry to students in  the context of
              a real-world problem or application and emphasize  the links between chemistry
              and other disciplines.  In  collaboration with the ChemLinks Coalition, modules
              are being  developed, tested and refined at the two- and four-year colleges 
              and research universities comprising the two consortia.  Curriculum  materials,
              including text, lab, and multimedia components suitable  for students from
              diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds and  usable at a wide variety of
              undergraduate institutions are being  produced and distributed by an
              established publisher.  Teaching  methods which utilize current understanding
              of learning processes  and emphasize active learning and the full spectrum of
              modern  technologies are being supported, tested and promulgated.  A model 
              support infrastructure for development and assessment of new  materials and
              methods is being provided.  A framework for  continuous improvement of
              curricula should result from the work and  be institutionalized within the
              consortium.  Faculty workshops and  sessions at national and regional meetings
              will be conducted to  guarantee dissemination.  Our consortium institutions now
               participate significantly in pre-service teacher training and  education of
              technology specialists and are developing new programs  in these areas.  Thus,
              our program will strongly impact the  Advanced Technological Education and
              Teacher Preparation Programs  by develo ping modular materials appropriate to
              the task of  educating future teachers and technology specialists.
