Title       : Improving Statistics Education: Faculty Enhancement Through Collaboration with
               Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1994   
File        : a9455055

Award Number: 9455055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roxy Peck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Traditional statistics education has been criticized for not  adequately
              preparing statisticians and engineers for careers in  industry and for being
              unresponsive to the needs of industry. One  difficulty encountered in trying to
              address this problem is that  there has not been sufficient interaction between
              industrial and  academic statisticians. This faculty enhancement project
              provides  a forum for such interaction.    Statisticians from twenty academic
              departments and twenty  statisticians from industry and government are coming
              together for  a five-day workshop to discuss common concerns, opportunities for
               collaboration, and ways in which the two groups might learn from  and support
              each other. At the workshop each academic statistician  is being paired with an
              industrial statistician for continued  collaboration. During the nine months
              following the workshop, each  academic statistician is making a three-day site
              visit to  participate in the work environment of the industrial statistician, 
              and each industrial statistician is making a three-day campus  visit. Each
              industrial/academic pair is also collaborating on the  development of a case
              study based on actual practice in industry.  Follow-through activities include
              a capstone meeting to discuss the  site visits, plans for continued
              collaboration, and the case  studies. The case studies and other educational
              materials are being  compiled and disseminated by the project.    The case
              study collection provides statistics educators with  interesting, real problems
              from industry that can be incorporated  into statistics instruction. By
              fostering communication and  collaboration between industrial and academic
              statisticians,  academic statisticians are becoming more cognizant of the
              concerns  and needs of industry, and academic departments can begin to  address
              the related curricular issues.
