Title       : Pattern-Based Programming Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1995   
File        : a9455736

Award Number: 9455736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69812              (Estimated)
Investigator: J P. East east@cs.uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet M. Drake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter E. Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Rebecca Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vernon E. Wallingford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We are developing curriculum materials for a pattern-based  approach in
              introductory computer programming courses. Typical  programming instruction
              tends to focus on the language and has  students develop original and often
              poor solutions to problems.  Little time for quality feedback from
              instructional staff is  available. Additionally, current instruction shows
              little  connection between educational theory and practice.    A pattern-based
              curriculum for introductory computer science is  being developed and tested.
              Problem and code patterns are  identified and selected for inclusion in the
              course. Print-based  instructional materials is produced via a cycle of
              development,  evaluation, and revision. A prototype of an automated environment
               that supports pattern-based instruction and provides supervision  for the
              higher level of student practice necessary for truly  successful instruction
              will be produced. Underlying principles  and theory for the approach are
              proposed and presented.    The proposed instructional material and system will
              provide a  solid test bed for further research and explication of standard 
              problems and programs in computing. The pattern-based approach  significantly
              improves the quality of programs produced by  students after a first course.
              While this project does not focus  on any special audience, the proposed
              approach to programming  instruction should ultimately enhance both attraction
              and  retention of students.    In addition to internal evaluation, two external
              reviewers will  assess the material twice during the project. Student
              performance  under the new approach will be tested and compared with that of 
              students under traditional instruction. Student and instructor  perceptions
              will be assessed. Descriptive papers will be produced  and submitted to
              appropriate (CS-Ed & AI) conferences and  Journals.
