Title       : The Geometry of Multivariable Calculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1994   
File        : a9455061

Award Number: 9455061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149712             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yves Nievergelt ynievergelt@ewu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail D. Nord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rose L. Pugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Caspar R. Curjel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Washington Univ
	      
	      Cheney, WA  990042444    509/458-6200

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Geometry of Multivariable Calculus strengthens the  multidimensional
              geometric intuition that students need, but  usually lack, to understand
              multivariable calculus. To motivate  students to learn the material, the
              project includes live  demonstrations by mathematicians from industry on the
              use of  multidimensional applied and computational geometry, for example,  in
              the design of automobiles, aircraft, and spacecraft. Many such  applications
              involve five dimensions: three for space, one for  time, and one coded by color
              to plot stress, pressure, or other  parameters.    To this end, community
              college and university instructors may  participate in annual week-long
              workshops and follow-up activities.  In the workshops, held at community
              colleges, participants will  spend most of the time researching and designing
              geometric  material--exercises, worksheets, test problems, and projects--ready 
              for use in their existing courses in elementary to advanced multi  variable
              calculus, and in such related courses as linear algebra  and advanced calculus.
              Follow-up weekends will enable participants  to polish their material in a form
              suitable for publication, and  follow-up days will allow participants to
              prepare their material  for presentations at a regional or national conference.
               Participants who wish to publish substantial projects may also  request a
              summer stipend.    Past workshops have resulted in publications and videos on
              3-D  graphics, splines, and differentials with several variables. Future 
              workshops will focus on Computed Tomography, Geometric Modeling,  and Fractal
              Geometry. Each workshop will take place in June in  Spokane and in September in
              Seattle. Guest speakers from industry  come from Applied Geometry Corp., The
              Boeing Company, and the Ford  Motor Company.
