Title       : Activity Based Physics: Curricula, Computer Tools, and Apparatus for
               Introductory Physics Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9455561

Award Number: 9455561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1780000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla W. Laws lawsp@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward F. Redish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Sokoloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Cooney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald K. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1032,7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Three related activity-based introductory physics curricula have  been developed
              with major support from the US Department of  Education and the National
              Science Foundation. These are Workshop  Physics, Tools for  Scientific
              Thinking, and RealTime Physics.  All three curricula use the findings of
              physics education  research, are activity-based, and have involved the design
              of  computer hardware and software for investigation, data analysis,  and
              dynamic modeling. This three-year collaboration between  principal
              investigatops at Dickinson College, University of  Maryland, University of
              Oregon, Tufts University, and  Millersville State University will extend,
              enhance, evaluate and  disseminate activity-based curricular materials,
              apparatus, and  computer tools for teaching introductory physics based on this 
              previous work.  The ultimate goals of this program are to  continue full scale
              efforts to improve the scientific literacy of  introductory physics students
              through the mastery of physics  concepts, investigative skills, and
              mathematical modeling  techniques and to motivate students to learn more
              science.  Throughout the three year period a comprehensive dissemination 
              program will be conducted to reach introductory physics  instructors at high
              school and college levels through workshops,  public talks, on-site visits to
              institutions, and journal  publications. These dissemination efforts will be
              supported by  the commercial distribution of products through J.C. Wiley & 
              Sons, PASCO Scientific, Vernier Software, and Physics   Academic Software. 
              Particular attention will be given to  developing physics activities suitable
              for courses designed for  future technicians at two year colleges and
              preteachers.
