Title       : Developing Active Learning Modules on the Human Dimensions of Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9455632

Award Number: 9455632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318544             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Hanson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc of Amer Geographers
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455632  Hanson  The project 1) actively involves faculty, global change
              scholars,  and people with expertise in pedagogy in the development of 
              introductory-level, activity-based course modules on the human  dimensions of
              global environmental change, and 2) establishes a  process within the
              Association of American Geographers (AAG) for  the development, evaluation, and
              dissemination of these and other  active-learning modules of introductory
              courses. The first goal  addresses the needs to a) infuse recent global change
              scholarship  into the introductory undergraduate curriculum and b) actively 
              involve students in the learning process. The second goal seeks to  address the
              current absence of any formal mechanism within the  discipline of geography for
              the sharing of teaching and learning  resources among undergraduate
              instructors.  The principal expected  outcomes are modules that speak to the
              three broad components of  global environmental change: 1) the human and
              physical causes or  driving forces of change; 2) the environmental consequences
               produced by these forces; and 3) the human responses to these  environmental
              consequences. Central to these modules are the  concepts of a) how human
              causes, environmental impacts, and human  response vary by location (geographic
              area), and b) how the  relationships among components are affected by the
              spatial and  temporal scales of analysis (local, regional, global; decadal, 
              centennial, millennial respectively).  The project also establishes  a
              clearinghouse within the AAG to disseminate the modules for use  in
              introductory courses nationwide. The modules will be available  to all
              instructors of some 500,000 students who are enrolled in  introductory
              geography courses annually. Once this project is  completed, the AAG
              clearinghouse will continue to develop and  disseminate activity-based
              undergraduate learning materials.
