Title       : Improving Biology Education for Non-Majors: Dissemination of the Workshop
               Biology Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1995  
File        : a9455145

Award Number: 9455145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Udovic udovic@uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We ape conducting a three-year dissemination of our  NSF/FIPSE project,
              "Workshop Biology for Non-Majors."  Workshop Biology is a successful
              non-majors' biology course,  taught in the context of a major research
              university, that  addresses the serious problem of scientific literacy in a 
              world with growing biological concerns.  The course aims to  develop students'
              understanding of biological concepts,  scientific processes, and critical
              thinking skills to help  them make decisions about important scientific issues.
               The  project has generated a great deal of enthusiasm among  science faculty
              at many other institutions, who have clearly  articulated to us their need for
              extended collaboration,  using effective models, in improving their approach to
               instructional problems.    The project's primary goal is to improve student
              learning in  general education science courses at other institutions, by 
              helping instructors clarify their educational goals and  implement and assess
              learning experiences designed to  achieve these goals.  The Workshop Biology
              project provides  models for goals, teaching strategies, and assessment 
              methods, as well as processes for developing new ones.  Our  project offers
              intensive collaboration, experimentation, and  reflection by all participants,
              to develop effective  educational practices for their own situations.  In the 
              first and second years we are focusing on regional  institutions, whom we have
              already identified, and who  represent diverse contexts:  both two- and
              four-year  institutions with different missions (including a state  teacher's
              college) and different student populations than  that served by the University
              of Oregon.  These institutions  will help us create development materials that
              we will  disseminate, in workshops and conferences the third year, to  other
              institutions around the country.  We will assess the  extent and duration of
              change at other institutions, the  reactions of participants to the process of
              dissemination,  and the effectiveness  of their new programs.
