Title       : Course and Curriculum Development: Integrating Pre-Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9455566

Award Number: 9455566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Earl Hamilton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Davene Eyres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Seattle Cmty Coll
	      9600 College Way North
	      Seattle, WA  981033514    206/634-4444

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455566  Hamilton  North Seattle Community College proposes a course and
              curriculum  development project that focuses on developing a year long, 
              team-taught pre-engineering program titled "Math and Physics: Tools  for
              Careers in Engineering." The program emphasizes students'  working
              collaboratively to apply concepts taught in physics and  mathematics to the
              kinds of problems encountered in the engineering  profession. The proposal
              entails the planning and integration of an  interactive physics and calculus
              laboratory into the curriculum.   By scheduling a daily three-hour block, the
              three faculty members  in physics, calculus and engineering will integrate
              their course  work in a two-quarter sequence which will provide students with
              10  credits in calculus, 5 in engineering physics and 9 in engineering 
              problems, statics and circuits. The program will be structured to  accommodate
              students who need remediation in particular skills with  learning assistance.
              It also will be designed to create a classroom  climate that promotes the
              pursuit of careers in science and  engineering among women and people of color.
               To bring such  significant change to the curriculum, the three faculty 
              investigators will devote time to curriculum research during the  first of the
              two-year project. They will consult with two faculty  experienced in developing
              an interdisciplinary program in science  at The Evergreen State College,
              Olympia, WA; confer with Professor  Denny Davis at Washington State University
              who developed a large-  scale engineering curriculum project with DUE support,
              and visit  model interdisciplinary programs in science and engineering being 
              developed at other institutions. In developing collaborative, small  group
              approaches to instruction, they will be guided by the  expertise of the
              Washington Center for Improving the Quality of  Undergraduate Education, a
              consortium of 42 colleges and  universities that focus on learning communities
              as a means of  reforming the undergraduate curriculum.
