Title       : ChemLinks Coalition: Making Chemical Connections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a9455918

Award Number: 9455918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2821386            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brock Spencer spencer@beloit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Oxtoby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Swartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra L. Laursen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beloit College
	      
	      Beloit, WI  53511    608/365-3391

NSF Program : 7426      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND ADOPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1032,1046,7348,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The ChemLinks Coalition is undertaking a five-year project to  change the way
              students learn chemistry, increase scientific  literacy for all students taking
              chemistry, and promote the process  of educational reform.  In collaboration
              with the ModularChem  Consortium, faculty are developing, testing, and
              disseminating  modular course materials that use active and collaborative 
              approaches to learning.  These materials, focused on the first two  years of
              the chemistry curriculum, start with interdisciplinary  questions important to
              students and to society (the molecular basis  of life, the environment,
              technology), and in answering them  develop an appreciation of how science is
              actually done.  This  approach is designed to reach a broader student audience
              more  effectively than do traditional courses, an audience that includes 
              students who are members of groups traditionally under-represented  in science,
              non-science majors, and those taking chemistry as a  supporting course, as well
              as chemistry majors.  By providing a  model for students preparing for careers
              in teaching, this approach  has an impact on Teacher Preparation Programs. 
              Collaboration among  faculty from different disciplines and a number of
              institutions  supports and reinforces those who want to make changes.  These 
              leading liberal arts colleges (Beloit, Carleton, Colorado,  Grinnell, Hope,
              Kalamazoo, Knox, Lawrence, Macalester, Rhodes,  Spelman, St. Olaf, Wooster) and
              research universities (Chicago,  Washington - St. Louis) already have
              experience working together on  chemistry curricular reform.  An alliance with
              the Advanced  Technology Environmental Education Center's coalition of 2-year 
              institutions assures an impact on Advanced Technology Education  Programs.  By
              using the extensive Project Kaleidoscope network to  promote reform, the
              ChemLinks Coalition involves a much larger and  more diverse group of
              institutions in making systemic and  sustainable changes in undergraduate
              chemistry education.
