Title       : Chem PRIME: A Curriculum of Chemical Principles through Integrated Multiple
               Exemplars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1995   
File        : a9455822

Award Number: 9455822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith J. Schray kjs0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kamil Klier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1046,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455822  Schray  A consortium of nine institutions of higher education headed by
               Lehigh University is making fundamental revisions of the chemistry  curriculum
              at all levels for majors in chemistry, for future  professionals, scientists
              and engineers, for responsible citizens,  and for continuing education
              students.  The proposed ChemPRIME  curriculum will utilize current,
              high-visibility, multiple  exemplars to structure the chemistry.  Options in
              exemplars, depth  and rigor of treatment, learning style format, review, self- 
              testing, and evaluation create a flexibility made possible by CD-  ROM
              technology.  Students will create self-customized courses.   Ultimately a
              single publication will integrate all courses in the  curriculum.  The planning
              process involves faculty in: (1)  selection of exemplars for introductory and
              analytical chemistry  courses, (2) definition of basic chemistry content
              covered in these  exemplars, and (3) combination of exemplars into tracks
              through the  courses in the traditional curriculum.  The interdisciplinary 
              nature of many exemplars will promote the integration of chemistry  and related
              disciplines, while traditional core concepts will allow  reliance on the
              experience and training of faculty.  The ChemPRIME  curriculum will create
              courses of unprecedented flexibility  because: (1) different exemplars treating
              the same basic chemistry  will be interchangeable; (2) depth and rigor may be
              selected by an  instructor; (3) courses may be incrementally updated; (4)
              students  will select the presentation optimized for their learning style;  (5)
              laboratory experiences will be closely linked to exemplars; and  (6) customized
              courses for new constituencies may be more easily  designed and tested,
              broadening the impact of chemistry through the  traditional college curriculum.
               Evaluation of individual  components and the overall ChemPRIME project will be
              readily  conducted.  Student access to the developing program through a 
              network will allow determination of component  use and learning  success via
              embedded self-testing and traditional methods.
