Title       : The Development of Visualization Skills in Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1994   
File        : a9455143

Award Number: 9455143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheryl A. Sorby sheryl@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly J. Baartmans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to conduct a faculty workshop to be  held during
              the summer of 1995 at Michigan Technological University  (MTU).  The focus of
              these workshops is on teaching and assessment  techniques for the development
              of 3-D spatial visualization skills  in engineering students.  This project
              builds on and disseminates  the products of an NSF project in the area of
              Course and Curriculum  Development.  The products of this previous project are
              a textbook  for the development of 3-D spatial visualization ability and an 
              accompanying computer lab manual which utilizes I-DEAS software.    The target
              audience for the workshops is undergraduate faculty with  primary
              responsibility in teaching engineering design graphics.   Many entering
              engineering students, particularly women, lack  background experiences which
              would develop 3-D spatial  visualization ability.  Consequently, they are not
              prepared to  compete on an equal basis in their graphics classes. This workshop
               provides engineering design graphics educators with the tools they  need to
              bridge this gap in the backgrounds of many of their  students.  It is estimated
              that with 25 participants, approximately  2500 engineering freshman per year
              will benefit from the use of the  developed materials and improved teaching
              techniques for 3-D  spatial visualization.  This improvement increases the
              likelihood  that the first experience of women engineering students in their 
              graphics curriculum is a positive experience, enhancing retention  of female
              engineering students.    Dissemination of workshop ideas is carried out by
              workshop  participants as they implement plans for change at their home 
              institutions in their engineering design graphics curricula. Work-  shop
              participants are supported in their efforts by being networked  together
              through e-mail and through contact with other participants  and the project
              coordinators at professional meetings.  An  evaluation questionnaire is
              completed by the participants at the  end of the works hop.
