Title       : Interactive, Conceptually Based Multimedia Instruction for Introductory
               Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9455585

Award Number: 9455585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark M. Bunge m bunge@eis.calstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rufino H. Ibarra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford Herlth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose City College
	      2100 Moorpark Avenue
	      San Jose, CA  951282723    408/298-2181

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455585  Bunge                                                This project will
              develop interactive Multimedia tutorials for  introductory physics . They will
              be distributed on CD-ROMs that can  be used by students at school or elsewhere
              on equipment that will  be available to most students upon completion of the
              project.  This project will make use of new technologies and findings in 
              physics educational research to provide a computer based learning  environment
              that will facilitate students actively constructing the  conceptual framework
              of Newtonian mechanics. Students will be  introduced to basic concepts through
              short video clips of actual  events. Many of these will involve confrontations
              with common  misconceptions. Computer animations and graphics will help 
              illustrate various interpretations and develop the principles  involved.
              Students will interact with simulations and physical  representations such as
              vectors, diagrams, graphs, with appropriate  feedback and help, enabling them
              to compare predictions made from  their conceptual models with those of the
              Newtonian model and the  real world.  After learning the concepts, students
              will be introduced to  appropriate mathematical models, which can be adapted to
              the  students background and ability. This will allow the programs to be  used
              in courses of different mathematical levels.  Most of the video clips will be
              taken from the extensive collection  produced at Valencia Community College in
              Orlando FL. Video  editing, additional production, and animation will be done
              at a  local high school which has a nationally recognized electronics  arts
              program that has received extensive support from Silicon  Valley companies.
              Simulations will be provided by an Interactive  Physics player, licensed from
              Knowledge Revolution.
