Title       : Taking Ownership: Science as Constructive Inquiry (SCI) - An Interdisciplinary,
               Urban, Multicultural Curriculum Development Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9455430

Award Number: 9455430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226589             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Sobel msobel@brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Jablon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Brooklyn College of the City University of New York is developing,  enhancing,
              and disseminating an intensive, yet supportive, science  preparation sequence
              for urban preservice elementary teachers. For  the past five years college
              faculty from the four science  departments - Physics, Chemistry, Geology, and
              Biology - have  collaborated with the science education faculty to design and
              pilot  a constructivist-oriented set of science and science education  courses.
               It is the purpose of this proposed project to consolidate  the successes of
              this preliminary program, to build upon pedagogic  discoveries, and to
              strengthen and disseminate a possible major  contribution to the nation's
              infrastructure in science.    In the early part of the three year project,
              curriculum is highlighted:  (1) Quantitative thinking is being developed as a
              systemic strand through  science courses; this involves the use of lab-based
              science instruction  as a way of teaching mathematics, and using mathematics as
              a way of  allowing active learning to extend beyond the bounds of lab and human
               scales.  This project addresses the science and science education  courses. 
              The PI's are cooperating with colleagues concurrently working  on revision of
              the mathematics sequence for elementary education majors.   (2) Since teaching
              in the constructivist mode involves a major shift for  most faculty, the PI's
              are working to enhance consistency in teaching  throughout the science courses.
               (3)  The science faculty are developing  a revised model for set-up of
              laboratory work, to allow for flexibility  and spontaneity in student
              activities.    In the latter part of the grant period, the PI's will prepare a
              book  about their experiences in devising a constructivist curriculum, 
              including discussion of pedagogical, scientific, philosophical, and  political
              issues.  In addition to curricular illustrations, the book will  demonstrate
              how faculty with traditional backgrounds can be encouraged,  motivated, and
              taught to develop teaching style s appropriate to  inquiry-based learning.
