Title       : Educating the Next Generation of Information Specialists, in Collaboration with
               Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1996  
File        : a9455450

Award Number: 9455450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doris K. Lidtke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Mulder  (Principal Investigator former)
              Della Bonnette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9455450  Mulder  This work produces a greatly needed and major revision (or
              complete  revamping) of Computer Information Science (CIS) oriented  curricula.
              Specifically it provides detailed curriculum guidelines,  supporting laboratory
              material, original learning/teaching  paradigms, and a methodology for dealing
              with complex information  systems. This major component of the Computing
              Sciences has been  overlooked by practitioners, educators, and the professional
               societies for at least fifteen years. During this same period the  need for
              complex, large grain information systems to support all  aspects of business,
              industry, and government has exploded;  similarly, the technologies supporting
              the generation and usage of  information have changed dramatically. This has
              led to our current  dilemma: the availability of exciting new information
              technologies  to be applied, BUT few (new hires or practitioners), if any, 
              properly prepared to effectively apply these advances. This  academe/industry
              collaborative proposal addresses this dilemma, and  will produce solutions. 
              This work builds on what is available  today in CIS, adding to it substantial
              new course and laboratory  material, a methodology for dealing with large grain
              information  system complexity, development of teamwork and communications 
              skills in students, and will embed problem solving and design  skills within
              the recommended curriculum. To support this  curriculum, appropriate materials
              are developed and tested at  selected university/industry test sites. A new
              learning/teaching  paradigm (ie., Just in Time Learning) is developed and
              tested, in  which qualified students (guided by a faculty member) is 
              electronically linked with an ongoing industry large grained  information
              systems project. There are participating project team  members, receiving both
              project experiences and just in time  classroom/laboratory experiences. The
              Boeing Company and Motorola  are committed to supporting this original
              learning/teaching  paradigm.  In add ition to the 2 1/2 months per year that
              the PI and  Co-PI devote to this project, a team of ten (10) carefully selected
               professionals (5 from industry and 5 from academe) are heavily  involved in
              the project. Three eminent CIS specialists will form  the National Visiting
              Committee to critique and guide the project,  and 50+ additional external
              specialists will review the results of  the project. ln this manner, the
              quality and applicability of  project results are assured. Widespread and
              timely dissemination to  the Computing profession will be conducted.
