Title       : RIA: Simultaneous Modeling of Features and Design Interdependencies to Support
               Computer-Integrated Engineeringvia Object-Oriented Software Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9308346

Award Number: 9308346
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Peters tpeters@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project demonstrates that the simultaneous modeling of               
              features and design interdependencies is essential for the critical            
              software communications necessary to support computer-integrated               
              engineering (CIE).  Consistency between interdependent features                
              must be preserved, so that a change to one feature is reflected in             
              all appropriate dependent features.  For example, a design feature             
              and a manufacturing feature may be interdependent, where a design              
              change may necessitate change in the associated numerical control              
              (NC) program.  Hence, an a fortiori requirement is the development             
              of a representative library of interdependent features.                        
              Unfortunately, current computer aided design (CAD) systems                     
              emphasize the input of detailed design-interdependencies within the            
              original design intent can not be easily expressed, even though                
              they are often well understood by the designer.  Modern concurrent             
              engineering envisions design, manufacturing, assembly, maintenance,            
              and evolution as co-operative activities; implying that the                    
              representation of interdependencies should be permissible within               
              any stage of CIE activity.                                                     
                   The use of object-oriented software design tools, undergoing              
              parallel development by an internal software engineering research              
              team, provide opportunities to capture these interdependencies and             
              efficiently propagate product and process changes.  The                        
              effectiveness of this approach is demonstrated over and object-                
              oriented database within a complex CIE domain, using emerging                  
              industrial jet engine casing designs as test cases.
