Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric, Numerical, and Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
               Studies in Molecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1993      
File        : a9308342

Award Number: 9308342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Florence J. Lin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Statistical analysis is an essential component of scientific  and technical
              research and development. These analyses have broad  mathematical links in
              common, although many problems also require  specific techniques adapted to the
              particular application. This  research proposal involves investigations into
              aspects of this  common mathematical structure. One focus of the research is 
              nonparametric function estimation, which encompasses varied  applications in
              image processing and in electronic signal  processing and analysis.  The
              current research will establish  desirable general properties for such
              procedures. It will then  examine to what extent the procedures in common use
              have these  properties and, where they do not, how they should be modified. 
              Another goal of the research is a general theory which explains  how to
              construct the smallest possible confidence sets of given  confidence. The
              implications for specific cases will also be  investigated. A third focus is on
              general methods for evaluating  probabilistic forecasts, such as the predicted
              chance of rain.  Considerable theory has been developed for the case of a
              single  forecaster predicting a binomial (="yes" or "no") event.  Extensions
              will be proposed for the case of multinomial events  and for forecasts produced
              by group consensus rather than by one  individual.
