Title       : Attitudes Toward Controversial Human Services among Minority Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1993    
File        : a9308857

Award Number: 9308857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13935              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lois Takahashi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              9308857  TAKAHASHI       Considerable research has been devoted by scholars to 
              analysis of individual and collective reactions to the siting of  controversial
              facilities, which are recognized as necessary but  are seen as undesirable when
              situated nearby.  Although many  studies have focused on the dynamics of
              "NIMBY" (not in my back  yard) responses to "LULUs" (locally undesirable land
              uses) that  have negative physical environmental externalities, much less 
              attention has been given to the analysis of reactions to human-  service
              facilities like homeless shelters and facilities for  treatment of people
              infected with AIDS.  Initial studies of  community reactions to such facilities
              disclosed that gender,  income, and other socio-economic characteristics are
              highly  correlated with individual and collective acceptance of these 
              activities.  National attitudinal studies indicated that  interregional,
              intraregional, and other locational factors may  also influence community
              acceptance of human-service facilities.  This Research Planning Grant will
              enable a capable and productive  young geographer to begin examination of 
              attitudinal variations  among different ethnic and racial minority groups. 
              Questions in  a national survey first administered in the late 1980s will be 
              adapted to take into account cultural and linguistic differences  among several
              minority populations, with pilot tests of modified  instruments conducted on a
              set of minority groups in Orange  County, California.  Results from these
              pretests will be used to  refine national survey instruments so that they
              elicit better  information regarding socio-demographic variations in attitudes 
              toward human-service facilities and other LULUs.       This award will move a
              promising line of research on an  important topic through a critical phase in
              the development and  testing of instruments designed to elicit critical
              information  about variations in attitudes among different groups of people. 
              By improving data-collection procedures, this  line of research  will better
              contribute to general understandings about the human  geography of individual
              and community attitudes regarding siting  of contentious land uses.  The award
              also will provide a valuable  boost to the independent research career of a
              highly qualified  woman who has not previous received federal research support.
               ***
