Title       : Collaborative Research in Decision, Risk, and Management Science: Judgement
               Based on Limited Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9308380

Award Number: 9308380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36776              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Sanbonmatsu sanbon@freud.sbs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0512003   Collective Decision-Making              
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308380  Sanbonmatsu    In decision making and everyday judgment, people must
              frequently  draw conclusions and make decisions on the basis of limited or 
              incomplete information.  Rarely is complete information available  about all
              relevant dimensions or aspects of a target object or  issue.  Consequently, it
              is important to understand how people  respond to limited information.  This
              collaborative research is  designed to investigate the psychological processes
              involved in  decision making based on limited or incomplete evidence.  It is 
              guided by the omission detection model, which prior research has  shown to be
              useful for integrating many seemingly unrelated  findings and for generating
              many new hypotheses concerning the  judgmental effects of previously neglected
              decision relevant  variables.  The research investigates several different
              judgmental  processes (i.e., sensitivity to missing information, attributional 
              processes, and inference processes), several different dimensions  of judgment
              (i.e., judgmental extremity, confidence, and  uncertainty), and several
              different types of judgments (i.e.,  attitudinal judgments, preference
              judgments, likelihood judgments,  and judgments of category membership).  The
              goal of this research  is to extend prior theory and research on the omission
              detection  model, and to develop debiasing applications based on this model.  
              The research will assess the utility of these procedures for  improving
              judgment and decision making based on limited evidence.  ***
