Title       : Management and Operations of the Ocean Drilling Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a9308410

Award Number: 9308410
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300937389          (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Falvey  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kathryn Moran  (Principal Investigator former)
              Daniel F. Weill   (Project Director current)
              Steven R. Bohlen  (Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Joint Ocean Insts Inc
	      1755 Mass Ave, NW
	      Washington, DC  200362102    202/232-3900

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                        Project Abstract                  Management and
              Operations of the                       Ocean Drilling Program    9308410  Pyle
               The Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) is an international program of  basic
              research in the marine geosciences supported by the National  Science
              Foundation, a consortium of Canada-Australia, the Federal  Republic of Germany,
              France, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the  European Science Foundation
              (representing Belgium, Denmark,  Finland, Greece, Iceland, Italy, The
              Netherlands, Norway, Spain,  Sweden, Switzerland, and Turkey). Drilling
              operations began in  January, 1985, following conversion of a state-of-the-art
              ocean  drilling vessel, the JOIDES RESOLUTION, for scientific ocean  drilling. 
                The first 51 legs of the program have examined the history of  global climate
              change in the equatorial and polar regions, the  early stages of continental
              rifting, fluid flow in sediments of  active margins, and the composition and
              alteration of the oceanic  crust. Sediment samples cored from the Norwegian
              Sea, eastern  equatorial Atlantic, and Weddell Sea record synchronous change to
               glacial conditions approximately 3 million years ago which marked  the
              beginning of northern hemisphere glaciation. Drilling on the  Antarctic margin
              has traced the history of continental glaciation  back to at least the early
              Oligocene and possibly late Eocene, 42  million years ago. Drilling results in
              the northwest Indian Ocean  are being used to correlate the initiation of
              monsoon circulation  with uplift of the Himalayas. Seismic reflection records
              from  rifted continental margins often record parallel, dipping  reflectors.
              ODP drilling on the Norwegian margin has shown that  these reflectors are
              basalt flows that form during continental  rifting and gradually change in
              chemistry from continental to  oceanic as rifting proceeds. Drilling along the
              Antilles, Peruvian,  and Japanese trenches has documented the importance of
              fluid  transport to the deformation and alteration  of margin sediments.    New
              ODP developments in drilling and instrument technology have  allowed coring of
              unsedimented oceanic crust. A 500-meter core into  the lower oceanic crust in
              the southwest Indian Ocean records the  successive formation and solidification
              of magma chambers along the  Indian Ocean spreading center. A major surprise
              was the high  magnetization of these lower crustal rocks, which is at odds with
               existing models for the formation of sea-floor magnetic anomalies.  In the
              eastern equatorial Pacific ODP has initiated attempts to use  mining drilling
              techniques to drill young ocean floor. Although the  initial drilling results
              were disappointing, development of this  new technology for ocean drilling will
              be continued. Deployment of  down-hole instrument packages for long-term
              measurement of crustal  conditions and processes are an important objective of
              the program.  In recent years, close collaboration with Global Seismic Network 
              planning has lead to initial deployment of long-period, digital  seismometers
              in ODP boreholes. Temperature and pressure sensors  have been deployed in holes
              drilled into an active hydrothermal  system on the Juan de Fuca Ridge in the
              northeast Pacific. Data  from these instruments are being recovered using
              submersibles and  remote vehicles.     The Ocean Drilling Program began a four
              year drilling program in  the Atlantic Ocean in early 1993. The major
              scientific problems to  be addressed during this period include oceanographic
              and climate  change of the Arctic during the Neogene, the formation of rifted 
              and volcanic continental margins, changes in equatorial circulation  and
              productivity, the composition of the lower oceanic crust, the  history of
              sea-level fluctuations during non-glacial periods of the  Tertiary, and the
              formation of metal-rich sulfide deposits along  the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.     The
              Ocean Drilling Program is managed through a contract with the  Joint
              Oceanographic Institutions, Inc. (JOI). JOI has subcontracts  with Texas A&M 
              University for management of scientific support and  drilling operations aboard
              the JOIDES RESOLUTION, and with  Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory for
              management of logging  operations. Scientific advice and direction for the
              program are  provided to JOI through the international scientific organization,
               Joint Oceanographic Institutions for Deep Earth Sampling (JOIDES).  The long
              term directions for ODP drilling are established by JOIDES  initiated
              Conferences on Scientific Ocean Drilling (COSOD). The  most recent of these
              international meetings was held in 1987 and  was attended by over 350
              scientists from 20 nations. Shorter term  planning evolves from the JOIDES
              advisory structure composed of 15  panels and committees with approximately 250
              total members. The  selection of actual drilling sites is in response to
              drilling  proposals submitted to JOIDES by individuals in the international 
              scientific community.    The responsibility of Texas A&M as science operator is
              to collect  cores from beneath the floors of the world's oceans and to assure 
              that adequate scientific facilities are available for the analysis  and
              preservation of these samples. In fulfilling this obligation,  Texas A&M: (1)
              contracts for drilling operations on the JOIDES  RESOLUTION; (2) develops
              operation plans and drilling schedules;  (3) staffs the ship with scientific
              personnel and technicians; (4)  maintains shipboard laboratories and equipment;
              (5) Stores,  archives and disseminates samples; (6) publishes the Proceedings
              of  the Ocean Drilling Program which  summarize the scientific results  of the
              program, and (7) develops new drilling and coring technology  required to
              address the scientific program developed by JOIDES.      The responsibility of
              the Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory is  to supply a full suite of
              geochemical and geophysical services  which involve the acquisition,
              processing, and dissemination of in  situ logging measurements. Routine logging
              services are performed  by Schlumberger Offshore  Services.  ***
