Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some New Bootstrap Methods for SampleSurveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9308373

Award Number: 9308373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34658              (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Booth jbooth@stat.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Numerous resampling methods for variance estimation and                   
              confidence intervals in sample surveys have been proposed in the               
              statistical literature.  In most cases, their theoretical                      
              properties are not well understood and there is little evidence                
              that the methods offer a significant improvement over standard                 
              approaches based on linearization and normal approximation.  The               
              proposed research involves extending recent foundational work on               
              resampling techniques for data obtained by stratified random                   
              sampling to more complex survey designs. In particular, this                   
              involves the development of Edgeworth expansion theory                         
              appropriate for double sampling and two-stage cluster sampling                 
              plans. A second component of the proposal describes a                          
              nonparametric prediction-based approach to inference in sample                 
              surveys which utilizes existing bootstrap methods for estimating               
              conditional distributions. In addition to theoretical work, a                  
              thorough numerical investigation of the proposed methods will be               
              conducted and applications to real data will be presented.                     
                   In today's "Information Age" an ever-increasing quantity of               
              data is collected and the need for reliable data summary                       
              techniques has never been more critical.  Unfortunately, much of               
              the data encountered in practical problems does not satisfy the                
              conditions necessary for standard statistical methods to work                  
              well.  The sheer quantity of information often prohibits or, at                
              least, inhibits the identification of these potential                          
              difficulties and hence blind application of many statistical                   
              procedures is commonplace.  In addition, there is a constant need              
              to develop new statistical methodology which can be used to                    
              analyze increasingly complex sampling designs. The proposed                    
              research is part of an ongoing effort to develop widely                        
              applicable and "robust" statistical methods for analyzing survey               
              data. The proposed methods will utilize widespread access to                   
              faster computers allowing statistical techniques which were not                
              feasible only a few years ago to be used routinely.
