Title       : Ulwa, A Misumalpan Language of Nicaragua: Grammar, Lexicon, Texts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1993 
File        : a9308115

Award Number: 9308115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Hale klhale@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308115    Hale              This project is concerned with the documentation of
              Ulwa, a  Misumalpan language, spoken in the town of Karawala, on the  Atlantic
              Coast of Nicaragua.  The project will produce materials  for a reference
              grammar, a dictionary, and a collection of texts.   The form which these
              materials will take will include not only  standard book manuscripts for use by
              linguists but also books in a  form requested by members of the Karawala
              community for use in  education, in their efforts to safeguard their endangered
               linguistic heritage.  The project builds upon four years of  intermittent work
              by two linguists from MIT and six Ulwa-speaking  residents of Karawala who have
              formed a committee for the purpose  of preserving their language.  The project
              does not start from  scratch, therefore, and the two-year period allotted for
              it is  realistic.  Ulwa has few speakers, and almost no children are  learning
              the language.  Miskitu has replaced it almost entirely.   The preservation of
              Ulwa is therefore understandably of concern to  the people of  Karawala.  The
              project is considered necessary by  the Ulwa members of the Karawala community,
              and it is felt that a  concentrated effort is now appropriate, as opposed to
              the  intermittent work of the past four years.  The scientific  importance of
              the project derives in part from the inherent value  of documenting a little
              known and imperilled language.  But Ulwa  has already involved using the study
              of a number of phenomena which  are to some extent peculiar to it.  The
              phonology of the language  has achieved some renown for its nominal inflection,
              whose  placement within the word is governed by metrical principles,  rather
              than morphological bracketing.  The syntax of Ulwa involves  use of the
              "internally headed" relative clause, which has provided  clues leading to a
              promising analysis of the syntactic structure of  the noun phrase in general,
              explaining an apparent exception to the  prevailing head-final ordering of
              elements.  The lan guage also has  a fully developed switch-reference   system.
               The latter interacts with a serial verb construction,  which because of the
              head-final syntax of Ulwa, exhibits structural  asymmetries strikingly at
              variance with those of the more familiar  serializing languages.  Ulwa is of
              some historical interest as  well, being crucial in understanding the
              interrelations holding  among Northern Sumu (Twahka, Panamahka), Southern Sumu
              (Ulwa), and  Miskitu during the past centuries, particularly since the 
              beginnings of British contact.  Ulwa helps to date and to locate  spatially
              certain events which have been important in the recent  linguistic history of
              Miskitu, leading to the latter's preeminence  in the region.  While full
              understanding of the linguistic and  ethnographic history of indigenous eastern
              Nicaragua is not a  specific purpose of this project, documentation of Ulwa is
              clearly  a necessary prerequisite to a project which might endeavor to  achieve
              that goal.
