Title       : Support for Control of Particulate Processes Conference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1993      
File        : a9308595

Award Number: 9308595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Rawlings   (Principal Investigator current)
              Reg Davies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles V. Freiman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              50        Engineering                             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1415,
Abstract    :
              It was proposed to provide partial support for an                              
              interdisciplinary, international workshop on "Control and                      
              particle processes Conference" in Santa Barbara, at the end of                 
              January 1993.  The meeting will bring together researchers from                
              universities, industry and government, with the focus on the in-               
              process measurements and control systems for manufacturing                     
              processes involving particles.  This topic is relevant in                      
              chemical, mining and mineral processing.  For instance, about                  
              80% of the products manufactured in chemical plant at DuPont use               
              particle technology.  The margins of improvement by process                    
              control, in both product quality and reliability in operation,                 
              are significant.  The proposed meeting will extend the research                
              interests on particle process control of the group with areas                  
              of interest including chemical processes.  The participants is                 
              truly international.  NSF funds will partially support only                    
              professors and graduate students from the U. S. (20 participants               
              with $500 support per person), while the funds for the                         
              industrial and overseas participants will come from industry and               
              Engineering Foundation.  The workshop covers four research                     
              areas:  reactor control systems, particle processing,                          
              instrumentation, and modeling and control strategies.                          
                                                                                             
              The research focus of this proposal is at the intersection of                  
              two division in engineering, "Chemical and Thermal Systems" and                
              "Design and Manufacturing Systems", which will co-shear the                    
              workshop expenses.
