Title       : LTREB: Long-term Studies of Population and Community Ecology in an
               Experimentally Fragmented Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9308065

Award Number: 9308065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Holt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Rich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin P. Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane M. Debinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond J. Pierotti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,9186,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

9308065
Holt

A long-term experiment on habitat fragmentation is underway
              in the prairie-forest ecotone in eastern Kansas.  An archipelago of patches,
              representing different levels of fragmentation, was arrayed within a period 6
              years. During the first six years of the study, fragmentation influenced
              consumer population dynamics, and the local persistence of herbaceous plant
              species with clonal life cycles, but did not affect measures of local species
              richness or the overall rates of succession.  It is expected that during the
              next five, substantial effects of fragmentation upon successional dynamics
              should begin to appear, because:  1) there is a transition underway from
              species present in the original seed pool to species colonizing form external
              source pools, particularly trees and shrubs, and 2) the stature of the dominant
              plants is increasing, thereby enhancing microenvironmental differences between
              patch interiors and the surrounding interstitial habitats and hence edge
              effects.  It is also expected that small mammal may be dominant driving factors
              in woody species establishment, and so fragmentation effects observed in plant
              succession may be indirect manifestations of fragmentation effects on the small
              mammal community.  This project will document dynamics in plant community
              composition, local persistence, and plant architecture as a function of the
              degree of fragmentation, using both ground surveys, canopy analysis technology,
              aerial photography, and remote sensing.  It will also monitor the spatial
              distributions of small mammals that are potentially important in slowing the
              invasion of woody species, and to use exclosures to directly measure effects on
              seedling survivorship.  This study is one of the very few experimental studies
              of habitat fragmentation, and provides a system for exploring more general
              issue of scale in ecological dynamics.

Research projects such as this are
              fundamental to the better understanding of the associative processes that occur
              within communities.  This understanding will provide a knowledge base on what
              to expect as landscapes are more finely fragmented.  It may also suggest
              ameliorative measures for maintaining system integrity.

