Title       : The Verb Complex of Two Caribbean Creoles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1995   
File        : a9308635

Award Number: 9308635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Winford dwinford@ling.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9308635  Winford                                Abstract    Continuing debate
              about the structure of creole Tense/Modality/  Aspect (TMA) systems has
              emphasized the need for more precise and  thorough analyses of particular
              creoles to elucidate issues such  as the degree of similarity among creoles and
              their implications  for theories of creolization. The longstanding view that
              creole  verb complexes are organized around three core categories -  Anterior
              (Tense), Irrealis (Mood) and Non-punctual (Aspect) - has  come under increasing
              challenge in recent years, as our knowledge  of these language has grown.  This
              research focusses on the  semantic and syntactic organization of the TMA
              systems of two  Caribbean creoles - Belizean and Sranan (Suriname).  The main 
              purpose of the investigation is to test the extent to which the  TMA systems of
              these creoles share a common organization and set  of categories, and in what
              ways they conform to the so-called  "prototypical" Creole TMA system which some
              scholars believe to  owe its origin primarily to the influence of language
              universals  in creole genesis and development.  This is related to the  broader
              hypothesis that creole grammar directly reflects  Universal Grammar.  The study
              will investigate the forms which  encode the TMA categories of each creole,
              their characteristic  distribution in various types of predicate structure, and
              their  combinatory possibilities.  The investigation will concentrate on  the
              most conservative or "basilectal" variety of each creole.   The data on which
              the analysis will be based will be collected  from a sample of subjects in at
              least one rural community in each  country using recordings of natural speech,
              and direct  elicitation techniques, including questionnaires.  The analysis 
              will then be used to test the validity of claims concerning the  uniformity of
              creole TMA systems and their implications for  creole genesis.
