Title       : U.S.-Africa Cooperative Research: Refugia and Graveyards: Patterns of Species
               Survivorship in the Fish Fauna of Lake Victoria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1993    
File        : a9308276

Award Number: 9308276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie S. Kaufman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Colin A. Chapman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lauren J. Chapman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New England Aquarium Corp
	      Central Wharf
	      Boston, MA  021103399    617/742-8830

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 5928,
Abstract    :
              9308276  Kaufman    Technical Narrative:    This proposal represents a
              collaborative research  project involving the New England Aquarium, Moi 
              University in Kenya, and the Uganda Freshwater  Fisheries Research Organization
              (UFFRO) in Jinja,  Uganda.  The objective of this study is to better 
              understand the Lake Victoria ecosystem and the  processes that are presently
              causing dramatic  declines in stocks of native fishes.  Dr. Les  Kaufman and
              his team from the New England  Aquarium will work in conjunction with Mr. 
              Richard Ogutu-Ohwayo and his team from the UFFRO.   Also included in the
              research team is a doctoral  student from Moi University, Mr. Peter Ochumba.  
              By continuing a faunal survey of Lake Victoria,  these investigators will
              obtain data to help  elucidate the processes that are currently  operating to
              structure the ecosystem.   Specifically, they will consider a series of 
              predictions that relate to the patterns of  species survivorship among the
              indigenous fish  species, the identification of refugia, and the  template of
              selective forces experienced by these  species.  More generally, the study will
              produce  a collection of archival fish specimens, more  firmly assess the
              current extent of extinctions,  establish a working team of in-country 
              scientists, and build the necessary  infrastructure to continue such work in
              the  future.    This project in environmental biology fulfills  the program
              objective of advancing scientific  knowledge by enabling leading experts in the
               United States, Kenya, and Uganda to combine  complementary talents and conduct
              research in  areas of strong mutual interest and competence.   This project
              will also enable  U.S. and African scientists, who are early in  their careers,
              to work together conducting  fieldwork, and collecting and analyzing data.  
              Partnerships created through this project could  lead to   future,
              collaborative activities.  ***
