Title       : Crossed Supersonic Molecular Beam Studies of the Reaction Dynamics of Fullerness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1995   
File        : a9308183

Award Number: 9308183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Jackson wmjackson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the                       
              Chemistry Division, Prof. W.M. Jackson of the University of                    
              California at Davis will perform a series of investigations on                 
              the reaction dynamics of two fullerene compounds composed of 60                
              and 70 carbon atoms each, reacting with molecules belonging to                 
              families known as free radicals, and those characterized by                    
              weak bonds, large electron affinities, and low ionization                      
              potentials.  The experiments are to be done with a newly                       
              constructed molecular beam machine built expressly for the                     
              purpose of these studies.                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Fullerenes comprise a recently discovered class of chemical                    
              compounds of carbon atoms in which the locations of these atoms                
              originally defined a nearly spherically shaped geodesic                        
              surface.  The appellation "fullerene" is used in recognition of                
              Buckminster Fuller whose architectural researches on geodesic                  
              domes popularized such structures.  A fullerene composed of 60                 
              carbon atoms has the atoms located at the corners of pentagons                 
              and hexagons, these regular polygons forming a closed surface                  
              just like that of a soccer ball.  Such a cluster of atoms is                   
              therefore also popularly referred to as a "Buckyball". The                     
              generic term fullerene is now commonly applied to refer to such                
              atomic clusters irrespective of their actual numbers of                        
              composing atoms, and its use has now been extended to also                     
              include tubular structures.  Fullerenes are found to be                        
              unusually stable and, even though originally thought to be rare                
              in nature, can actually be easily made and are found in a                      
              variety of substances as a result of chemical processes.  Due                  
              to the potential of technological applications, fullerenes are                 
              the subject of intense investigations of their physical,                       
              chemical, and material properties.  Their chemical reactivities                
              are not well understood and the purpose of this fundamental                    
              research project is to contribute to the knowledge base of                     
              these systems and thereby help in their eventual exploitation                  
              for technological applications.
