Title       : US-Czech Joint Fund Research on Mathematical Logic and Complexity Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1993       
File        : a9308779

Award Number: 9308779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : May 15,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Krajicek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mathematical Inst
	      Zetna 25 Prague 1 11567
	      , CZ  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Czech Joint Fund mathematics research                                  
              project between Dr. Jan Krajiek, Mathematical                                  
              Institute, Czech Academy of Sciences and Dr.                                   
              Samuel Buss, University of California-San                                      
              Diego, concerns the following topics:  bounded                                 
              arithmetic, complexity theory and complexity of                                
              propositional and first order proof systems.                                   
              The researchers see these topics as closely                                    
              related in aims and techniques and believe the                                 
              major problems in all three areas have the same                                
              character as the famous "P versus NP" problem                                  
              (whether there is a propositional proof system                                 
              in which every tautology has a proof whose                                     
              length is polynomial in the length of the                                      
              tautology.)                                                                    
                                                                                             
              In their investigation of elicit connections,                                  
              the researchers will study the following                                       
              problems:  finite axiomatizability                                             
              of bounded arithmetic, lower bounds to the                                     
              depth and to the size of Boolean circuits,                                     
              bounds on the length of Frege, extended Frege                                  
              and first-order proofs.  Results are expected                                  
              to help determine whether some methods                                         
              developed purely for logic can be applied to                                   
              problems in complexity theory.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research in mathematics fulfills the                                      
              program objective of advancing scientific                                      
              knowledge by enabling leading experts in the                                   
              U.S. and Czech Republic to combine                                             
              complementary talents and pool research                                        
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest                                   
              and competence.  Funds for the project are                                     
              awarded through the US-Czech Joint Fund,                                       
              Prague, in accordance with established                                         
              guidelines.
