Title       : The Temporal Structure of Urban Residence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1993    
File        : a9308889

Award Number: 9308889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dowell Myers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308889  MYERS       Most research on urban residential mobility treats the 
              housing stock and the households moving through it as separate  objects of
              analysis.  Housing research has been conducted with  only slight regard to
              population dynamics, and population  research has under-emphasized the housing
              in which people live.  Both housing units and households have life cycles which
              are  joined together by an occupancy of some duration.  This linkage  between
              specific housing units and specific households requires  study in order to gain
              a better understanding of urban  residential structure.  This research project
              will test a theory  of the role of time in urban residential structure and
              housing  relocation by integrating housing stock, population, and the 
              residential mobility process that links the two.  It uses a model  of cohort
              layering to integrate housing construction and aging,  cohorts of householders,
              and occupancy cohorts defined by year  moved into the unit, thus joining the
              histories of individual  households and housing units.  This framework will be
              used to  test for differences in residential mobility rates observed  across
              metropolitan areas in the United States.  Multivariate  models will be
              estimated to explain the persistence of  occupancies from 1980 to 1990 for
              different types of households  and dwellings under different metropolitan
              conditions.  Data will  come from the Public Use Microdata Sample of the U.S.
              Census.       Age of housing is an important factor in residential  mobility of
              households, but it is unclear what role housing plays  in this process.  This
              research will combine both spatial and  temporal dimensions of household
              residential mobility to give a  clearer understanding of how households and
              housing units combine  in time and space to define rates of residential
              mobility in  urban areas.  The model to be developed through this research 
              will be able to be implemented with readily available census data  for any
              location in the nation, which will make it  of use to both  researchers and
              policy planners wishing to understand how housing  age affects relocation.  ***
