Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Well-Posed Numerical Calculations of Free-Surface Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1993 
File        : a9308075

Award Number: 9308075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Baker baker@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308075  Baker       The investigator studies the motion of free surfaces in 
              fluid flows by investigating the development of singularities in  a related
              analytic problem.  In many free-surface flows, the  effects of viscosity and
              surface tension appear to be so small  that they are neglected.  However,
              attempts to solve the motion  of the free surface by numerical techniques,
              boundary integral  techniques for example, soon run into difficulties due to
              the  formation of curvature singularities.  Only when one of the  fluids is
              effectively a vacuum do numerical calculations indicate  that the motion of the
              free-surface is well-posed.  Obviously,  the effects of surface tension and
              viscosity, no matter how small  the coefficients are, become very important
              close to the time of  singularity development.  Precisely how these
              regularizing agents  prevent singularity formation, and what the nature of the 
              subsequent motion is, are the main thrusts of this proposal.  To  achieve this
              objective, the investigator uses a simple  mathematical view that describes
              singularity formation through  the analytic extension of the boundary integrals
              into the complex  arclength variable (or other suitable parametrization
              variable).   In this complex plane, singularities are born, depending on the 
              details of the initial conditions.  These singularities then  track through the
              complex plane, and may reach the real axis in  finite time.  At that point they
              become physically relevant.   Preliminary studies of the influence of surface
              tension show that  the singularities slow down and fail to reach the real axis
              in  finite time, but they get extremely close.  The close proximity  of these
              singularities to the real axis plagues standard  numerical methods, because of
              the high resolution needed to  capture the extremely distorted free-surface. 
              Instead, the  investigator uses a method that represents any singularities in 
              the complex plane explicitly, so that the rest of the behavior of  the
              free-surface is analytic.  In  particular, this analytic part  can be
              represented by Fourier series very accurately.  The first  task is to use this
              approach on a simpler classical free-surface  flow problem, the fingering
              instability in a Hele-Shaw cell.  The  second is to explore the method on the
              Kelvin-Helmholtz  instability of an interface between two incompressible fluids
              of  equal density and in the presence of surface tension.       Surfaces
              between immiscible liquids and gases occur  abundantly in nature and
              technology.  Some examples include the  rise of bubbles in chemically reacting
              units, falling rain-drops,  spray jets, and oil and water flowing in the
              ground.   Mathematical models that attempt to describe the motion of  surfaces
              typically exhibit great sensitivity to the details of  the motion. 
              Consequently, computer simulations can suffer from  inaccuracies unless
              extraordinary care is taken.  The  investigator develops a conceptually new
              mathematical approach  that will allow severely deformed geometries to be
              tracked  reliably.  In particular, the approach will be able to track the  long
              term behavior of water penetrating oil in a Hele-Shaw Cell,  a mathematically
              similar model for the motion of oil and water  during secondary stage recovery
              from an oil-field.  Once  completely understood on this important problem, the
              approach  will be adapted to the study of rising bubbles and dendritic 
              formation during crystal growth.  ***
