Title       : RIA: Controlling Synthesis of Domain-Specific Object- Oriented Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9308425

Award Number: 9308425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151797             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rattikorn Hewett hewett@cse.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9264,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This research will address the problem of automatically                   
              synthesizing object-oriented programs, focusing on control of the              
              synthesis process.  The primary objective is to reduce user                    
              interaction in transformation-based automated synthesis systems by             
              means of significant advances in control mechanisms.  Secondary                
              objectives include application of synthesis to object-oriented                 
              program development, identification of practical specification                 
              languages for object-oriented synthesis systems, and techniques for            
              specification acquisition, software modeling, and knowledge                    
              representation that support software reuse and maintenance.                    
              Automated program synthesis is one of the central methods used in              
              knowledge-based software engineering to enhance the quality and                
              efficiency of software development. Although many transformational             
              synthesis systems have been successfully designed and implemented,             
              automatic control of the synthesis process remains a difficult                 
              problem.  This research proposes a domain-specific knowledge-based             
              system that includes intelligent control for synthesizing object-              
              oriented programs.  The proposed research will develop                         
              transformation rules and schemas used for synthesis by implementing            
              as experimental system for a specific domain.  The architecture                
              integrates a black-board-based control mechanism with an existing              
              transformational system to achieve greater efficiency in program               
              synthesis.  By employing a blackboard-based architecture, the                  
              system explicitly represents control knowledge used in guiding the             
              selection of transformations.//
