Title       : An Examination of the Nature and Consequence of Senate Campaigns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1993       
File        : a9308421

Award Number: 9308421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48882              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim F. Kahn kahn@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Kenney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308421  Kahn    Political campaigns are crucial to a functioning democracy
              because,  at the very least,s they energize voters to participate in the 
              electoral process, they provide a specific time period for voters  to reflect
              on the state of the nation, they afford a forum for  politicians, elites, and
              experts to debate the important issues of  the day, and they supply a mechanism
              by which candidates can  communicate directly with voters.    In this study,
              the investigators focus on the process by which  candidates communicate with
              voters and how these messages affect  the behavior of voters.  Specifically,
              they examine the nature and  consequences of campaigns for the U.S. Senate. 
              Senate elections  present an optimal setting for the study of campaigns because
              these  elections provide impressive variation in candidates' political 
              experience, campaign strategy, campaign spending, and media  coverage.  Unlike
              campaigns for the U.S. House of Representatives,  which are usually low-key
              affairs, and presidential races, which  are often highly competitive contests,
              campaigns for the U.S.  Senate vary considerably in their intensity.  Some
              races are  lopsided, where one candidate wins easily; others are competitive 
              where one candidate ekes out a narrow victory; and still others  fall somewhere
              in between.    This investigation involves three distinct data collection 
              activities focusing on the 1988-1992 elections for the U.S. Senate:   1)
              interviews with senate campaign managers; 2) an examination of  the candidates'
              political advertisements; and, 3) a study of the  newspaper coverage of the
              senate campaigns.  These new data allow  an examination of the process by which
              candidates and newspapers  communicate information to voters.    In addition to
              collecting these data, the investigators rely on  survey data already available
              from the National Election Studies.   The National Election Study conducted a
              state by state survey of  potential voters for each senate election in 1988,
              1990, and 1992.    These surveys asked voters, among other things, what they
              knew  about the candidates, what they liked and disliked about the  candidates,
              and which candidates they supported at the polls.   These survey data, coupled
              with the three data sets being created,  will enable the investigators to gauge
              voters' reactions to the  messages emananting from the campaign, and provide
              insight into how  voters decide their vote.  ***
