Title       : Research Initiation Award: Multidisciplinary Design Optimization Development and
               Application in Electronic Package Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1995        
File        : a9308083

Award Number: 9308083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Renaud renaud.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   In this research two new general purpose algorithms for                   
              multidisciplinary design optimization will be fully developed and              
              implemented in application to electronic package optimization.  In             
              one algorithm second order system sensitivities will be generated              
              using local second order design sensitivities generated                        
              concurrently during subsystem optimizations.  The concurrent                   
              subsystem optimizations and local sensitivity calculations will be             
              implemented in parallel to achieve greater efficiencies.  The                  
              algorithm provides a computationally inexpensive procedure for                 
              quantifying subsystem interactions as compared to previous                     
              algorithm proposals.  The second algorithm will use neural networks            
              to build approximations of the system design space.  The use of                
              neural networks to represent the design space moves the                        
              multidisciplinary design optimization strategy away from the point             
              design techniques used in previous algorithm proposals.  The neural            
              network will be trained using data that is accumulated during                  
              concurrent subspace optimizations.  The algorithms will be                     
              developed as general purpose design optimization tools for                     
              application to a variety of complex coupled multidisiplinary                   
              systems.                                                                       
                   Electronic packaging design is an area where immediate                    
              benefits can be realized through the application of                            
              multidisciplinary design optimization.  In multidisciplinary design            
              optimization the complex couplings between subsystems are formally             
              quantified and exploited in a concurrent design process.                       
                   //
