Title       : The Cellular Cholesterol Efflux Potential of Human Serum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9308279

Award Number: 9308279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Magarita E. de la Llera-Moya   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny Univ Health Sci
	      Broad & Vine
	      Philadelphia, PA  191291192    215/842-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,9136,9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The maintenance of proper intracellular levels of cholesterol is               
              dependent on a dynamic equilibrium between cholesterol efflux and              
              uptake of the lipid component after having bound to an                         
              extracellular acceptor in serum.  To study this phenomenon, a                  
              method was developed to assay the combination of "released"                    
              cholesterol with serum acceptor molecules. The objective of the                
              present research is to extend the current assay in order to obtain             
              more information on other parameters that can influence cholesterol            
              efflux.  These factors include intracellular cholesterol content               
              and the relative activities of serum components, other than those              
              lipoproteins already known to regulate cholesterol homeostasis such            
              as lecithin cholesterol ester hydrolase (LCAT) and cholesterol                 
              ester transfer protein (CETP).  To begin to monitor the movement of            
              cholesterol after entry into the extracellular acceptor pool,                  
              methods will be developed to assay intracellular acyl cholesterol              
              ester transferase (ACAT).  Changes in ACAT activity have been shown            
              to correlate with cell cholesterol in numerous cell systems.  With             
              the ACAT enzyme assay in place, cholesterol efflux values will be              
              correlated with changes in serum components such as high density               
              lipoprotein (HDL) subclasses, other lipoproteins, and standard                 
              parameters of LCAT and CETP.  Finally, the new assay method will be            
              scaled down for screening small volume serum samples from                      
              genetically engineered mice, that have extra, or missing copies, of            
              genes for serum proteins that play a crucial role in cholesterol               
              metabolism.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              A better method will be developed to measure changes in the                    
              circulating total concentration of cholesterol in serum. This is               
              difficult to do because cholesterol exists in combination with a               
              variety of different circulating serum components, and in this                 
              combined state, it is not detected by ordinary procedures now in               
              use.  Development of such an assay system and the identification of            
              more of the different extracellular cholesterol-absorbing                      
              components in serum will provide a better understanding of                     
              cholesterol metabolism in vertebrate animals.
