Title       : A Comparison of the Decision-Making Processes Associated with Good and Bad
               Outcomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1993      
File        : a9308566

Award Number: 9308566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Frisch dfrisch@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              79        Psychology Sciences NEC                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308566  Frisch    One goal of research in decision making is to evaluate the
              quality  of people's decisions.  Decision quality is typically evaluated by 
              comparing people's choices to a normative model such as utility  theory. 
              However, it is not clear that conformity to a normative  model is associated
              with favorable outcomes in the real world.  The  purpose of the proposed
              research is to empirically derive a  standard of good decision making.  In
              particular, by comparing  decisions with positive and negative outcomes, expect
              to identify  those aspects of the decision making process that are most 
              important in achieving positive outcomes.    We have found that positive
              outcomes are associated with more  rational deliberation than negative
              outcomes, and that that the  amount of deliberation was related to two aspects
              of the decisions.   First, people report engaging in more deliberation for
              professional  decisions than for personal ones.  Second, more deliberation is 
              reported for decisions that were framed as choices (e.g., should I  buy a
              product or should I save my money) than those that were  framed as
              opportunities (e.g., should I buy the product or not).   The basic goal of this
              research is to examine these effects in more  detail.  The proposal includes
              several retrospective self-report  studies in which people describe either
              positive or negative  outcomes that occurred in their lives and the thought
              processes  that led to them.  Included is a prospective study of a decision in 
              progress.  Finally, the proposal includes a controlled experiment  examining
              the effect of decision context or framing on  deliberation.    The ultimate
              goal of the research is to discover the aspects of the  decision-making process
              that distinguish positive and negative  outcomes.  This research has
              theoretical implications for how  researchers should conceptualize a good
              decision-making process.   It also has the potential to lead to practical
              advice about how to  improve the quality of real-life decision maki ng.  ***
