Title       : RIA: Specialized, Fully Declarative Logic Programming Languages for Expert
               Systems and Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9308970

Award Number: 9308970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan A. Plaza   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Murrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Specialized, Fully Declarative Logic Programming Languages for                 
              Expert Systems and Databases                                                   
                                                                                             
              A family of logic programming languages is proposed -- one general             
              purpose programming language, and the others specialized and aimed             
              at major application areas of AI. The languages are fully                      
              declarative and based on solid mathematical foundations.  The                  
              language for general purpose programming admits (unlike PROLOG and             
              its currently existing generalizations) extended syntax: general               
              quantifiers and a functional form of classical negation.  This                 
              language is used as a basis from which the others are developed.               
              The second language for expert systems has an intrinsic support for            
              non-numerical measures of confidence and formal mechanisms for                 
              handling hierarchies of contradictions.  The third language for                
              deductive databases supports multiple open and closed domains and              
              efficient query evaluation.  The fourth language combines features             
              of the previous two, and is suitable for distributed multi-                    
              component intelligent systems.  The languages have a potential for             
              parallelization.  This research is based on a theory recently                  
              developed by the investigator and extended to support the features             
              above.  In this research, experimental implementations are also                
              produced to allow validation of the theory and comparisons of                  
              efficiency with corresponding implementations of other languages.              
              No languages with proposed features currently exist; their                     
              introduction will have a desirable impact on the construction of               
              future intelligent systems.
