Title       : RIA: Composite Cavity Semiconductor Lasers for High Speed Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1993 
File        : a9308126

Award Number: 9308126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98477              (Estimated)
Investigator: Giora Griffel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9256,
Abstract    :
              9308126  Griffel  The tunable semiconductor laser (SCL) is a key component in
              the most advanced lightwave communication systems, which are based on frequency
              tuning and wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) techniques.  In these
              systems, the tunable SCL is used as the light source for optical fiber links. 
              Due to its unique properties it is capable of efficiently delivering the high
              data rate of information required in telecommunication and computer networks,
              CATV, LAN, etc.  Other important applications for the tunable SCL include
              frequency domain optical memory (FDOM), optical pumping of Erbium doped fiber
              amplifiers and solid state lasers, laser spectroscopy, as well as direct source
              for space communication.    In this project, we propose to carry out both
              theoretical and experimental studies of a new class of composite-cavity
              semiconductor lasers that consist of multi-active-section structures.  Such
              semiconductor lasers have been the subject of extensive research and
              development effort in the recent years  1-5,9,10 , which was driven by their
              improved operation and finer characteristic.  As a result, single longitudinal
              mode, higher side-mode suppression ratio, improved modulation efficiency, wider
              tuning range, and, in the case of coupled cavities, high output power were
              obtained.  However understanding of many of these structures is incomplete, and
              comprehensive design criteria have not yet been established.  In a recent study
              we have outlined the basis for modelling these devices, and used it for the
              specific case of two-section gain-levered distributed-feedback SCL. The
              preliminary results obtained so far, as well as other studies are extremely
              encouraging  3,5,8  and stress the necessity to acquire a better understanding
              to optimize their operation.  The study program is projected to include the
              theoretical and experimental investigation of parameters such as modulation
              efficiency, optical linewidth, tuning range, field patterns, as well as other
              pertinent characteristics.  ***
