Title       : Research Initiation Awards: Process Planning for Coordinate Measuring Machine
               (CMM)-Based Dimensional Inspection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9308648

Award Number: 9308648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ming C. Leu                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yin-Lin Shen shen@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This research project is aimed at developing a knowledge-                 
              based process planning system for dimensional inspection of                    
              discrete-part products using coordinate measuring machines in a                
              computer-integrated manufacturing environment.  The project is                 
              structured to rigorously investigate critical issues in such                   
              dimensional inspection, including evaluation of software                       
              algorithms, evaluation of uncertainties in measurement results,                
              design of inspection strategies, capturing of dimensional                      
              inspection knowledge in computer systems, and generation of                    
              standard inspection programs.  The system uses product definition              
              data, dimensional inspection expertise, and knowledge-based expert             
              systems to generate process plans for dimensional inspection                   
              applications.  The system also generates part inspection programs              
              to be executed on coordinate measurement machines, which represent             
              an emerging automated dimensional inspection technology widely                 
              accepted by industry.                                                          
                   The research is a pragmatic problem and contains a wealth of              
              research problems that require innovative ideas.  Major                        
              improvements in product quality, inspection throughput and                     
              flexibility for moderate to low volume applications are                        
              anticipated.  The research focus is on seamless flow of product and            
              production information.  The research results will be applicable               
              in establishing a critical link between the islands of automation              
              of design and inspection.  It may also advance the state of the art            
              of automated dimensional inspection technology.
