Title       : Second U.S. Japan Workshop on Global Change: Environmental Response Strategies;
               Honolulu, Hawaii; February 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9308256

Award Number: 9308256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fereidun Fesharaki   (Principal Investigator current)
              Toufiq A. Siddiqi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ctr Cult&Tech Interchange
	      
	      Honolulu, HI  96801    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
                   The needs for expanded research on global environmental                   
              change has highlighted the need for greater cooperation and                    
              collaboration among scientists in different nations to address                 
              problems that affect the world as a whole.  Under the auspices of              
              the U.S.-Japan Science and Technology Agreement, the Committee on              
              Earth and Environmental Sciences (CEES) of the Federal                         
              Coordinating Commission on Science, Engineering, and Technology                
              (FCCSET) is sponsoring a series of bilateral workshops to examine              
              ways that scientists and engineers from both nations can address               
              significant research problems.  The second is this series of                   
              workshops is being held in Honolulu, Hawaii, in early February                 
              1993.  The objectives of this three-day workshop are (1) to                    
              permit participants from the U.S. and Japan to provide overviews               
              of research and development activities within their nations                    
              mitigating increases in energy-related greenhouse gases in the                 
              atmosphere and adapting to greenhouse gas-induced climatic                     
              changes; (2) to identify topics for future global change                       
              mitigation and adaptation research; and (3) to identify potential              
              forms of collaborative research and development between the U.S.               
              and Japan on mitigation and adaptation technologies and practices              
              related to greenhouse gas-induced climatic changes.  This award                
              provides reimbursement to the East-West Center (Center for                     
              Cultural and Technology Interchange Between East and West, Inc.)               
              for costs it will incur as it assists CEES in hosting this                     
              meeting.  Funds to provide this reimbursement are being                        
              transferred to NSF from the U.S. Department of Agriculture and                 
              the U.S. Department of Energy.                                                 
                   This workshop will provide a valuable opportunity for                     
              scientists and engineers from the U.S. and Japan to address                    
              collectively important problems related to the human dimensions                
              of global change, and it will encourage the development of                     
              research and development collaborations among individuals from                 
              the two nations.
