Title       : Mathematical Sciences: New Directions in Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9308772

Award Number: 9308772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew McDougall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Three research projects that explore some recent and  innovative
              methodologies of active interest in time series  analysis are investigated. The
              first focuses on the problem of  obtaining robust recursive estimates for ARMA
              models, and will  initially address a number of important issues that arise
              when  redescending robust criteria are employed in the recursive  procedure. In
              the second project, applications and finite sample  properties associated with
              the spectral envelope methodology for  analyzing categorical time series are
              investigated. The extension  of this methodology to real-valued time series is
              also explored.   The development and integration of exploratory time series 
              analysis methods within the dynamic graphical environment is  considered in the
              final project, and provides an effective means  to perform the research
              involved in each project concurrently.           The development of new
              procedures for analyzing time series  data is an important and active area of
              research across a variety  of disciplines.  Typically, time series analysis is
              equated with  data that is observed sequentially over time (eg. stock market 
              prices, temperature), but in other disciplines "time" may simply  be a
              positional index that defines, for example, the order of the  base-pair codings
              (a,t,g,c) in DNA sequences.  In this project,  three innovative approaches to
              time series analysis are  investigated.  The first concerns the problem of
              retaining the  ability to obtain useful information about a time series process
               when aberrant observations may be present.  The second approach  deals with
              the concept of a "spectral envelope" which provides an  objective criterion for
              assessing periodic patterns in  qualitative series such as DNA sequences.  A
              large component of  the research involved in both these approaches will be 
              incorporated into the last project where the development of  highly interactive
              exploratory graphical methods for time series  analysis is pursued.
