Title       : US-Poland Cooperative Research on Effect of Strong Correlations and Disorder on
               Electron States and Phase Transitions in Vanadium Sesquioxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1993      
File        : a9308323

Award Number: 9308323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jurgen M. Honig   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Rosenbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 5953,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Poland Cooperative Research project                                  
              on the Effect of Strong Correlations and                                       
              Disorder on Electron States and Phase                                          
              Transitions in Vanadium Sesquioxides is between                                
              Dr. J.M. Honig of Purdue University and Dr.                                    
              Jozef Spalek of the University of Warsaw.  The                                 
              researchers plan a strongly interactive                                        
              collaboration both in experiment and in theory                                 
              for a thorough investigation of electron                                       
              correlation effects and interaction-driven                                     
              phase transitions in the (V1-xMx)2O3 system, with                              
              M = Cr, Ti, and cation vacancies and related                                   
              systems.  They will emphasize: (1) the proper                                  
              preparation and characterization of single                                     
              crystals grown by skull melting techniques; (2)                                
              measurements of heat capacity, magnetic                                        
              susceptibility, and transport properties (with                                 
              and without magnetic fields) in the cryogenic                                  
              temperature range where lattice effects are                                    
              negligible, to study their dependence on                                       
              temperature, composition, and externally                                       
              applied pressure; (3) the proper theoretical                                   
              interpretation of the results in systems where                                 
              both strong electron correlation and disorder                                  
              effects determine the physical properties.  The                                
              PI's involved in this project have had                                         
              considerable experience in the area of                                         
              materials preparation, physical measurements,                                  
              and theoretical analysis, and have engaged in                                  
              informal collaboration in the past.  A                                         
              principal result of the cooperation so far is                                  
              the theoretical construction of an overall                                     
              phase diagram for the (V1-xCrx)2O3 and V2(1-.)O3                               
              systems, as well as the experimental discovery                                 
              of a new boundary of V2(1-.)O3 terminating the                                 
              antiferromagnetic metallic phase.  They also                                   
              plan as a follow-up to initiate a theoretical                                  
              investigation of real space interactions                                       
              involving hybrid pairing induced by Kondo-type                                 
              interactions in various correlated electron                                    
              systems.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research in condensed matter physics                                      
              fulfills the program objectives of advancing                                   
              science by enabling leading expert in the U.S.                                 
              and Poland to combine complementary talents and                                
              pool research resources in areas of strong                                     
              mutual interest and competence.
