Title       : Optimization Techniques for Problems Arising in Design and Other Engineering
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9813057

Award Number: 9813057
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andre L. Tits andre@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     The objectives of this research are to contribute to the advancement of
              optimization as applied to engineering design and other engineering
              applications.  Specifically, three main goals will be targeted:  (1) Work will
              be pursued to enhance a previously introduced tradeoff exploration methodology,
              by borrowing from utility theory and information-based design theory; and to
              enhance a software environment implementing this methodology.  (2) Efforts will
              be devoted to developing and analyzing highly effective optimization algorithms
              with the property that all iterates, that is, all successive approximate
              solutions generated by the algorithms, satisfy the prescribed constraints--a
              crucial property in many engineering contexts.  (3) The resulting algorithms
              will be implemented, tested and validated on test benches pertaining to various
              engineering disciplines.   If successful, these efforts should have a
              significant impact on engineering design.  It is important that all iterates
              satisfy the prescribed constraints in many engineering applications.   There is
              a lack of fast, effective optimization algorithms that enjoy this property. If
              the present effort is successful, the work per iteration will be substantially
              reduced, especially for large problems.  An important side effect of reducing
              the amount of computation per iteration is a resulting gain in accuracy. 
              Failures in the solution of optimization problems can often be traced to
              insufficient computational accuracy.  Also, tradeoff exploration is
              ubiquitously needed in engineering design, where the complexity and number of
              competing design specifications make it challenging to identify an appropriate
              utility function.  Effective tools aimed at capturing the designer's underlying
              preferences can give him/her a definite edge.
