Title       : Dissertation Research: Collapse and Agricultural Innovation in the Titicaca
               Basin Formative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9813395

Award Number: 9813395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9330               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine A. Hastorf hastorf@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Christine Hastorf, Mr. Matthew Bandy will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork in
              the Lake Titicaca Basin of Bolivia to study the Formative Period center of
              Chiripa. At the close of the Formative, ca. 550 AD the first of the major
              Andean prehistoric states arose in this region and its influence spread over
              much of the Bolivian and Peruvian highlands. This Tiwanaku State preceded by
              almost 500 years its better known Incan counterpart. Examples of `pristine
              states` - those which arise independently and not in response to pressure from
              other similar entities - are extremely rare and anthropologists study them to
              understand the processes which lead to complex societies. In the Titicaca
              region the Formative Period spans approximately a thousand years and the
              general cultural trajectory during this interval it towards greater social
              scale and integration. Chiripa lies at the heart of the future Tiwanaku state
              and what makes it anomalous is that fact that it underwent a collapse during
              the late Formative. Preliminary archaeological data suggests a wholesale
              reconfiguration of local social, economic and political institutions. The scale
              of integration decreases, contrary to what one might expect. In preliminary
              work, Mr. Bandy noted changes in settlement pattern and in the configuration of
              stone celts. Today, simple plows are widely used in the highland Andes and Mr.
              Bandy hypothesizes that the `collapse` is not in fact one but reflects a shift
              in subsistence and settlement pattern which resulted from the introduction of
              the plow. He believes that this simple device for the first time permitted the
              utilization of heavy lake margin soils, that population dispersed to take
              advantage of this new technology and that this movement resulted in smaller,
              settlements. However the data necessary to provide strong support for such a
              scenario are missing. With NSF funding Mr. Bandy will carry out an integrated
              program of foot survey, systematic surface collection of Formative Period
              materials, limited test excavations and problem-oriented laboratory analyses. 
              This research will shed new light on the rise of the first great Andean
              civilization. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
