Title       : New Jersey Center for Advanced Technological Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9813444

Award Number: 9813444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack L. Waintraub Jack_Waintraub@middlesex.cc.nj.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy A. Paugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Rubino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlesex County College
	      2600 Woodbridge Avenue
	      Edison, NJ  08818    201/548-6000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During its first three years of existence, NJCATE has made substantial progress
              in reshaping technology education, broadening awareness of the role technicians
              play in the global economy, and expanding partnerships in Center activities. 
              Through the development of the Mecomtronics Engineering Technology Program,
              NJCATE has produced a model that provides a unique approach to the creation of
              curriculum for technician programs.    The NJCATE curriculum model provides a
              process and the procedures for the creation of integrated, interdisciplinary
              engineering technology programs.  The development of the new Mecomtronics
              Engineering Technology program was the vehicle for the design and testing of
              the curriculum development model which is transferable to all other engineering
              and science technology disciplines.    NJCATE will continue serving as a
              resource and catalyst for the continuous renewal and improvement of technician
              education to prepare graduates for successful employment in a globally
              competitive marketplace.  This will be accomplished by creating and
              disseminating innovative curricula and instructional materials, providing high
              quality professional development programs for academic and industry personnel
              and technical assistance services to the educational community.    Over the
              next three years, a major focus of Center activities will be to position NJCATE
              as a national provider of quality educational products and services, moving the
              Center toward an increasing level of self-sufficiency.  Working with a business
              consultant, NJCATE staff analyzed potential markets for NJCATE products and
              services, identified and described products and services, and developed a
              series of strategies to move NJCATE forward.  The activities outlined in this
              proposal result from planning effort.
