Title       : In Vitro Studies on Nucleosome Dissolution and Assembly During Transcription
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9813427

Award Number: 9813427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vaughn E. Jackson jacksonv@mcw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Medical Col of Wisconsin
	      8701 Watertown Plank Road
	      Milwaukee, WI  532263548    414/257-8296

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Jackson, Vaughn

The main objective of this project is to extend our
              knowledge of the mechanisms that facilitate transcription through nucleosomes.
              This will be done by testing the hypothesis that positive stress, which is
              induced during transcription, causes a disruption of histone interactions
              within the nucleosome. It is specifically proposed that the H2A,H2B is
              disrupted from H3,H4, such that the majority of H2A,H2B is released. It is
              proposed that, in contrast, this increase in positive stress increases the
              affinity of H3,H4 for the DNA, so that H3,H4 transfer during transcription is
              minimized. The rate of transcription through nucleosomes is proposed to
              influence both processes, with NAP1 (a histone deposition factor) maximizing
              the release of H2A,H2B. This model will be tested by utilizing an in vitro
              transcription system that includes the following components: T7 RNA polymerase,
              prokaryotic (E. coli) topoisomerase I and eukaryotic (MSB) topoisomerase I,
              acetylated or nonacetylated histones and additional agents to regulate the
              level of positive stress, i.e. polyamines and RNase A. The template is a
              circular, covalently closed DNA with two T7 promoters immediately upstream of
              18 repeats of the 207 bp 5S RNA gene of Lytechinus vareigatus, a sequence that
              positions nucleosomes. The assay for measuring histone mobility includes a
              competitor DNA in the reaction mix and measures the topological change in the
              competitor as well as the amount and type of histone bound, by separating
              components on sucrose gradients and by gel electrophoresis. Formaldehyde
              crosslinking will also be used to freeze the state of the transcription
              complexes, which will facilitate the separation and analysis of the
              nucleosomes.

Histones are highly basic proteins that bind DNA with extremely
              high binding energies. This binding is required to facilitate the orderly
              condensation of the large quantity of DNA that is contained in the nucleus of a
              cell. The compacted structures that are formed are called nucleosomes. These
              structures, stabilized by the high histone binding energy, repress nuclear
              processes such as DNA replication, DNA repair, and transcription initiation or
              elongation. It is therefore important to understand the cellular mechanisms
              that disrupt these interactions and allow these processes to occur. This
              project will study one possible mechanism, the induction of positive stress on
              DNA, which is caused when the DNA is overwound by RNA polymerase, in the course
              of copying the information into RNA. This study will provide insight into the
              nuclear dynamics that allow the genetic information in DNA to be duplicated and
              copied.

