Title       : SGER: High Precision Pulsed Laser Curvature Modification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9813758

Award Number: 9813758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68807              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xianfan Xu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Xu  DMI-9813758  The objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research
              (SGER) project is to develop and evaluate a curvature modification technique
              with precision on the order of sub-micro-radians. High precision curvature
              modification is useful in many manufacturing processes, particularly in
              microelectronics industry. For example, the required flatness of some
              components in a high capacity computer hard disk is on the order of ten
              nanometers; its curvature is less than one micro radian. Currently, no
              technique is available for modifying curvature with such high precision. A
              laser-based high-precision curvature modification technique is proposed. A
              controlled pulsed laser beam will be used to raise the temperature of the
              target material and induce plastic deformation, therefore, to change the
              curvature of target material.  The project work will carry out exploratory
              research on the feasibility of using pulsed lasers for curvature modification.
              The repeatability of high precision curvature modification, and materials'
              structural and property changes due to laser irradiation will be investigated.
              Experimental studies will also be conducted to correlate laser processing
              parameters with the laser-induced curvature change. The outcome of the project
              will be instrumental to the evaluation and development of the precision laser
              bending technology. This project will provide research opportunities to
              graduate and undergraduate students. This research project could also become a
              topic in the course taught by the P.I, "Laser Processing", so that a large
              number of students will be introduced to novel laser processing techniques.
              Therefore, this project will contribute to the human resource development in
              the area of laser technology.                                      1
