Title       : Nonlinear Robust Control and Estimation For Distributed Parameter Systems: A
               Temperature Field Control Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9813284

Award Number: 9813284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey V. Drakunov drakunov@eecs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Enrique Barbieri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fernando Figueroa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9813284  Drakunov  The objective of this research project is to develop robust 
              and computationally feasible control schemes which can  successfully deal with
              Distributed Parameter Systems(DPS).  The main difficulties to control DPS for
              example, a  diffusion equation modeling the evolution of the temperature  field
              in arc welding, or a Timoshenko equation modeling the  vibrations of a flexible
              manipulator, are complexity and  strong uncertainty.  Although one can assume
              for simulation  purposes that the geometry and properties of the heated (or 
              cooled) materials are known, or that the manipulator payload  may be ignored,
              in practice they vary in a wide range.  An  accepted model for a DPS is
              obtained by (1) selecting a  suitable set of boundary conditions that describe
              a closely  related problem; (2) solving the associated  eigenvalue/eigenfuction
              problem; and (3) invoking the  assumed-mode method.  The result is an infinite
              system of  uncoupled, ordinary differential equations for the so called  system
              modes.  In practice, one truncates the model and  fulfills the control design
              using a finite number of  equations.  To validate such an approach in general,
              the  effects of unmodeled dynamics, that is, control and  observation
              spillover, need to be examined.  On the other  hand, there exists the sliding
              mode control methodology,  which is well developed for finite dimensional
              systems but  relatively very little has appeared in the literature for 
              infinite dimensional systems.  The appeal of this approach  is its robutsness
              to matched disturbances and parameter  variations. The design idea is based on
              the following  procedure: in order to solve a control problem such as the 
              stabilization of the weld width or heat penetration, the  objective is
              formulated as a certain function of the system  states which defines a desired
              manifold.  A control is found  such that the set in the state space where this
              relation is  true forms a sliding manifold, that is, an integral manifold 
              reachable in finite tim e.  Once in the sliding mode, the  dynamic behavior is
              prescribed by the choice of switching  surfaces, and the system is inherently
              insensitive to that  class of parameter variations and external disturbances 
              which is implicit in the system input channels -- the so  called matched
              uncertainty.  The inherent insensitivity of a  system with sliding modes to
              parameter variations and  disturbances eliminates the need for exact modeling -
              a very  desirable property that has quite remarkable theoretical and  practical
              implications.  In this research project, the  generalization of this method is
              developed with mathematical  rigor to further study and synthesize efficient
              control and  sensing algorithms for DPS.  ***
