Title       : IDPO/WG: CONNECTIONS: Women in Sciences, Engineering, and Math (SEM) Making
               Connections Between Curriculum, Career, and Personal Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a9813896

Award Number: 9813896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899523             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara Wadia-Fascetti swf@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Duwart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura Watkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice E. Gilmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paula G. Leventman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1588,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The Connections Partnership is based on a two-year collaboration between
              Northeastern University (NU) and the Boston-area Patriots' Trail Girl Scout
              Council (PTGSC).  PTGSC, who represents over 8,000 elementary, middle, and high
              school girls in the City of Boston, brings expertise in all-girl programs and
              gender sensitivity to Connections and NU with its signature cooperative
              education program brings expertise in career training and SEM education. 
              Connections will attract and support girls and women who can excel in math and
              science and encourage them to make the transition into majors and careers in
              SEM-related fields.  NU faculty, staff and students will team with girls in
              Boston-area Girl Scout troops, their troop leaders, and their teachers in
              after-school activities and summer day camp programs at Computer Club Houses at
              NU and at the PTGSC site in Boston.  The major goal of the program is to
              empower high school ready girls, college ready high school graduates, and
              career ready college graduates and prepare them for a future in SEM-related
              fields.  It takes the creative efforts of all stakeholders, including classroom
              teachers and their students, to shift a significant number of girls and women
              into careers that have not been traditional for them.
     Connections will
              target three populations:  middle school girls (Group 1); high school girls
              (Group II); and undergraduate college women (Group III).  The program combines
              best practices of (1) Women in Engineering (WIE) programs and girl-focused SEM
              programs; (2) hands-on SEM classroom experiences with work in real-world
              settings; and (3) a structured mentoring program that supports middle and high
              school girls and undergraduate women linked to women faculty, Girl Scout
              leaders, teachers, and working professionals in SEM fields.
     The target
              population will connect with one another through several paths:
         o 
              Contact with one or more mentors:  A structured mentoring program that groups
              more than 500              students over e-mail, involving troop leaders,
              professional women, parents, college majors, and NU              faculty
              crossing over all three target populations.
         o  Use of a structured
              e-mail communication and support network, tying together all elements of the   
                        program (curriculum, SEM-activities, mentoring, and coaching to
              learning).
         o  Participation in regularly scheduled academic and
              summer activities that connect 	   	               curriculum, career, and
              personal goals for participants and members of the Connections team.
     Each
              target population will participate in age-specific activities designed to help
              girls and women make the right connections for successful careers as 21st
              Century SEM professionals.  These activities will reflect the three themes that
              will be integrated throughout the proposed Connections Partnership program: 
              Curriculum, Career, and Personal Development (CCPD).  Middle school girls will
              understand the importance of what they are learning to succeed in high school;
              high school girls will understand what SEM careers involve through their
              interactions with college women, faculty and professionals in the field; and
              college women will become career ready and have a clearer understanding of
              their future opportunities as SEM professionals.  The program will have a
              direct impact on the lives of more than 450 girls each year, with almost 1,000
              during the three-year funding period.  In addition, more than 300 NU
              undergraduate women will participate in Connections with an impact on
              approximately 500 NU's students over the three years.  We will seek additional
              funding to sustain the program beyond NSF funding as needed.

