Title       : Texas Rural Systemic Initiative (TRSI)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a9813583

Award Number: 9813583
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16453423           (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman T. Guffy tguffy@wtamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The TRSI project seeks to implement systemic reform principles and to improve
              instructional practice in science and mathematics in schools in impoverished
              rural districts in Texas.  The principal arena upon which the initiative will
              provide intervention is the local district.  The initiative will operate
              through four direct and indirect support strategies focused at local
              districts:

o	district and community leadership development
The initiative
              will require all participating districts to establish a systemic leadership
              team composed of teachers, administrators, parents, community members, and
              students.  The initiative's role will be to guide the formation of these teams,
              and provide assistance in gaining community support for the reform.
o	district
              teams' development of systemic reform understanding and capacity
The
              initiative will hold periodic 3-day institutes to increase the leadership team
              members' understanding of actualizing systemic reform in their districts, as
              defined by the NSF Drivers and the Texas Essential Knowledge and
              Skills.
o	principals' academies
The initiative, in recognition of the crucial
              role the principal plays in instructional practice in a school, will hold
              leadership-development forums specifically to enhance the capacity of the
              principals in the participating districts.
o	teacher partners' academies
The
              initiative will work with site-identified lead teachers to guide the reform in
              their schools.  The role of the teacher partners will be that of a resource,
              model, and coach, but not that of professional development deliverer.

In
              addition to the four strategies listed above, the initiative will provide
              support to the participating districts to foster their adoption of systemic
              reform principles, and to implement classroom instruction in science and
              mathematics that is in line with the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills

