Title       : An Integrated Map of Cytological, Genetic and Physical Information of Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9813365

Award Number: 9813365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $762977             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Zacheus Cande zcande@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9179,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is to generate a map of the chromosomes of maize based
              on cytological features that will integrate information from existing genetic
              maps with new cytological and physical data. In general, this new map will be
              created by using three dimensional fluorescent in situ hybridization (3-D
              FISH), deconvolution light microscopy, and computerized image analysis to place
              genetically mapped genes onto the cytological map of maize. Genetic maps are
              based on the percent recombination between genes. Genetic maps report the
              linear order of genes and the amount of recombination between linked genes, but
              do not contain information on cytological distance or number of base pairs
              between genes. Cytological maps are created by determining the position of any
              visible structure on a chromosome as viewed through a microscope. The position
              is usually reported as a percentage of total chromosome arm length. Physical
              maps reflect DNA sequence data, and show the position of DNA motifs relative to
              an absolute scale in base pairs. For example, a map of overlapping sequenced
              clones forming a contig is a physical map.

The cytogenetic map will be
              created by using 3-D FISH to place genetically mapped genes onto the
              cytological map of maize. Meiotic pachytene chromosomes will be utilized as the
              basis of the map since they are 10X longer than mitotic chromosomes and display
              excellent cytology. Several cytological features such as the heterochromatic
              knobs and prominent chromomeres will be genetically mapped. Chromosome specific
              bar codes, based on repetitive sequences, that will allow unambiguous
              determination of each region on every chromosome, will also be developed. The
              cytological position of highly repetitive DNA elements, as well as the gene
              positions, will be determined to allow the discovery of regions of the
              chromosomes that are gene rich or gene-poor. To utilize sequence data in the
              map, base pair distances between markers will be integrated into the map as
              these data are determined by other groups. This will make it possible to
              determine relationships between physical, cytological and genetic distances;
              i.e., the relationships of base pairs to microns to centimorgans in different
              parts of the genome.

This map will provide biological information about the
              global positions of genes, the global organization of repetitive elements,
              position of recombination events, and will possibly shed light on the process
              of meiotic homologous pairing. It could be used for ordering large insert
              clones, for integration of the several genetic maps of maize, and for the
              genetic placement of markers that cannot be mapped genetically. This technology
              will be generally applicable to other grasses and could be used in a
              comparative approach to study grass genome evolution. In general, this publicly
              available map will be used to arrange and manage a large amount of genome data,
              and will provide biologically relevant information to the plant genome
              community.

