Title       : Workshop: Anthropology, Genetic Diversity and Ethics to be held in February 1999
               at the University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9813667

Award Number: 9813667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29287              (Estimated)
Investigator: Trudy R. Turner trudy@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Aswad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Over the last decade the developments of biotechnology have created an
              unprecedented ability to study genetic variation within our species.  Such data
              can be applied to a number of significant areas including the reconstruction of
              the relationships between modern human populations, the mechanisms of human
              adaptation, the pathways of human migrations and the contribution of genes to a
              variety of human disorders.  Biological anthropologists, population
              geneticists, historical linguists and members of other interested disciplines
              are likely to reap deeper understanding from analysis of DNA variation around
              the globe.  Those who donate genetic samples may someday also benefit by
              contributing to the understanding of the biology underlying disease processes.
              The National Academy of Sciences has stated that a program to investigate
              population level variation in the human genome is highly desirable.  While
              there are tremendous benefits to be gained from population investigations, they
              also raise a number of serious ethical concerns. Questions surrounding informed
              consent issues, especially in populations with limited knowledge of science
              require much discussion.  Intellectual property issues related to the genetic
              material are very difficult to answer.  Safeguards must be designed to protect
              the rights of both individuals and populations that are at a political
              disadvantage.  This award will underwrite the costs of a workshop that will
              bring together bioethicists, scientists and representatives of several
              populations of anthropological interest in order to discuss socio-cultural,
              scientific, ethical and political issues generated by the sampling of the human
              genome.  The workshop will be held at the University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee in
              February, 1999.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
