Title       : Catalysis with One Hand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a9813937

Award Number: 9813937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Sholl sholl@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Gellman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.:	CTS-9813937
PI:		David S. Sholl, Andrew J.
              Gellman
Institution:	Carnegie Mellon University
Title:		Catalysis with One
              Hand

Professors David Sholl and Andrew Gellman seek to understand the
              characteristics of chiral surfaces that determine enantioselectivity in
              heterogeneous catalysis. They will pursue this goal using surface science,
              quantum chemical and Monte Carlo techniques. Their first objective is to study
              chemisorption and surface reactions on naturally chiral surfaces, such as
              Ag(643)S, Cu(643)S, Pt(643)S and Ag(643)R, Cu(643)R, Pt(643)R, which have S and
              R configurations. The differences in desorption energies, adsorbate orientation
              angles and reaction rate constants will be calculated and measured, in order to
              isolate and quantify the role of each type of interaction in
              adsorption-desorption enantiodifferentiation. Enantiomerically pure adsorbates
              will consist of alkyl chlorides, secondary or tertiary alcohols, alkenes,
              nitriles, and substituted aromatics. LEED will be used to characterize the
              surfaces, IRAS to determine adsorbate orientation, and TPD to measure
              desorption energy. Utilizing semiempirical potentials, molecule-surface and
              intermolecular interactions will be parametrized and adjusted to experimental
              measurements of alkyl chloride adsorption. Monte-Carlo simulations will afford 
              the energy and orientation of adsorbed species in order to study surface
              coverage and adsorbate size effects on enantiodifferentiation. Extended Huckel
              Molecular Orbital (EHMO) theory will be used in the case of alcohol, ketone and
              alkene adsorption on naturally chiral Cu and Pt surfaces. 
The second
              objective is to modify achiral surfaces (such as Pt(111) and Cu(111)) by
              adsorption of a chiral template, to model and quantify the types of interaction
              producing enantiospecific behavior. Templates will consist of R or S
              configurations of thermally stable molecules bound to the metal through oxygen
              or methylene groups, and containing side groups such as alkyl, vinyl, phenyl,
              etc.. Co-adsorbates will consist of reversible bound monofunctional species
              such as primary alcohols, ketones and nitriles. Interaction energies will be
              measured using TPD. The interaction between functional groups will be studied
              theoretically utilizing semiempirical potentials for group-surface and
              function-function interactions, as well as EHMO theory and Monte-Carlo
              simulation to obtain adsorbate orientation and desorption energy.
The third
              objective is to investigate the surface chemistry of enantiospecific surfaces.
              Series of alcohols on well-characterized kinked and stepped surfaces will be
              used to study structural factors such as relative size of adsorbate with
              respect to spacing between selective sites. Theoretical prediction of energies
              and molecular orientation for various combinations of surfaces, templates and
              co-adsorbents will be used to guide the experimentation.
The final goal is to
              generate fundamental knowledge of the surface and intermolecular interactions
              that produce enantiodifferentiation. Such knowledge could be used to guide the
              design of heterogeneous enantioselective catalysts. This theorico-experimental
              research will involve the training of students.

