Title       : Mycobiotic, Revisionary, and Monographic Studies in the Xylariaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9813304

Award Number: 9813304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack D. Rogers Rogers@WSU.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9813304
Rogers
	In a continuation of his productive taxonomic studies of
              ascomycete fungi, Dr. Jack Rogers of Washington State University and his
              students and colleagues are focusing on several genera including Anthostomella,
              Penzigia, and Xylaria. Field collecting in tropical and temperate regions,
              along with study of museum collections and laboratory cultures, provides the
              materials for study of the morphology and growth, life cycles, and association
              between asexual (anamorphic) and sexual (teleomorphic) phases of these
              widespread but poorly known fungi, which include wood-rotting organisms, soil
              saprobes and pathogens, endophytes, commensals in ant and termite nests, and
              termite-gut symbionts. Some species are known sources of toxic compounds with
              antibiotic properties, and Dr. Rogers' culturing studies have provided the
              means for further analyses of these mycotoxins and their effects.
	The
              sampling, describing, and naming of the biological diversity of the Earth
              continue in the hands of taxonomic specialists as a fundamental activity in
              biology. The fungi in particular, because of their small size and often obscure
              activities, are poorly known in most parts of the world, yet are important in
              numerous ecological processes and offer challenges to evolutionary biologists
              as well. The basic revisionary and monographic research proceeding from studies
              by Dr. Rogers and his colleagues worldwide reveals the full diversity of form
              and life cycle in these xylariaceous fungi, provides reliable indicators for
              identifying individual species and for associating their sexual and asexual
              strains, and lays the groundwork for further ecological and phylogenetic
              investigations.


