Title       : Interaction Between Multiple Memory System in the Mammalian Brain: Preliminary
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9813587

Award Number: 9813587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan A. Salinas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT    Interaction between Multiple Memory Systems in the Mammalian
              Brain    IBN9813587         The field of behavioral neuroscience has begun to
              appreciate  that the control and direction of a presumably simple behavioral 
              response may not be the result of a single psychological process,  but may
              reflect the involvement of more than one such process and  therefore, the
              involvement of more than one underlying neural  system. When more than one
              neural system is involved in guiding  and directing behavior on the basis of
              experience, there are three  possible ways that these systems can logically
              interact during a  learning situation: A) they may operate independently and 
              simultaneously, in a parallel redundant fashion, B) one system may  predominate
              over the other(s) to control behavior, or C) multiple  systems may need to
              cooperate in order to solve a given task. The  goal of the proposed experiments
              is to collect preliminary data on  the neurochemical basis of these
              interactions in order to develop  in vivo animal model systems for the complex
              cognitive control of  behavior.    The proposed preliminary research utilizes
              behavioral tasks  that have been used previously with permanent and reversible 
              lesion methodologies to focus on the second logical form of  interaction, one
              neural system predominating over the other(s). To  investigate the roles of
              specific neural structures in the  functional and neurochemical relationships
              among multiple memory  systems, the experiments employ two complementary
              techniques. The  first is in vivo microdialysis coupled with high pressure
              liquid  chromatography (HPLC) to measure neurotransmitter release in 
              structures important for learning and memory (i.e., hippocampus  and dorsal
              striatum) during ongoing learning and behavior. The  second is site-specific
              direct brain injections to alter the  activity in specific neurochemical
              systems during learning and  behavior. The findings are anticipated to provide
              the basis for  understanding the mechanisms und erlying the allocation of
              control  over behavior by specific neural systems. The aim of future  studies
              is to describe and categorize further the neuroanatomical  and neurochemical
              bases of interactions among multiple memory  systems. Greater understanding of
              these interactions is necessary  to develop accurate models of the ongoing
              complex control and  direction of behavior. Such refined models would be of
              value to  other fields of inquiry ranging from the basic neurobiology and 
              neuroethology to the design of complex computational neural  networks.
