Title       : Microscale and Mesoscale Structures in Convective Marine Boundary Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2000   
File        : a9813687

Award Number: 9813687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318193             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest M. Agee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The characteristics of the transfer of heat and moisture from water surfaces to
              the atmosphere is important to advancing understanding of both weather and
              climate. 
This research will address the dynamic and thermodynamic properties
              and characteristics of convective marine boundary layers through both
              observational study of special field data and numerical model simulations.
              These cloud-topped boundary layers form in response to wintertime cold air
              masses that advect from continental regions out over warm ocean currents, as
              well as the relatively warm open waters of large inland lakes such as the Great
              Lakes.

Observational studies in this research will focus on the statistical
              characteristics of turbulence of the convective boundary layer and will utilize
              data from already completed field programs.  An advanced numerical simulation
              model will be use to study the physical processes responsible for convective
              structures.  The model will be validated using special volumetric LIDAR data
              collected during one of the field programs.  New statistical methods will be
              developed for calculating higher-order moments (e.g., vertical velocity
              skewness) in two-dimensional and three-dimensional data sets from both the
              numerical model simulations and field observations (such as the LIDAR data
              scans).  Determination of signals in convective cloud fields from coherent
              remotely sensed data streams, such as digitized satellite data, will also be
              pursued and compared with in situ ground truth observations. 

Successful
              completion of this project will result in better understanding of the impact of
              the marine boundary layer on the atmosphere.

