Title       : System Effects on Remediation of VOC-Contaminated Saturated Soils and
               Groundwater Using In-Situ Air Sparging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9813466

Award Number: 9813466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna R. Reddy kreddy@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0000908   Urban Problems                          
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Groundwater contamination impacts a significant portion of  our nation's water
              supply.  In-situ air sparging has proven  to be both an efficient and a
              cost-effective method for  remediating saturated soils and groundwater
              contaminated  with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), including light 
              nonaqueous phase liquids (LNAPLs) such as benzene as well as  dense nonaqueous
              phase liquids (DNAPLs) such as  trichloroethylene.  The current design of field
              air sparging  systems is empirical, based solely on pilot tests and past 
              experience.  As a result, the present implementation of  field systems often
              requires extensive modification in  design during the remediation program in
              order to improve  air sparging performance - leading to larger expenditures of 
              time and money.  This research will develop a rational design basis for air 
              sparging field operations by:  1) conducting controlled,  idealized laboratory
              experiments to investigate air flow  patterns and the resulting mass
              transfer/transport processes  that occur during air sparging; 2) developing a 
              comprehensive mathematical model that accurately  incorporates the major
              contaminant mass transfer/transport  mechanisms and validating it using the
              results f the  laboratory testing; 3) assembling and assessing the  performance
              of air sparging systems implemented in the field  under different geologic and
              contaminant conditions, and 4)  using the extensive field air sparging data to
              validate the  numerical model.  The laboratory experiments will have the 
              following specific objectives:  1) investigate the effects  of soil
              stratigraphy and groundwater flow on air sparging  performance; 2) evaluate the
              effects of VOC type, form, and  location, including LNAPL and DNAPL pools on
              air sparging  removal efficiency; 3) verification of laboratory studies 
              through the laboratory remediation of actual field soils,  and 4) perform a
              comparison on laboratory simulation results  with field performance data and
              develop a conceptual air  sparging model.  The resulting conceptual model can
              be used to develop or  validate mathematical models, permitting field systems
              to be  designed on a rational basis in the future.  Because air  sparging is a
              viable remedial option at so many contaminated  sites, an optimization of the
              design process that this  research will provide will offer enormous financial 
              benefits.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
