Title       : Control of Underactuated, Nonlinear, Non-holonomic, Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9813182

Award Number: 9813182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282573             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren N. White wnw@ksume.me.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Atul G. Kelkar  (Principal Investigator former)
              David R. Auckly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lev Kapitanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9813182  Kelkar  The main objective of this research project is to develop a 
              unified framework for the stabilization and control of  underactuated linear
              and nonlinear nonholonomic systems.  In  particular, it is aimed to develop a
              methodology for the  control of nonlinear underactuated nonholonomic systems 
              which will include open-loop unstable and/or non-minimum  phase systems.  As a
              special case, the methodology will be  applicable to linear systems as well. 
              Similarly, the  methodology will also be applicable to holonomic systems.  The
              proposed research will yield a methodology to obtain a  class of controllers
              (and not a specific controller) for  stabilization and control of underactuated
              nonlinear  systems.  The proposed method has great potential in the  design of
              robust controllers and fault-tolerant controllers  for difficult-to-control
              nonlinear systems, leading to the  development of a software tool (toolbox)
              which can generate  controllers for a given underactuated system.  The 
              methodology is based on the construction of a class of  auxiliary stable
              systems each of which will be equivalent to  the original system with a proper
              choice of controller.  The  simulation results for an underactuated 2-d.o.f.
              inverted  pendulum-cart system are included and compared with the  existing
              recent results as a validation of the theory. The  methodology will advance the
              state-of-the-art in the area of  control of nonlinear systems as well as
              nonlinear  controllers.  The results of this research will enhance  ability to
              control a large class of real life systems, for  example, aircraft and
              spacecraft in actuator failure mode,  underwater vehicles, and biped
              locomotion.  To demonstrate  the viability of this methodology, a series of
              control  experiments will be developed.  Each apparatus will  represent a class
              of underactuated nonlinear mechanical  systems with two or higher
              degrees-of-freedom.  ***
