Title       : IDPO/WG: Girl Power - Implementation and Development Projects for Women and
               Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a9813908

Award Number: 9813908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $886650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen C. Plank ccplank@cox.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jaime L. Lujan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frances Rosamond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sweetwater Union HS Dist
	      1130 Fifth Avenue
	      Chula Vista, CA  91911    619/426-2252

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1588,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9813908
Carmen Plank

Sweetwater Union High School District, in
              collaboration with twenty university, business and community partners, has
              developed a project model to help young women prepare for technically
              challenging careers.  This comprehensive partnership targets underrepresented
              middle school girls, 80% of whom are ethnic minorities, to help them recognize
              and develop their full potential in science, math and
              technology.

Sweetwater's Girl Power model grew out of the recognition that
              equity for girls must be achieved through change processes that are immediate,
              significant and systemic.  Girl Power's holistic approach incorporates four
              major elements: 
1) Comprehensive professional development for the district's
              counselors and science, math and technology teachers; 2) intensive services for
              middle school girls including: extra counseling, mentoring, science/ math/
              technology clubs, hands-on math and science activities, a single -gender
              math/science summer "camp" and parent participation events; 3) teacher
              development of program curriculum and products; and 4) articulation,
              integration and dissemination among a wide array of project
              partners.
Sweetwater's Girl Power project is guided by three major
              objectives:
1) Increase the number of young women accessing rigorous science,
              math, technology and      engineering-related learning
2) Improve the
              achievement of girls in higher levels of science, math and technology
3)
              Enhance equity for girls by promoting systemic change in partnership with
              educators, families and           community members

The challenges
              Sweetwater girls face reflect circumstances found in many other districts in
              California and the entire nation.  By creating an inclusive system wide culture
              for young women who are traditionally underrepresented I science, math and
              technology, Girl Power demonstrates great potential for helping girls in all
              parts of the country to access and succeed in SEM education and careers.  The
              strategies that bring success for girls in sweetwater can make a significant
              difference for other young women as well.
 

