Title       : Collaborative Research: Studies of Microstructural Features and Brine Drainage
               Networks in First-Year Sea Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a9813221

Award Number: 9813221
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253570             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Cole dmcole@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cole 9813221 and Shapiro/Eicken  9872573

The objective of this 3-year project
              is to address gaps in knowledge of
the development and evolution of some
              important macro- and microstructural 
features of first year sea ice by
              repeated measurements through the annual 
cycle from freezing to melting.
              Topics of study include:(1)the geometrical 
characteristics and spatial
              distribution of brine drainage networks and 
their relationship to the crystal
              structure of the ice, (2) the 3-dimensional characterization of brine and gas
              inclusions,(3)variations in permeability through the year and the resulting
              impact on heat and mass transfer through the ice, and (4)details of the
              relationship between c-axis fabrics and under-ice currents. Knowledge of these
              is important for studies of the optical and mechanical properties of sea ice,
              biological activity in sea ice, remote sensing applications, some aspects of
              climate modeling, and the entrainment and transport of contaminants.
 
The
              main activity of this project will be the acquisition and analysis of
detailed
              observations relevant to the structural features listed, along with 
in-situ
              permeability measurements. The samples and data will be collected
              
periodically through the year from a study site on first-year sea ice near
              
Barrow, Alaska. The site will be instrumented to continuously monitor the
              
thermal regime of the ice, and other relevant parameters will be measured
              
periodically through the year. The scale of the features to be studied ranges
              from individual brine inclusions (approximately 10-4 m) to the full thickness
              of the ice sheet. Current information on these subjects comes mainly from
              short-term field studies (although there are some notable exceptions) which
              often involve relatively thin ice, or studies on laboratory-prepared specimens.
              To some extent, this reflects the difficulty of obtaining information on
              natural 
first year ice sheets as they evolve through the year from initial
              freezing 
to melting. The main problems in this regard are the remoteness of
              the field 
areas and the expense of getting to them, coupled with the lack of
              appropriate methodologies for collecting samples other than by relatively
              small-diameter corers. However, this project makes use of recent advances in
              techniques for sampling, measuring and testing for the relevant parameters,
              some of which the investigators helped to develop. In addition, the presence of
              the Barrow Arctic Science Consortium (BASC) as a reliable source of local
              personnel to assist in data gathering allows frequent visits to the site to be
              made for routine data collection or sampling. These data collection efforts
              will maintain continuity between and after 3 additional field programs of
              approximately 10 days each, during which extensive data sets will be acquired.
              These programs will be timed to conduct detailed studies of the ice at the site
              shortly after it forms, under cold, mid-winter conditions, and at the start of
              the melt season. In addition to the usual salinity, density, grain size and
              c-axis fabric measurements, specialized observations will include the
              permeability measurements and associated detailed measurement of drainage
              pathways, sets 
of orthogonal micrographs (which yield size distributions of
              small-scale 
inclusions in 3-dimensions), ocean current measurements, and
              vertical 
sections through the entire thickness of the ice sheet. The latter
              provide a 
unique view of larger-scale features such as brine drainage
              networks and 
horizontal banding. The data will be used to develop or evaluate
              and improve 
existing salt-flux/thermodynamic ice growth models. 



