Title       : SGER: Period-3 Labels in Genomic Systems of Prokaryotes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9813469

Award Number: 9813469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julius H. Jackson jhjacksn@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Herring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Julius H. Jackson & Patricia A. Herring    Summary      The  goal  of  the 
              proposed study is to  identify  the  genomic  origin  of  any prokaryotic gene
              based solely upon the  nucleotide  sequence.  Protein-coding nucleotide
              sequences  characteristically  contain  bases  that  tend to repeat at
              three-step  intervals,  or  period-3  base  repeats.  Based upon  prior  work 
              revealing  that  heterologous genes from an individual bacterial chromosome 
              tended  to  construct the period-3 base repeats using a pattern common  to 
              genes  from  the same chromosome, we propose to determine  whether  patterns  
              of  period-3  repeats  constitute  genome  labels   for  phylogenetically
              distinct bacteria. The hypothesis  to  be  tested  is:  The pattern of bases
              comprising a period-3 repeat pattern  in  protein-coding genes is measurably
              similar to that of other  genes  from  the  same genome. A component signal
              analysis  of  the  base  composition  of  period-3 repeats will be used as 
              inputs  for  an  artificial  neural  net to assist in analyzing  the 
              relationships  between  the  periodic information and the genes and genomes 
              that  are  sources  of  the  data. Possibly, such  a  signal  marks  the 
              evolutionary  and genetic history of a gene. Reading that  history  might tell
              where the gene has been and for approximately how long.  In  addition to
              characterizing system labels for chromosomes, this  study   could   potentially
                provide  information   critical   to  understanding  the early history of
              chromosome formation  and  the  impact  of  gene  flow  on  gene and  genome 
              assembly.  A  nearly  immediate impact could be the detection of informational
              labels to  track gene flow, and determine the hosts of origin of genes moving 
              through  cell  populations  in nature.  This  study  may  make  it  possible 
              to identify the prokaryotic host of origin for any  gene  found anywhere.
