Title       : Learning with Distributed Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  2000   
File        : a9813654

Award Number: 9813654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly P. Woolf bev@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta O. Day  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Corrado Poli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Clement  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Richards Adrion  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,8888,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research is intended to identify appropriate roles for technology, assessed
              in part in the context of open, inquiry-oriented learning.  We will
*quantify
              the cost-effectiveness of instructional technology, looking at several
              web-based, intelligent systems with large user bases for empirical
              studies,
*evaluate the impact on student's learning while using these systems,
              and
*identify and build key component technologies that will allow others to
              construct cost-effective instructional applications.

Major research
              questions include: how can technology be used effectively, and just how
              effective are these uses?  Are these uses cost-effective?  Our group has worked
              with educators for a decade and has built four large web-based systems used by
              thousands of students.  We will examine existing and on-going conversions to
              intelligent, web-based systems and look for economies of scale that will help
              to reduce development costs.

Careful evaluation studies are also key.  Solid
              evidence is required about student learning and pedagogical effectiveness.  We
              need to accommodate students with varied backgrounds, motivations and
              educational goals.  Empirical evidence is necessary to confirm individual
              student outcomes using these systems and support continuous systems refinement
              based on the evidence collected.  This research will include qualitative and
              quantitative measures as a means of providing moth meaningful, action-oriented
              feedback and rich documentation of the project and its accomplishments. 
              Through careful studies of existing and emerging systems we will quantify their
              impact on learning effects and working with affiliates in other universities,
              will demonstrate that these systems will be of general use on a national
              scale.

Component software promises to reduce cost by encouraging software
              reuse.  However the obvious benefits of software reuse have not been realized. 
              In this project, we will develop reusable components for creating web-based
              homework, lecture and tutoring systems.  We will assemble components of
              existing systems into larger pieces (e.g. connecting the web-based lecture
              system with a homework and tutoring system).  This component assembly process
              will drive development of reusable component technologies.

