Title       : 1999 NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference: Mathematical Analysis of
               Viscoelastic Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1998   
File        : a9813241

Award Number: 9813241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26050              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Olagunju Olagunju@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuriko Renardy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Viscoelastic fluids are fluids which in addition to possessing viscous and
              elastic properties, also have memory. They abound in a wide range of
              technological  applications such as molten plastics, polymer solutions, paints,
              and  body fluids.  Due to their complex microstructure, the equations
              describing these fluids are also very complex. Only in the recent past  have
              fundamental analytical questions of existence, uniqueness, and qualitative
              behavior of solutions  been systematically addressed. Many of these insights
              have
directly contributed to successes in numerical simulations.   Although
              great strides have been made during these years many challenges still
              remain.

Michael Renardy's research on the mathematical modeling of
              viscoelastic fluids places him at the forefront of this very important subject.
              He has an international reputation  and  possesses both a very broad view
and
              profound  knowledge of the subject.  As a coauthor  of the research monograph
              "Mathematical Theory of Viscoelasticity" (1987) and the graduate text ``An
              Introduction to Partial Differential Equations'' (1993), as well as numerous
              research articles on viscoelastic flows, he is uniquely qualified to provide an
              overview of the major developments in the subject during the past two decades
              and to indicate  directions for the future to an interdisciplinary
              audience.

This conference is expected to stimulate interest and spur
              activities in research on  the mathematical and computational  analysis of
              viscoelastic fluids by bringing together both established researchers and
              newcomers from academia and industry.

