Title       : Navajo Nation Rural Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9813616

Award Number: 9813616
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kalvin G. White kalvinwhite@navajo.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anselm G. Davis  (Principal Investigator former)
              Christopher Schaufele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Navajo Nation
	      P.O. Box 670
	      Window Rock, AZ  86515    520/871-7471

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Navajo Nation encompasses land approximately the size of the state of West
              Virginia (25,000 square miles), located in the states of Arizona, New Mexico
              and Utah and has six school systems with over 160 schools on the Navajo
              Reservation.   The Navajo Nation is seeking to create a systemic reform effort
              for science, mathematics and technology by building upon one component of the
              currently funded Utah-Colorado-Arizona-New Mexico Rural Systemic Initiative
              (UCAN-RSI).  The UCAN experience indicates that there is a need for a new and
              expanded endeavor for the Navajo Nation schools.  The major factors leading to
              this conclusion include: the need for Navajo Nation leadership; the large
              geographical area and number of schools to be served on the Navajo Reservation;
              the complexities among the six different school systems in three states; and
              the limited resources available through the UCAN RSI.  

To build a
              successful sustainable program, the need for strong Navajo leadership to direct
              and control of the reform effort on a wider scale is paramount.  This proposal
              will greatly expand the commitment and number of schools participating in the
              mathematics, science and technology systemic reform programs.  

The NN-RSI
              is a collaborative endeavor of the Navajo Nation's Division of Dine Education,
              the six school systems operating on the reservation, the Dine College,
              (formerly the Navajo Community College), the local business community and other
              universities in proximity to the Navajo Nation.  The Navajo Nation Rural
              Systemic Initiative (NN-RSI) will function as an entity under the Navajo Nation
              government, which has access to other educational resources for collaborative
              efforts.  The NN-RSI will be administered under the recently expanded Office of
              Dine Science, Mathematics, and Technology (DSMT).  Five Regional Centers
              located at K-12 schools will be established to promote curriculum dissemination
              and professional development and assist schools in the systemic reform process
              across four geographical regions.  A fifth Center will serve the Window Rock
              School District.

The mission of the NN-RSI is to create a standards-based
              student centered teaching and learning environment in science, mathematics,
              technology (SMT) for approximately 70,000 K-12 students on or near the Navajo
              Reservation, most of whom come from families living below the Federal poverty
              level.  The NN-RSI will assist schools in implementing a standards-based
              science and mathematics program by promoting a variety of instructional
              strategies and by assisting teachers to teach within the context of the
              cultural environment of Navajo students toward identified goals and objectives.
               The proposal requests $10,000,000 over a period of five-years to implement the
              program.


