Title       : IDPO/WG: Girls on Track: Increasing Middle-Grade Girls' Interest in Math-Related
               Careers by Engaging Them in Computer-Based Mathematical Explorations of Urban
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a9813902

Award Number: 9813902
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $772120             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah B. Berenson berenson@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mladen A. Vouk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tracy Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1588,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9813902
Sarah Berenson

Despite increased retention of girls in advance
              high school math programs, female college entrants continue to
              disproportionately avoid such math-related majors as computer science,
              engineering, and physics.  To counter this persistent problem, Girls on Track,
              a three-year, multi-institutional intervention program for 200 middle-grade
              girls, will engage 50 in-service Algebra I teachers, 15 guidance counselors,
              and 30 math education undergraduates in developing and delivering Summer
              Academies and year-round activities to increase middle grade girls' enthusiasm
              for and confidence in learning mathematics, using computer technology.  Using
              real data sets pulled from public, Internet-based databases, girls will work
              with a variety of common and state-of-the-art computer applications to
              construct mathematics-based solutions to problems in their own urban
              environment, Wake County, NC Wake County, with the surrounding Research
              Triangle area, is one of the most rapidly developing regions in the US Girls
              will explore patterns and functions, spatial reasoning, and probability and
              statistics by applying these concepts to such social problems in their own
              Raleigh-Durham area as the shortage of public schools and low-income housing,
              increased pollution and deforestation, insufficient mass transit systems, and
              shortage of qualified persons for the many mathematics-related technician and
              professional careers in the Research Triangle.  In consolation with guidance
              counselors, girls will also develop trajectories of their own careers, as well
              as explore past and present trends in gender and minority representation in SEM
              fields.  During annual Summer Academies, teachers and guidance counselors will
              use action research to refine these rigorous computer-based mathematics
              explorations.  Other activities for girls include pairing with Math Mentors;
              tutoring by pre-service teachers; meeting with counselors; accompanying Mentors
              on "Take Your Daughter to Work Day;" team competitions on Sonya Kovalevsky Day;
              and an Annual Awards Banquet.  Project partners include NC State University's
              Center for Research in Math and Science Education and Departments of Math
              Education, Computer Science, and Counselor Education; Meredith, a private
              women's college with a strong Math Mentoring Program affiliated with local
              industry; Wake Co. Public Schools, with a rapidly growing student population of
              85,000; and the NC Department of Public Instruction.  Additional contributors
              include IBM, the Math Association of America, and the many other corporations
              in nearby Research Triangle Park that sponsor the Math Mentoring component
              through the staff time of their female scientists and mathematicans. 
              Interactive math lessons and girls' portfolios and presentations on women and
              minorities in SEM careers will be made publicly available by the NC State
              Computer Science department via Internet sites, and linked to LEARN- NC, the
              centralized web site for the NC Mathematics and Science Education Network's
              annual statewide pre-college program, while project results will be
              disseminated a professional conferences and in evaluated journals.

