Title       : Probe Microscopy Investigations of Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2001   
File        : a9813399

Award Number: 9813399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $573998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Lieber cml@cmliris.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9813399
Lieber
The overall objectives of the project are to elucidate
              systematically the electronic properties of 1-Dimensional (1D) and 2-
              Dimensional (2D) nanostructures using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and
              to develop and exploit scanning probe microscopies (SPM) techniques for the
              manipulation and fabrication of nanostructures.  STM and spatially-resolved
              tunneling spectroscopy will be used to characterize systematically the atomic
              structure and local electronic properties of single wall carbon nanotubes
              (SWNTs) and inorganic nanowires (NWs).  These studies will (i) characterize and
              model the intrinsic electronic structure, and the effect of defects and 
              intertube/interwire coupling for SWNTs and NWs, (ii) elucidate the structural
              distributions of SWNTs as a function of chemical processing, and (iii) explore
              the consequences of mechanical deformation on electronic structure and
              transport through SWNTs and inorganic NWs.  STM and spectroscopy will also be
              used to characterize the fabrication, structure and electronic properties of
              transition metal dichalcogenide 2D nanocrystals.  These investigations will (i)
              elucidate the mechanism of the STM tip-induced 2D nanocrystal formation in
              tantalum diselenide, (ii) characterize the size dependent electronic properties
              and effects of intercluster interactions in 2D charge density wave
              nanocrystals, and (iii) explore the generality of tip-induced solid-solid
              transformations as a method for the fabrication of 2D nanocrystals in other
              material systems.
%%%
Nanometer scale structures represent an exciting and
              challenging area of interdisciplinary research that could impact broad areas of
              technology ranging from electronics to super strong composites.  A prerequisite
              for the realization of such applications is a greater understanding of their
              intrinsic and potentially unique physical properties and a greater
              understanding of how they can be synthesized or fabricated.  The results of
              this project are expected to advance significantly the basic scientific
              understanding of the electronic properties of 1D and 2D nanostructures that are
              needed ultimately to exploit these materials.
*** 

