Title       : GOALI: Thermal Analysis of Landfills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a9813248

Award Number: 9813248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173858             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Hanson hanson@ltu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurel A. Kendall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nazli Yesiller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence Technolog Univ
	      21000 Ten Mile Road
	      Southfield, MI  480751051    313/356-0200

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Landfilling is the most common method used for permanent disposal of wastes.  A
              thorough understanding of the processes occurring within wastes and liner
              materials is required for proper design and operation of landfills and
              associated facilities.  Temperature affects the processes occurring within
              wastes and liners and also the properties and engineering behavior of both
              wastes and liner materials.    The objective of this GOALI study is to
              investigate temperature fluctuations and spatial distributions of temperatures
              in landfills and investigate the effect of temperature on the engineering
              properties of wastes.   This information will be used to determine temperature
              related behavior of solid wastes and landfill components to optimize
              performance of landfills.  The study will involve four major phases.  The first
              phase will be to identify the thermal regime of landfills.  Thermal properties
              of wastes will then be determined as a function of temperature.  A numerical
              model will be formulated using these thermal properties to predict temperature
              distributions within landfills and conduct parametric evaluations.  Finally,
              engineering properties of solid wastes will be determined as a function of
              temperature.  The study will be conducted with collaboration between Lawrence
              Technological University, Wayne State University, and Allied Waste Industries. 
              Results of this investigation will be applicable to various practical design
              and operational aspects of landfills. Cooperation between universities and
              industry will promote improved design and operation of waste containment
              facilities as well as complement educational objectives.  Knowledge of
              temperatures within a landfill and the temperature-dependent behavior of wastes
              is expected to advance the state-of-the-practice.
