Title       : Particle Acceleration in Magnetic Reconnection Regions in the Solar Corona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2000  
File        : a9813933

Award Number: 9813933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin A. Lee marty.lee@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuri E. Litvinenko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will study electron and proton acceleration by the electric
              field associated with magnetic reconnection in the solar corona.  Acceleration
              of charged particles to energies far exceeding the thermal energy is ubiquitous
              in cosmic plasma, especially in solar flares.  The goal is to model
              self-consistently the rapid conversion of the coronal magnetic energy to the
              kinetic energy of fast particles by virtue of the reconnection process. 
              Parameters of reconnecting current sheets will be determined self-consistently
              using a system of balance equations following from conservation laws.  Regimes
              of both turbulent and entirely collisionless reconnection will be considered. 
              Properties of the flaring coronal plasma and flare loops will be calculated and
              used as a means of testing the reconnection model.  The n the energies,
              acceleration times, electron/proton ratios, and fluxes of accelerated particles
              will be calculated for various conditions in the corona.  Electron-rich
              impulsive flares and X-ray hardening gradual flares that produce geo-effective
              protons will be specifically considered.  New processes such as acceleration in
              time-dependent electric fields at magnetic null points and second-step
              acceleration in collapsing magnetic traps will be investigated.  The study will
              emphasize analytical methods as well as comparisons between theoretical
              predictions and observations by Compton GRO, Yohkoh, and SOHO.  Overall, the
              work is intended to be a step towards a unified modeling of global magnetic
              energy release and particle acceleration in flares and flare-like phenomena in
              space.


