Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Analysis of Proteins Involved in Salt
               Tolerance of Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9813382

Award Number: 9813382
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne P. Yenush   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5952,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              98?????  Yenush      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-  four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards  provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of  unique or complementary facilities, expertise and 
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twenty-four-month
              postdoctoral  research visit by Dr. Lynne P. Yenush to work with Dr. Ramon 
              Serrano at the Universidad Politecnica de Valencia in Spain  on the study of
              yeast as a model system for understanding  high salt tolerance in higher
              plants.    The salination of irrigated land is a problem for the future  of
              agriculture.  Because arid land has low levels of  precipitation and must rely
              on irrigation, the water  evaporates and leaves a high concentration of salt in
              the  soil.  This increased salinity causes the soil to  deteriorate, making it
              incompatible with plant growth.  This  research project will help understand
              the mechanism of salt  toxicity and defense responses of crop plants, so
              genetic  engineering strategies can be developed to improve crop  growth in
              arid regions.    Dr. Seranno has developed a model system for understanding 
              the genetic basis of the evolution of this high salt  tolerance in
              agriculturally important higher plants.  ***
