Title       : U.S. GLOBEC Phaes III: Environmental Consequences of Tidal- Front Entrainment in
               Larval Fish along the Southern Flank of Georges Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1999   
File        : a9813642

Award Number: 9813642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis S. Incze   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Environmental Consequences of Tidal-Front Entrainment in Larval Fish Along the
              Southern Flank of Georges Bank

G.  Lough, J. Manning, E. Caldarone, L.
              Buckley, L. Incze, D. Townsend

It is a general feature of continental shelf
              spawning regions that fish larvae can be concentrated in the vicinity of
              tidal-fronts, the transition zone between well-mixed and thermally-stratified
              waters, and tidal jets can result in increased downstrean advection.  There
              also is the possibility of retention to shoal nursery areas through
              cross-frontal exchange, a mechanism whose details are unknown.  Enhanced growth
              and survival of larvae have been observed in convergence zones where peak
              copepod abundance and production coincide with aggregations of larval fish. 
              However, sampling of the physics and various trophic levels is difficult
              because of the short time- and space-scale physical processes.  Therefore in
              April and May 1999, we will focus on the following objectives: (1) describe and
              quantify the three-dimensional circulation in the vicinity of the tidal front
              when cod and haddock larvae are normally found along the southern flank of
              Georges Bank; (2)  determine the small-scale distribution and temporal
              variability of fish larvae and their prey in relation to the physical frontal
              processes; (3)  estimate vital rates in the different environments; and (4) 
              evaluate the interrelations and relative importance of larval swimming
              behavior, physiological condition, and cross-frontal exchange and retention
              processes.

The field sampling strategy and instrumentation include a
              combination of grid surveys, cross-front transects, and drifter studies which
              have been designed to make measurements on the time- and space- scales relevant
              to larval fish and their copepod prey.  Neither the fish nor their prey are
              likely, by themselves, to be measured with sufficient resolution to document
              the exchange process.  Consequently, we plan to make high-resolution
              measurement of the current/shear fields with ship-mounted Acoustic Doppler
              Current Profiler (ADCP) and sample hydrographic structure, nutrients and
              chlorophyll concentrations as tracers of water movements contemporaneously with
              larval fish and prey sampling.  Not only will the
              ADCP/CTD/fluorescence/nutrient data provide a scale of measurement not possible
              with larval fish, but they will provide a common denominator of measurement
              between our cruises and the detailed physical oceanographic process studies and
              other modeling components of GLOBEC.  When these data and processes are
              combined with our other sampling systems (ARGOS/VHF drifters, MOCNESS/VPP,
              CTD/pump), we hope to be able to describe the interaction between tidal front
              processes and the transport, retention and growth of cod and haddock larvae and
              their prey prior to and during the transition to stratified water conditions.

