Title       : Colloquium on Biology and Aggression: Investigating Theories, Data and
               Implications for Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9813547

Award Number: 9813547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14019              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Strouse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Owen D. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The prevalence of human aggression across and within the sexes poses difficult
              challenges for law and society.  Reducing this aggression and enhancing
              victims' autonomy are legal goals with widespread public support. This
              colloquium is designed to bring together in a common forum, leading biological
              researchers, legal and sociolegal scholars to explore the insights biological
              science has that may be useful to legal scholars.  Those participants expert in
              the strengths and limitations of biological theories of  intraspecies
              aggression will report on and discuss predictions derived from an evolutionary
              perspective and suggest promising next steps in research.  Legal scholars
              specifically interested in sexual aggression will share with other participants
              the latest legal scholarship on this issue.  All participants will evaluate the
              current state of research in both biology and law and generate ideas for future
              research and articulate the implications (should there be any)  of the
              evolutionary perspective for the law.  In addition to advancing research
              opportunities, the participants will explicate the limits of biologically based
              thinking for sociolegal research and the possible misuses of biological
              insights by the legal system.  %%%  The prevalence of human aggression across
              and within the sexes poses difficult challenges for law and society.  Reducing
              this aggression and enhancing victims' autonomy are legal goals with widespread
              public support. This colloquium is designed to bring together in a common
              forum, leading biological researchers, legal and sociolegal scholars to explore
              the insights biological science has that may be useful to legal scholars. 
              Those participants expert in the strengths and limitations of biological
              theories of  intraspecies aggression will report on and discuss predictions
              derived from an evolutionary perspective and suggest promising next steps in
              research.  Legal scholars specifically interested in sexual aggression will
              share with other participants the latest legal scholarship on this issue.  All
              participants will evaluate the current state of research in both biology and
              law and generate ideas for future research and articulate the implications
              (should there be any)  of the evolutionary perspective for the law.  In
              addition to advancing research opportunities, the participants will explicate
              the limits of biologically based thinking for sociolegal research and the
              possible misuses of biological insights by the legal system.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
