Title       : A New Generation of Neural Network Optimization Techniques with Applications to
               Manufacturing Scheduling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9813176

Award Number: 9813176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Luh Peter.Luh@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lakshman S. Thakur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9813176
Luh
     Many exciting results on neural networks have been obtained
              over the past two decades, with most successful applications in the areas of
              pattern recognition and signal processing.  Developing neural networks for
              mathematical optimization has been a new thrust, holding much promise for
              overcoming the difficulties in solving large combinatorial optimization
              problems.  This research is to further advance neural networks for the very
              common but notoriously difficult "NP hard" combinatorial optimization problems.
               The focus will be on integer optimization problems with specialized
              "separable" structure, since they encompass a wide range of scheduling and
              other important applications, and often lead to efficient methods with orders
              of magnitude performance improvement.  The first task is to lay a solid
              foundation for neural optimization by exploring theoretical issues such as
              stability and convergence properties using recent algorithm convergence
              results. The second task explores effective ways to solve manufacturing
              scheduling problems by developing "neural dynamic programming" for solving
              subproblems.  This novel neural dynamic programming transcends the majority of
              computational difficulties associated with solving subproblems such as
              infeasibility, local minima, and slow convergence of subproblem solutions, and
              in addition is amenable to efficient hardware implementation.  The third task
              seeks hardware implementation of the approach to achieve very high solution
              quality and computation speed.
     The successful development of neural
              networks for separable integer optimization will result in a new generation of
              methods to obtain near-optimal solutions with quantifiable quality in a
              computationally efficient manner.  The effective resolution of realistic
              scheduling problems will also have practical impact on the bottom line of our
              industrial partners and beyond.  The hardware implementation then has a strong
              potential to achieve very high solution quality and computation speed for a
              wide range of business and engineering applications.  The vision is to have a
              VLSI "digital optimizer" chip to be plugged into PCs to help solve a wide range
              of business and engineering optimization problems.



