Title       : RISE (Raising Interest in Science & Engineering): A Collaborative Effort
               Targeting Middle School Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9813891

Award Number: 9813891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy A. Brown jbrown@miamisci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda Simmons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ana Maria M. Lopez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Raymond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constance Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Museum of Science In
	      3280 South Miami Avenue
	      Miami, FL  331292832    305/854-4247

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1588,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9813891
Judy Brown

The Miami Museum of Science, in collaboration with
              Miami-Dade County Public Schools Urban Systemic Initiative (USI), and SECME.
              Inc. (formerly Southeaster Consortia for Minority Engineers) will carry out
              implementation and development project that will leverage existing networks and
              resources to ensure wide scale expansion of Girls RISE (Raising Interest in
              Science and Engineering).  Girls RISE is an NSF PWG model project designed by
              the Museum to increase middle school girls' self-esteem and confidence in
              leering mathematics and science, thus reducing the attrition in advance level
              mathematics and science coursework that occurs as girls move from middle school
              to high school.

The new collaborative project, entitled SECME RISE, will
              expand the Girls RISE model in Miami-Dade County Public Schools, the fourth
              largest school district in the country with 345,000= students. Through
              integrated program strategies including career exploration seminars, technology
              workshops, an engineering design studio, peer leadership training, a lead
              teacher institute, parent involvement activities and technology access through
              the local public library network, SECME RISE will work to achieve a systemic
              approach in Miami-Dade Public schools that will enhance the access of girls
              (with an emphasis on girls of color) to improved science, mathematics and
              technology education and exposure to engineering-related careers.  Broad
              program dissemination will be achieved through the national SECME, Inc. Teacher
              Summer institute (15 states, 100 school systems), utilization of existing
              science, engineering and mathematics networks, outreach opportunities, print
              and electronic media, and the SECME RISE web site, as well as through
              contributions to the field through documentation of the program's impact on
              girls' achievements in mathematics and science.

Through this collaboration,
              SECME RISE will seek to increase the access of girls to those courses in which
              they have been traditionally underrepresented as well at to effect permanent
              change by:
	
1) Expanding the SMT infrastructure trough a new partnership
              between science museums, public schools,      universities and the private
              sector;

2) Creating extracurricular and informal science learning
              opportunities that provide new vehicles for      maintaining girl's interest in
              science and mathematics through the transitional years (middle to high)

3)
              Effecting classroom pedagogy by increasing teacher awareness of the benefits of
              gender-fair education for      both males and females;

4) Increasing
              parental awareness and eliciting parental support  for their daughter' SMT
              education and      related career aspirations;

5) Contributing to the
              research base on how socio-economic status and ethnicity interact with gender
              to      influence  mathematics and science learning; and

6) Documenting the
              impact of informal instruction (before and after school, Saturday and summer
              programming) on maintaining girl's interest and achievement in mathematics and
              science.


