Title       : Physical Mechanisms Governing the Intersonic and Supersonic Decohesion of
               Bimaterials: Effects of Interfacial Strength, Loading Rate and Confining
               Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9813100

Award Number: 9813100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ares J. Rosakis rosakis@atlantis.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              An analytical study will be conducted of the physical phenomena associated with
              highly dynamic decohesion of bimaterial interfaces and simple unidirectional
              composites.  Specific goals of the project are to establish the necessary
              conditions for dynamic bimaterial decohension in various regimes (subsonic,
              intersonic, and supersonic) and to characterize the associated physical
              phenomena. To accomplish these goals, material combinations and processing
              techniques will be chosen that allow for the variation of interfacial strength,
              confining pressure and mismatch of mechanical properties (most importantly wave
              speeds) across the interface.  In addition, loading configurations will be
              selected that can provide a range of impact velocities.  Analytical studies
              will be undertaken to develop a theoretical framework by which the
              experimentally observed transient intersonic and supersonic shear dominated
              mechanical fields can be qualified in terms of appropriate fracture parameters.
               Thermal fields resulting from the observed large scale frictional contact and
              the associated energy dissipation will also be investigated.  Experimental
              measurements of the deformation fields and thermal fields in the vicinity of a
              dynamically loaded or propagating interfacial crack will be performed in real
              time using ultra-high speed optical and thermographic diagnostic techniques. 
              The deformation fields will be characterized using high speed photography in
              conjunction with two optical techniques:  Coherent Gradient Sensing (CGS) and
              dynamic photoelasticity.  Temperature fields near shear dominated intersonic
              and supersonic intrfacial cracks willb measured using a recently developed high
              speed infrared camera in order to study local mechanisms of energy dissipation.
