Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Discrete Wavelet Transform Analysis of
               Large Scale Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9813041

Award Number: 9813041
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41195              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesus Pando   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5918,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9813041  Pando    The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables  U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-  four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards  provide opportunities for joint research, and
              the use of  unique or complementary facilities, expertise and  experimental
              conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral
              research  visit by Dr. Jesus Pando to work with Dr. Alain Blanchard at  the
              University of Strasbourg, Observatoire Astronomique de  Strasbourg in France. 
              They will study the cosmological  structure formation using a wavelet transform
              technique.  Measuring these structures will help to determine the  initial
              seeds and exact mechanisms that led to large-scale  structure formation in the
              universe.  The primary focus will  be the study of correlations in the Cosmic
              Microwave  Background and in the absorption spectra.  They will analyze  both
              data sets to determine if there is Non-Gaussian  (abnormal) behavior in these
              distributions by using the  moment spectra and to determine if there is
              hierarchical  structure by using the scale-scale correlation functions.   
              Wavelet transformation as a tool is at the forefront of  modern scientific
              analytical methods.  It can be used not  just for cosmology studies, but also
              those of biological  systems, for pattern recognition in experimental particle 
              physics or for any problem where space-scale correlations  exist.  For Dr.
              Pando to be at Strasbourg is to place him in  the center of wavelet research. 
              ***
