Title       : Collaborative Research: SCICEX/SCAMP Mapping of the Arctic Ocean Floor to Test
               the Hypothesis of the Pleistocene Arctic Ice Sheet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9813535

Award Number: 9813535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44725              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Polyak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-9813532
Edwards
OPP-9813535
Polyak

This is a collaborative
              project by Principal Investigators from the University of Hawaii, Mapping
              Research Group, and Ohio State University.  The Principal Investigators propose
              to test the existence of the Arctic Ocean Ice Sheet during the glacial maxima
              which is a major uncertainty in Quaternary history.  The only reliable way of
              testing this controversial hypothesis is to investigate the relatively shallow
              portions of the Arctic Ocean seafloor for traces of glacial impact.   The use
              of the Seafloor Characterization and Mapping Pod (SCAMP) in the SCICEX program
              provides a unique opportunity to perform this research.  Backscatter, swath
              bathymetry, and subbottom profiler records across the rises and ridges of the
              Chukchi Borderland, parts of the Lomonsov Ridge, and possibly the Canadian
              continental margin will be collected.  The Principal Investigators will
              concentrate on the location and tracing of subglacial and ice-marginal seafloor
              features, iceberg plow marks, and potentially glacier-related debris flows. 
              Findings of glacial-sole marks and ice-marginal indicators would provide strong
              evidence for the existing of a thick ice shelf over the Arctic Ocean in the
              past.  In the absence of direct subglacial features, the depth range of iceberg
              plowmarks will provide critical information on the thickness of the ice over
              the Arctic Ocean during the Quaternary.  Mapping the plowmark orientation will
              enable reconstruction of Arctic paleo-circulation patterns.  The processed
              seafloor images will be compared with existing glacial features from the
              continental margin.  Future sediment cores and boreholes will provide
              stratigraphic constraints on the mapped glacial seafloor features and provide
              further understanding of associated paleoceanographic environments.

