Title       : Optimal Design of Steel Frames Using Advanced Analysis and Genetic Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9813216

Award Number: 9813216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76242              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Foley chris.foley@marquette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9813216
Foley
Much of the past research in optimization of structures has
              dealt with trusses, but recently partially and fully restrained steel frames
              have been optimized using classical as well as genetic algorithm
              procedures.
However, optimal structure design procedures have been limited to
              those involving ASD and/or LRFD design specifications.  Advanced analysis is a
              means with which proportioning of a steel frame is undertaken with a design
              analysis that includes all aspects of frame and member behavior.  Such an
              analysis allows the LRFD design equations to be omitted.  Therefore, optimal
              design utilizing advanced analysis offers substantial improvement for least
              cost designs, since the design analysis allows for full redistribution of
              forces within the frame and avoids excessive overstrength that can occur with
              member by member design procedures.

This research seeks to develop and test
              methods of implementing genetic algorithms in the optimal design of steel
              frames.  Fully and partially restrained and flexible connections will be
              considered.  An unconstrained optimization problem that includes provisions for
              advanced analysis in the constraint equations will be formulated.  The
              computationally intensive distributed inelasticity procedure for computing
              nonlinear inelastic load-deformation response will be implemented using
              parallel processing and vectorization.  A novel approach to limiting the search
              space using a genetic tree representation for structural steel frameworks will
              be used. This representation gives a more intuitive feel to problems and also
              suggests macro crossover operations that would be difficult to discover using
              traditional binary string representations. A method of intelligent mating using
              fitness proportionate sampling and normalized genetic differences with respect
              to cost and penalty functions will be implemented and evaluated.  A cross-over
              frequency parameter is to be defined whereupon the amount of genetic material
              swapped during cross-over operations can be regulated.  Parallel processing and
              vectorization will be implemented and evaluated in the optimization
              procedure.
***




