Title       : Symposium on Electron Crystallography of Macromolecules at Granlibakken
               Conference Center in Lake Tahoe, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1999    
File        : a9813474

Award Number: 9813474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wah Chiu wah@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      1200 Moursund Avenue
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/790-4846

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

This award provides partial support for a Symposium on Electron
              Crystallography of Macromolecules at Granlibakken Conference Center in Lake
              Tahoe, California, between December 9-12, 1998. The motivation of this
              symposium is to be based on the recent advances in this field of structural
              biology capable of resolving biological structure details at 3-10 angstrom
              resolution range. The Symposium will focus on recent dramatic advances in four
              branches of electron crystallography, emphasizing both methodology development
              and the elucidation of inter-molecular interactions in large macromolecular
              assemblies. Particular attention will be paid to proteins - both integral
              membrane components and non-membrane proteins - in crystalline monolayers;
              probing inter-molecular interactions by fitting high resolution subunit
              structures into lower resolution maps of intact complexes; analysis of
              filaments and free-standing particles at subnanometer resolution; and a novel
              method of phasing native X-ray data based on exploiting EM-derived molecular
              envelopes and non-crystallographic symmetry. The goal of the Symposium is to
              summarize these and related lines of investigation, assess the prospects for
              further methodological improvement (higher resolution, accelerated analysis),
              and stimulate their application to a more extensive set of biological problems.
              Another important purpose of this Symposium is to disseminate this emerging
              structural biology tool to the cell and molecular biology community. The
              organizers will make an attempt to attract participants from non structural
              biology discipline attending this meeting via a variety of means of advertising
              the Symposium and scheduling it right before the 1998 Cell Biology Annual
              Conference to be held in San Francisco. For a broader dissemination, it is
              planned to publish a special issue of the envisaged topics in the Journal of
              Structural Biology contributed from the invited participants.


