Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Novel Single Electron Coulomb Blockade Transistor as a
               Proble in the Study of Si02/Si Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9813040

Award Number: 9813040
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce J. Hinds   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hinds  9724743    This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Bruce Hinds at the
              Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo,  Japan.  Dr. Hinds will work with Dr.
              Shunri Oda, Professor  at the Research Center of Quantum Effect Electronics, on
              a  research project entitled, "Novel Single Electron Coulomb  Blockade
              Transistor as Probe in the Study of the SiO2/Si  Interface."    The proposed
              research will focus on the design of a single  electron Coulomb blockade
              transistor and will be  specifically directed toward lower gate control
              voltages  (required for logic applications) and systematic control of 
              interfacial oxides.  Current research on Coulomb blockade  transistors suggests
              that the charge of a single electron  (in a floating gate) controls the state
              of the transistor  (the flow of electrons through the channel).  The proposed 
              research will examine a novel transistor design that will  allow for variations
              in interfacial oxides (SiO2/Si) present  at the floating gate, modify the flow
              of electrons through  the channel, and lower the control voltages that
              determine  the efficacy of logic operations.  Anticipated results of  the
              research is the effective utilization of lithography  with feature sizes near
              10 nanometers, representing a  significant advance in the scaling down of
              electronic device  structures.  The results of the proposed research will be 
              critical to the advancement of nano-scale electronics and  the conventional
              metal oxide semiconductor (MOS)  fabrication, which is the basis of the present
               microelectronics industry.  ***
