Title       : A Unified Image Science and Electronic Imaging Systems Curriculum Development
               Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9813002

Award Number: 9813002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $509855             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas George   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Kriss  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kevin J. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Murat Tekalp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kiriakos N. Kutulakos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas George   (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Three academic departments (Electrical Engineering, Computer Science, and The
              Institute of Optics) at the University of Rochester will jointly offer a new
              curriculum in Image Science and Electronic Imaging Systems.  The three
              departments have undertaken this ambitious project in recognition of the
              fundamental role that electronic imaging plays in the current and future
              economic growth of the United States.

The Image Science and Electronic
              Imaging Systems curriculum will span all four undergraduate years and the first
              year of graduate school.  A student will be able to obtain a Bachelors of
              Science Degree from one of the three departments with a Concentration in
              Imaging.  Outstanding students will be able to take advantage of the University
              of Rochester's 3+2 Plan.  The 3+2 Plan enables one to earn a Masters of Science
              after five years by taking graduate courses during the student's senior year. 
              The Masters of Science program provides students the opportunity to concentrate
              on one of three Imaging Tracks.  The tracks are Medical Imaging, Image Science
              and Image & Video Computing.  A student finishing this program will earn a
              Masters of Science in one of the three disciplines with a specialization in one
              of the Imaging Tracks. 

The proposed curriculum will include five new
              courses and nine enhanced courses, seminars or laboratories.  The five new
              courses form the core of the undergraduate education Image Science and
              Electronic Imaging.  A special freshman course, Quest Course in Electronic
              Imaging Systems, will provide students a comprehensive overview of electronic
              imaging. Four Foundations of Imaging courses round out the undergraduate
              education.  Two new seminar series will be initiated (for credit) that will
              keep students and faculty aware of leading edge technology and science.  Summer
              research opportunities for undergraduates will provide an early introduction to
              scientific method and "real" problems in electronic imaging.

This
              combination of lectures, laboratories, seminars and research experience will
              facilitate the introduction of leading edge, current research in electronic
              imaging into the undergraduate curriculum.  Using the industrial contacts
              developed through the Center for Electronic Imaging Systems, students will be
              exposed to industrial research and development programs, thus gaining true
              insight to job opportunities outside of academia.

