Title       : Adaptive Inventory Control for Partially Observed, Non-Stationary Demand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9813127

Award Number: 9813127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143518             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Sox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9813127
Sox
     This project will address inventory control problems with
              partially observed, non-stationary random demand.  A demand process is
              partially observed when the probability distribution of demand in a given time
              period is not known with certainty. Instead, it is only partially observed
              through the previous demand observations which are random variables.  The
              demand process is non-stationary in that the probability distribution of demand
              may randomly change from one time period to the next, and such a change is not
              known but is indirectly observed through the random demand observations. The
              problem is modeled as a composite-state, partially observed Markov decision
              process.  Structural results for optimal control policies will be developed for
              a  wide range of problems that include backordering, lost sales, zero and
              non-zero fixed order cost, and positive lead times.  Because of the
              computational and memory requirements to compute optimal policies, the project
              will also develop a range of suboptimal control policies that will have greater
              potential for use in industry.  These policies will be tested on a wide range
              of problem instances and compared either with an optimal policy or a lower
              bound.  These policies will also be compared with strategies typically used in
              industry in order to evaluate their potential industrial impact.
     This
              problem is becoming more important as the length of product life cycles
              continues to decrease and as market factors such as competition and product
              proliferation increase the volatility of individual product demand.  In this
              environment, classical inventory models are ineffective.  The value of
              information and the effective use of information in constructing control
              policies are important issues in this problem.  The results of this project
              will have a broader impact on related problems in supply chain planning and
              other problems that have a similar structure of uncertainty such as process
              control, maintenance, and yield planning. The immediate practical benefit of
              this project will be the development of inventory control policies that will
              improve customer service and reduce inventory and production costs in the face
              of extremely uncertain customer demand.



