Title       : Collaborative Research: Hydrographic Change and Effects on Bivalve Communities
               and Top Avian Consumers in the Bering Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a9813946

Award Number: 9813946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline M. Grebmeier jgrebmei@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee W. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will examine whether oceanographic changes have resulted in
              long-term shifts in bivalve communities and thus the energetics and survival of
              the world population of Spectacled Eiders, a diving seaduck that feeds on
              benthic invertebrates near the St. Lawrence Island Polynya (SLIP) during
              winter. The project has four objectives: 1) retrospective analyses of the
              species and size structure of dominant bivalves collected over the past 25-50
              years, along with similar analyses of samples to be collected over an annual
              cycle, 2) studies of recent changes in indicators of physical/biological
              hydrographic processes (sediment oxygen uptake rates, grain size, and carbon
              content), 3) investigation of alternative influences on bivalve production (ice
              cover, current transport, productivity, walrus/sea star predation), and 4)
              simulation modeling to relate bivalve prey characteristics to eider energy
              budgets. Previous studies indicate that the SLIP and Gulf of Anadyr (GOA) cold
              pool have an important influence on benthic community structure and biomass.
              Oceanographic studies south of St. Lawrence Island conducted in the May-August
              summer season since 1988 show that very high standing stocks of benthic infauna
              (up to 45 g C m-2) are maintained by nearshore primary production enhanced by
              hydrographic dynamics, and subsequent transport of waters rich in particulate
              organic carbon southwestward from the island. In March 1995, large flocks of up
              to 300,000 Spectacled Eiders were located for the first time south of St.
              Lawrence Island amid high concentrations of sea ice. Surveys in 1996 and 1997
              confirmed that this area downstream of the SLIP is the major overwintering site
              for virtually the entire world populations of Spectacled Eiders. While it may
              seem surprising that these avian benthivores would dive in 40-60 m of
              sub-freezing water in ephemeral leads in the shifting pack ice as an
              overwintering strategy, prior studies showed that very large densities of small
              bivalves occur in this region (Nucula belloti and Nuculana radiata, 1-3 cm
              long). Each bivalve species has a preference for a specific sediment grain
              size, so changing sedimentation patterns and carbon loading may greatly impact
              bivalve population structure. Spectacled Eider populations have declined
              dramatically in the last 25 years, and historical data suggest that dominant
              bivalve communities south of St. Lawrence Island have also changed during this
              period. Possible alterations in the intensity of ice formation in the SLIP, and
              associated changes in transport conditions affecting the GOA cold pool, might
              have affected the species and size structure of bivalves. Simulation models
              suggest that these prey characteristics strongly influence eider energy
              budgets. Thus, eiders may be key indicators of how climate-mediated
              interactions between ice, hydrography, pelagic production, and benthos affect
              upper trophic levels. This project will characterize and analyze the strength
              of these interactions in an Arctic benthic system.

This project will
              interact with an already funded, yearlong physical oceanographic program. The
              physical oceanographic program will deploy an array of moorings south of St.
              Lawrence Island in September 1998 to study transport conditions. Cooperation
              with this hydrographic program will greatly enhance interpretation of the
              biological and sediment measurements to be made in fall 1998, late winter 1999,
              and summer 1999. This collaboration also involves interaction with scientists
              investigating sea ice dynamics using SAR satellite imagery in a real-time
              manner. The end result of the collaborations will be evaluation of the
              interactions between physical forcing functions (hydrographic, ice) and trophic
              processes (benthic to top predators). This will allow simulation of eider
              energetics and population sensitivity to varying ice conditions and changes in
              underlying benthic communities under different climate scenarios.


