Title       : NSF/CBMS Conference in the Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Inference from
               Genetic Data on Pedigrees to be held July 19-23, 1999 in Houghton, Michigan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1998   
File        : a9813767

Award Number: 9813767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianping Dong jdong@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anant P. Godbole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The NSF-CBMS  Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences ``Statistical
              Inference from Genetic Data on Pedigrees'' will feature, as Principal Lecturer,
              Elizabeth Thompson of the University of Washington, who will deliver ten
              keynote lectures that expose attendees to methods for using state-of-the-art
              statistical techniques to analyze human genetic data. The areas covered by
              Professor Thompson's lectures will lie at the confluence of the fields of
              statistics, probability, genetics and molecular biology, and the intrinsic
              interdisciplinarity of the project will make it particularly attractive to
              statisticians, mathematicians, and quantitative biologists alike.  Professor
              Thompson is a renowned researcher with an impressive array of
key publications
              in statistical genetics.  She is widely respected as a lecturer, having
              recently delivered two keynote addresses at the Joint Statistics Meetings.  Her
              lectures will form the basis of the monograph
``Meioses, Pedigrees and
              Populations:  Modern Inference Methods for Human Genetic Data'' that will be
              published by the Institute for Mathematical Statistics.  A diverse group of
              attendees will attend the conference, which will be held July 19--23 1999 at
              Michigan Technological University in Houghton: present will be established
              researchers and new entrants in several fields; women, minorities, graduate
              students and REU-undergraduates; persons from non research-intensive schools
              and persons wishing to enter the area.  Participants will be housed in
              dormitory rooms or university apartments, and special attention will be paid to
              post-conference interaction and collaboration.  Several organized social
              activities will be planned during the conference.  The overall objective of the
              conference is to facilitate the learning of incisive statistical methodology in
              a contextual fashion, with a continual focus on a vitally important biological
              application.

