Title       : Crystallographic Studies of Phosphoryl Group Transfer Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9813271

Award Number: 9813271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Osnat Herzberg osnat@carb.nist.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9813271  Osnat Herzberg    The three dimensional structures of proteins involved
              in phosphotransfer reactions will be determined by X-ray crystallography and
              the mechanism of action will be investigated, complementing the
              crystallographic work with site-directed mutagenesis and kinetic
              characterization. The focus of this study is on three enzymes: (1) Pyruvate
              phosphate dikinase (PPDK) which catalyzes the inter-conversion of the two
              high-energy compounds, ATP and PEP, via a three phosphoryl transfer reaction
              pathway. The structure of the bacterial enzyme from Clostridium symbiosum has
              been determined in the laboratory (Herzberg et al., PNAS 93:2652, 1996),
              revealing  a three-domain molecule in which the pyruvate and nucleotide active
              sites are located 45 Augstrom units  apart. The implication of the structure is
              that phosphoryl group transfer from one substrate to the other are accompanied
              by a domain swiveling between the two remote active sites, a mechanism that
              offers an attractive paradigm for communication in other complex multidomain
              proteins. The substrate and inhibitor binding to PPDK and the dramatic
              conformational transition will be further investigated using the bacterial
              protein that catalyzes the reaction in the direction of ATP formation, and the
              maze PPDK which catalyzes the reverse reaction toward PEP formation under
              physiological conditions, and which is regulated by a specific phosphorylation
              on a threonine residue. (2) Phosphoenolpyruvate phosphomutase which catalyses
              the rearrangement of PEP to phosphonopyruvate. This reaction serves as the
              major entry step into the synthesis of natural phosphonates, compounds that
              display a wide spectrum of biological activities. Understanding of the
              catalytic mechanism of the enzyme is important for the development of methods
              for synthesizing and breaking down target phosphonates. The crystal structure
              of PEP mutase from salt-water mussel will be determined. A detailed view of the
              architecture of the active site will help in the elucidation  of the catalytic
              mechanism, and will provide the structural basis for site-directed mutagenesis
              experiments and crystallographic binding studies designed to confirm or refute
              the mechanism that will be deduced. (3) The phosphoenolpyruvate: sugar
              phosphotransferase system (PTS) which is a bacterial multi-enzyme sugar
              transport system that involves multi-phosphotransfer reactions. Following the
              structure determination of two protein components of the system during previous
              funding periods, HPr and the IIA domain of the glucose permease, the focus will
              be shifted to Enzyme I which accepts a phosphoryl group from PEP and delivers
              it to HPr. A truncated version of enzyme I has been crystallized, which
              contains the PEP-binding domain and the phosphoryl group acceptor domain. The
              structure determination will reveal the mode of binding with an inhibitor,
              Mg-oxalate, and by analogy, the interaction with the substrate, PEP.      The
              goal of this study is to gain better understanding of the nature of regulation
              by protein phosphorylations, reactions which are central to a wide range of
              biological processes. A combination of X-ray crystallography and protein
              engineering techniques is used to elucidate the three dimensional structure of
              the proteins, and to probe their function by binding studies in the crystals,
              and by site-directed         mutagenesis approaches. Three systems that utilize
              phosphotransfer reactions are selected for study: (a) The enzyme pyruvate
              phosphate dikinase that catalyses the inter-conversion of two high energy
              compounds, ATP and PEP, in some bacteria and plants. (b) The enzyme PEP mutase
              that catalyzes the first reaction in the synthesis of phosphonates, compounds
              with antibiotic, antifungal, insecticidal, antiviral, antihypertensive,
              herbicidal, and neurotoxic functions. (c) A phosphoryl transfer chain that
              mediates sugar uptake across the membrane in bacteria. The first protein in the
              chain, Enzyme I, which accepts a phosphoryl group from the high-energy compound
              phosphoenolpyru vate and delivers it to the proceeding protein, HPr, will be
              investigated.
