Title       : Interpretation of in Situ Tests in Unsaturated Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9813137

Award Number: 9813137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald A. Miller gamiller@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kanthasamy K. Muraleetharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              In situ testing of soil with the cone penetrometer and pre-bored pressuremeter
              are becoming more commonplace in geotechnical engineering practice in the
              United States.  The cone penetration test (CPT) in particular is seeing more
              widespread use among consulting engineers, and is becoming increasingly
              prevalent as a topic of interest at conferences and meetings.  Pressuremeter
              (PMT) testing is often used for foundation design in stiff soil deposits, and
              also is becoming more prevalent in US practice.  During a subsurface
              exploration, a zone of unsaturated soil is usually encountered, sometimes
              extending to considerable depth. While it is generally understood that the
              behavior of unsaturated soils is different from the commonly assumed
              saturated-undrained or drained soil behavior; there are no methods for
              interpreting CPT and PMT results that account for these differences.  A great
              deal of research has been devoted to the CPT and PMT; however, there are
              currently no reliable comprehensive methods for interpreting in situ test
              results from unsaturated soils.  The research proposed will focus on the
              development of such a method.=20  The CPT and the PMT will be investigated
              through a research program that includes laboratory soil testing, calibration
              chamber testing, and analytical/numerical modeling. This research proposal
              represents the first step in a long-range research plan. The proposed research
              includes three major components: 1) design and development of a calibration
              chamber and testing procedure for unsaturated silt; 2) CPTs and PMTs conducted
              in an unsaturated silt within the chamber; and 3) development of a cavity
              expansion based method of interpretation for the CPT and PMT in unsaturated
              soil.  The first research component involves several important considerations
              including: chamber geometry; top cap and pedestal details; control and
              measurement of pore air and pore water pressure; pressure control system
              details; soil bed preparation methods; soil bed instrumentation; CPT and PMT
              testing apparatus and procedures; and others. Research proposed will utilize a
              silty soil because it is easier, compared to clay, to handle in terms of soil
              bed preparation, and because matric suction values expected for the test silt
              can be measured with tensiometers. The proposed research will benefit from the
              fact that the Co-PI has successfully developed a technique for rapid
              measurement of matric suction with small pressure transducers equipped with a
              high-air entry porous stone. Results of matric suction measurements using this
              technique during dynamic loading in a centrifuge indicate that the response
              time of these devices is excellent. Development of methods for preparing soil
              test beds in the chamber will involve a trial and error process with soil
              sampling for analyzing homogeneity and repeatability. In addition, samples from
              soil beds will be tested with a triaxial system equipped to define the
              unsaturated soil behavior.  Second and third components of this research
              include a series of CPT and PMT tests in the chamber under different matric
              suctions, and interpretation of the data in terms of soil properties and
              outcome of modeling studies. Finite element modeling of an expanding cylinder
              and an expanding sphere in an unsaturated soil will be performed to simulate
              the PMT and CPT. This modeling will be performed using a fully-coupled finite
              element analysis method that utilizes an elastoplastic constitutive model for
              unsaturated soil, developed through the Co-PI=EDs CAREER research. The results
              of this analysis will be calibrated using unsaturated triaxial test and PMT
              calibration chamber test results, and will also be used to conduct a parametric
              study of the variables of interest. An analytical cavity expansion  based
              method of interpretation will be developed for interpretation of CPT and PMT
              results. This will allow engineers to make reasonable predictions of soil
              properties at moisture conditions other than those that exist when the in situ
              tests are performed.=20  A primary goal of this research is to gain important
              knowledge about the influence of matric suction on in situ test results. In
              accomplishing this goal a valuable set of experimental data will be established
              in an area of soil mechanics where information is scarce. A unique calibration
              chamber will be constructed and methods for preparing and testing unsaturated
              soil beds will be developed.=20                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
