Title       : Computing Purposes of Geometric Features
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1999   
File        : a9813259

Award Number: 9813259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Stahovich stahov@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul S. Heckbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for research that will result in techniques for
              automatically computing the purposes of the geometric features on the parts of
              a mechanical device.  These purposes serve as a form of design documentation.
              This work will employ a combination of techniques from computer graphics,
              artificial intelligence, and mechanical engineering.  The first step in the
              process is identifying the features on a part.  This will be accomplished by
              creating new model simplification algorithms.  These algorithms will remove the
              small geometric details (protrusions, cavities, etc.) from a part to reveal the
              simple underlying geometry.  Subtracting this simplified geometry from the
              original geometry will reveal the set of features.  To explain the purpose of a
              particular feature, a simulation of the device with the feature removed will be
              compared to a simulation of the original device.  The differences in the
              simulations indicate which of the device's many behaviors are produced by that
              feature.  Causal reasoning techniques will then be used to construct an
              explanation for how the feature causes its behaviors.  These explanations,
              which constitute one of the purposes of the feature, will be automatically
              translated into natural language (English) and will then be incorporated into
              the device's documentation.       If successful, the results of this research
              will lead to advanced design documentation tools which will increase the scope
              and completeness of design documentation while at the same time reducing the
              cost of producing documentation.  The particular kind of rationales computed by
              this approach (the purposes of features) will facilitate a variety of common
              engineering tasks including coordinating collaborative design and enabling
              product redesign without creating unintended side-effects, thereby reducing
              design cost.  Furthermore, if successful, this research will produce
              fundamental advances in model simplification and causal reasoning.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
