Title       : NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences-Mathematical Control
               Theory of Coupled Systems of Partial Differential Equations 8/3/99-8/7/99
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1998  
File        : a9813596

Award Number: 9813596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27708              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Rebarber rrebarbe@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Irena Lasiecka will be the Principal Lecturer for an NSF-CBMS Regional
              Research Conference on ``Mathematical Control Theory of Coupled Systems of
              Partial Differential Equations.'' The aim of this lecture series is to provide
              a self-contained, comprehensive exposition leading up to state-of-the-art
              results. The motivation for the study of coupled systems of PDE's comes from a
              variety of technological advancements in engineering involving interactive
              structures such as structure/acoustic interactions, large scale flexible
              structures, fluid/structure interactions, etc. These systems are described by
              strongly coupled PDEs, often coupled on the boundary, with mixed types of
              dynamics. The effect of the coupling prevents the direct application of results
              and techniques for uncoupled equations, so new techniques need to be developed,
              often based on microlocal analysis and propagation of singularities.

In
              order to effectively focus attention and convey the main ideas of the topic,
              the lectures will concentrate on specific benchmark models of interactive
              systems: structural acoustics interactions; thermal/structure
interactions;
              composite plates; dynamic shells; and combinations of the above.  The lectures
              will provide a complete analysis of these systems in the context of
              mathematical control theory, focusing on three types of control problems which
              are the cornerstones of classical control theory: optimal control,
              controllability, and stabilization.  The first four lectures will deal with
              those aspects of the theory of uncoupled PDE's which are required for the
              analysis of interactive structures.  The remaining six lectures will deal
              directly with interactive structures.  The lecture topics are: Theory of linear
              and nonlinear semigroups with unbounded forcing terms and boundary inputs;
              Abstract control theory with unbounded controls and observations; PDE 
              
methods in control theory; PDE models of interactive structures; Optimal
              control and optimization problems for interactive structures; and
              Controllability and stabilization of interactive structures.
