Title       : On-Chip Bulk Assembly/Disassembly Method of Micro/Meso-Scale Discrete Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9813110

Award Number: 9813110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239436             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kazuhiro Saitou kazu@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Koditschek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this research project  is to develop the foundation for a
              novel assembly/disassembly method for micro/meso-scale components.  The project
              will investigate bulk assembly/disassembly of micro- to meso-scale discrete
              components on a planar substrate using the combination of vibratory
              palletization for gross positioning and on-substrate micromechanical linear
              impact actuators for fine positioning and positive fastening and release.  The
              research also aims to demonstrate the potential effectiveness of the method as
              a bear-chip interconnection means in multi-chip module (MCM) assembly and
              disassembly.  Vibratory palletization will be applied to effectively eliminate
              the need of sequential pick-and-place style component handling/positioning. 
              The applied high-frequency vibration is intended to overcome sticking among the
              components, handling devices, and substrates. The micromechanical linear impact
              actuators will be selectively activated also by external vibration, to provide
              fine positioning and positive fastening and release of the components.  The
              integration of an array of palletizing features and linear impact actuators on
              a common substrate is intended to realize a bulk assembly/disassembly method
              suitable for micro electromechanical applications.
     Successful completion
              of the research will provide the enabling knowledge for bulk assembly and
              disassembly of micro/meso-scale components amenable for automation.  The method
              will advance the current microelectrical and MEMS fabrication technology by
              dramatically increasing the number of combinable fabrication processes and
              materials and by improving the system reliability through increased subsystem
              modularity.

