Title       : Dissertation Research: The Role of Diet and Dietary Change in Nutritional Status
               of Young Children in the Republic of the Marshall Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1999   
File        : a9813348

Award Number: 9813348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Gittelsohn jgittels@jhsph.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Early childhood undernutrition is a significant problem in many developed and
              developing countries throughout the world. Nutritional status in children, as
              indicated by well-accepted anthropometric measures, is heavily influenced by
              dietary adequacy, diarrheal morbidity and parasite load within a complex milieu
              of sociocultural, environmental, and genetic factors. This study will examine
              the role of diet and dietary change on the nutritional status of children
              between 12 and 72 months of age living in the Republic of the Marshall Islands.
              

Recent survey data indicate that even in food-secure settings, including
              impoverished urban and rural settings in the U.S.,  undernutrition remains a
              source of excess morbidity and mortality in  young children. These findings
              raise questions as to whether individual children are receiving adequate
              nutriture so as to maintain energy balance or whether co-morbid conditions or
              other factors are compromising the effects of adequate intake. 

There is
              recognition that diet in the Marshall Islands, as in other developing
              countries, has changed since Western contact. While observations about
              transitions to a "high-fat, energy-dense diet" have been made, few quantitative
              analyses of how the composition of children's diets vary in remote versus more
              modern settings have been undertaken to date. This research will reach beyond
              the relationship between protein/calorie nutriture and nutritional status to
              explore the relationships among dietary quality, adequacy and nutritional
              status. Data will be collected through a variety of mechanisms including 1)
              individual dietary and morbidity recall data; 2) infant feeding history; 3) the
              assessment of nutritional status; 4) household- and community-level demographic
              data 5) anthropometric data on other household members. The research will also
              explore the limits of dietary variation found in traditional and modern diets
              that support normal growth in children. 

