Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Political and Social Organization During the
               Early Horizon, Casma Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9813748

Award Number: 9813748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Burger richard.burger@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Burger, Mr. Ivan Ghezzi will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavations at the
              site of San Diego, located in the lower Casma Valley on the northern coast of
              Peru. The site itself dates to the Early Horizon period, from ca. 800 - 200 BC
              and consists of a series of interconnected architectural compounds made up by
              rooms, corridors, courtyards and low platform mounds. These compounds are
              arranged around large plazas up to eight hectares in size. Because of the dry
              desertic conditions preservation of organic remains, rare in most
              archaeological sites, is excellent. Occupational layers are thin and relatively
              near the surface and thus it is possible to excavate broad areas quickly. Mr.
              Ghezzi will take advantage of this fact to expose domestic structures and the
              space around them. Over the course of two seasons of fieldwork he will conduct
              a systematic stratified sampling in domestic units and refuse deposits to
              elucidate the basic patterns of socioeconomic variability. On the basis of
              materials collected it will be possible to provide a representative picture of
              the community at San Diego and to examine the extent to which hierarchical
              differentiation in wealth between domestic units is present.  The Early Horizon
              in Peru is marked by the appearance of a stylistic horizon which appears
              strongest in the Northern Highland area yet spreads across much of Peru. Termed
              `Chavin` it is unclear what it actually represents. Given that a series of
              later empires united, for temporary periods of time, much of this same area,
              archaeologists tend to interpret `Chavin` in this same context and view it as
              the first of Peru's empires. However the distribution of Chavin materials is
              spotty and it is unclear the extent of actual social and political  integration
              which took place. Mr. Ghezzi will examine this question. San Diego is located
              outside, yet not far from the Chavin heartland and preliminary survey indicates
              relatively little Chavin influence. Through an analysis of the site it should
              be possible to determine whether it exhibits an independent hierarchical system
              or whether it is best understood as an under-developed part of a Chavin
              periphery. The research will provide data of interest to many archaeologists
              and assist in training a promising young scientist.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
