Title       : TETRAHERTZ MICROWAVE GENERATORS: Heterostructure Ballistic Negative Effective
               Mass Generator for Tetrahertz Range
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2001   
File        : a9813823

Award Number: 9813823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir V. Mitin mitin@ece6.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zinovi Gribnikov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
9813823
Mitin

The PI's propose a collaborative research effort between a
              device simulation and modeling group at Wayne State University and an
              experimental device physics group at Brown University to focus on solid state
              generators of terahertz frequency radiation.  This novel class of devices,
              based on short ballistic diodes in which current flow is due to carriers with
              negative effective mass (NEM), was originally proposed and numerically
              simulated by the Wayne State group over the past three years.  These diodes are
              predicted to generate electric oscillations in the 0.1-10 THz frequency range
              (corresponding to freespace wavelengths from 3 mm down to 30 um).  In contrast
              to other solid-state terahertz generators, the operation of these devices
              requires neither magnetic nor radiation fields, nor pumping by lower-frequency
              pulses.  Finally, the radiated frequency is tunable by the voltage applied to
              the diode.

The required NEM dispersions can be realized in a number of
              semiconductor systems.  The thrust of the experimental research, led by the
              Brown University team, is to fabricate and characterize short-base ballistic
              diodes in the most accessible and technologically mature of these systems:
              p-type modulation-doped GaAs quantum wells with quantized NEM holes.  The
              high-mobility two-dimensional hole gases will be grown both at Brown and at
              Princeton (where Mansour Shayegan's group has achieved high-quality hole
              gases).  For the latter stages of the project, when very high frequency
              measurements will be required, they have established a collaboration with the
              Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

The theoretical effort at Wayne State will focus
              on further developing the theory of ballistic diode generation for new types of
              structures.  One proposed device involves the injection of NEM current carriers
              via an emitter heterojunction, instead of their acceleration in a
              self-consistent electric field.  Independent control of carrier injection
              energy will decouple the generation frequency from the voltage applied to the
              diode, allowing for a markedly higher upper frequency limit on the generated
              radiation.  Other proposed devices extend the generation mechanism to
              three-terminal structures, such as ballistic field-effect transistors
              controlled by an ultrashort gate.  While more difficult to fabricate, such
              devices would permit separate control over both the amplitude and frequency of
              the radiation.
***







