Title       : The Generation of a Tomato EST Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a9813392

Award Number: 9813392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3246725            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ewen Kirkness ekirknes@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Craig Venter  (Principal Investigator former)
              Catherine M. Ronning  (Principal Investigator former)
              Steven D. Rounsley  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Anthony R. Kerlavage  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Generation of a Tomato EST Database.

The tomato plant has long been a
              popular species for various aspects of plant biology research including
              genetics, development, physiology and pathology.  Today much of the research on
              tomato concentrates on fruit development and pathogen response since in these
              areas tomato still stands out as an ideal model.  In recent years, genomics has
              risen to the forefront of modern biological research and now provides great
              opportunities for plant biology.  One of the most widely used genomics
              approaches is to generate Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) from an organism. 
              These are short sequences obtained from cDNA clones selected at random and are
              a very cost effective way of identifying a large number of genes expressed in a
              tissue.  Once generated these sequences are a valuable resource for a large
              number of experimental approaches including mapping, expression studies, and
              genome annotation.  This project will generate 90,000 ESTs from a variety of
              tomato tissues including core tissues present in most plants (shoots, roots,
              developing anthers and ovules, and developing seeds), as well as tissues of
              particular interest to tomato researchers such as ripening fruits, and diseased
              tissues.  These 90,000 sequences will be used to construct a tomato EST
              database in which the ESTs from the same gene are grouped together and treated
              as a single entity.  These will then be annotated to identify possible
              functions of each gene.  Information about the source of each EST will also be
              part of this database, and therefore it will be possible to identify
              tissue-specific genes, and genes switched on in response to attacking
              pathogens.  It is expected that the sequences and the clones from this project
              will become part of the collection of tools used by tomato researchers, and
              indeed researchers working on any number of other species.  

