Title       : Friction from Atomic to Tectonic Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a9813752

Award Number: 9813752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. Carlson carlson@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9813752
Carlson
This award supports education and theoretical research in
              tribology. Carlson proposes to continue her work focussing on three areas:  (1)
              derivations of phenomenological friction laws from experimental data and
              microscopic models, (2) studies of microscopic models of interfaces in which
              different dissipation mechanisms can be explored, and (3) applications of
              friction models in seismology and engineering. The first of these continues
              development of the PI's proposed rate and state friction law for boundary
              lubrication and extends the study to a broader class of rate models applicable
              to granular materials, polymers, adsorbed lubricants, foams, emulsions, and
              rough lubricated interfaces.  The second of these involves the study of many
              degree of freedom models for interface sliding. Of particular importance are
              the identification of macroscopic laws from atomistic or continuum models and
              to better understand the origins of cooperative effects and the importance of
              fluctuations.  The last area involves applications of friction models in
              engineering systems and seismology.  A focus of this research is to elucidate
              how variations in the friction law affect seismological observables, such as
              propagation speed, rise time, etc. 
%%%
This award supports education and
              fundamental research on friction and wear, and their microscopic origins. The
              nature of the research is interdisciplinary and applicable to a wide range of
              mechanical interfaces under various conditions, including interfaces lubricated
              by foams and polymers, and the interfaces at geological faults.  In the latter
              case, computer simulations are used to interpret data from specific earthquake
              events.
***


