Title       : CEDAR-TIMED: Colorado State Sodium Lidar Update
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9813843

Award Number: 9813843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chiao-Yao She joeshe@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Krueger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
The investigators will upgrade the Colorado State narrowband sodium lidar from
              a one-beam system for measuring vertical profiles of temperature and sodium
              density to a two-beam system capable of simultaneously measuring heat flux,
              zonal and meridional winds, zonal momentum flux, and meridional momentum flux. 
              The proposed upgrade doubles the power-aperture product of the lidar, making
              possible a two-beam operation with several operation geometries.  The CSU lidar
              is now in its seventh year of operation and has provided unique observations in
              the mesopause region (80-105 km).  The upgrade will allow better determination
              of the seasonal variations of mean temperature, winds, and tidal structure, and
              the evaluation of vertical gradients of heat flux and momentum flux.  The
              mesopause is an important region of the atmosphere where gravity waves,
              depositing energy and momentum, force a diabatic mean meridional flow that is
              believed to be responsible for the cold summer and warm winter temperatures
              observed at those altitudes. These observations will support CEDAR/TIMED
              science goals.  CEDAR, which stands for Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of
              Atmospheric Regions, is a global change program that combines theoretical
              modeling with ground-based measurements to study the upper atmosphere and
              ionosphere.  TIMED, for Thermosphere, Ionosphere, Mesosphere Energetics and
              Dynamics, is a NASA satellite program to study similar regions of the
              atmosphere.  The joint CEDAR/TIMED program aims to coordinate ground-based and
              space-based observations to achieve better understanding of physical processes
              in the lower thermosphere and ionosphere. 



