Title       : Furthering U.S. Interests and Leadership in the International Council of
               Scientific Unions and its Associated Unions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9813966

Award Number: 9813966
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christine Galtizine                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3302239            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy D. White wwhite@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2001 Wisconsin Ave.
	      Washington, DC  20007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 5984      OFFICE OF TRANS-REGIONAL AFFAI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5984,9217,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wendy D. White, National Academy of Sciences

Because of the global character
              of contemporary science and engineering, it is essential for U.S. scientists
              and engineers, as well as their professional organizations, to remain in close
              touch with the activities and plans of their foreign counterparts, in part as a
              means to facilitate the development of collaborative programs.  Additionally,
              gaining a better understanding of many important problems, such as those
              associated with the global environment, data quality and access, and the
              training and utilization of research personnel, require cooperative efforts on
              a multilateral basis.  An increasing number of such problems either cut across,
              or transcend, indivudal scientific disciplines.  The oldest and most extensive
              mechanism for facilitating world-wide communication between U.S.  scientists
              and engineers and their foreign countarparts is the array of non-governmental
              international disciplinary unions and cross-disciplinary committees that
              together comprise the International Council of Science (ICSU), a
              non-governmental, multilateral organization comprised of adhering organization
              in over 90  countries.  This award will permit the National Academy of Sciences
              to continue to manage U.S. participation in ICSU.  It provides dues payments to
              ICSU and five of its 23 international disciplinary unions, and funds to support
              the activities of the committees of U.S. scientists and engineers who represent
              U.S. interests in ICSU and those unions.

