Title       : Design of Interfacial Microstructures and Creep Resistant Lead-Free Solders for
               Electronic Interconnects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9813919

Award Number: 9813919
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris E. Fine   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gautam Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9813919
Fine

This program addresses the fundamental aspects of
              thermodynamics and kinetics of bulk and interfacial microstructural evolution
              in solder joints and how they affect creep of precipitation-strengthened
              lead-free solders.  The focus is on two areas:  (1) experimental
              characterization and simulation of microstructures in solder joints including
              the interfaces, and (2) creep studies of precipitation strengthened lead-free
              solders for higher-temperature applications. The effects of underbump
              metallizations on the kinetics of interfacial microstructures are investigated
              in the liquid and solid states of the solders. The metallizations of interest
              are Ag, Au, Cu, Ni, Pd, and Pt, and the solders of interest are lead-free, as
              well as Pb-Sn binary solders.  Building on thermodynamic databases, a
              multicomponent mobility database and appropriate methodologies will be
              developed to facilitate the one dimensional growth simulation of interfacial
              microstructure using DICTRA software.  In addition, morphological analyses and
              simulation of microstructural dynamics will be performed using analytical and
              numerical techniques.  Fundamental understanding of the creep resistance,
              strength, and mechanics of interfaces between Cu6Sn5, Ag3Sn, InSb, Ni3Sn4 and
              SbSn precipitates and the Sn-matrix are sought. Elastic and plastic properties
              and the creep deformation kinetic parameters will be correlated with the
              microstructure of model alloys.  A mechanism is sought to explain why some
              intermetallics are more efficient than others in improving the creep resistance
              of solders.  The bulk creep properties will be correlated with the interface
              mechanics properties obtained through nano-indentation experiments.  Fracture
              tests in shear will relate failure to the solder and interface microstructure. 
              These results will improve the design methodology for advanced lead-free
              solders.

In electronic packaging solder joints provide electrical contact
              and mechanical support to interconnected components.  To achieve a higher
              density of connections in electronic devices, the trend in electronic packaging
              is to replace peripheral wire bonds with area array joints using solder bumps. 
              Underbump metallizations play a critical role in the evolution of interfacial
              microstructures.  Such information is lacking for lead-free solders.

