Title       : Cross-Frontal Fluxes and Mixing on Georges Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2000  
File        : a9813641

Award Number: 9813641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Barth barth@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Cross-Frontal Fluxes and Mixing on Georges Bank
D. Hebert and J. Barth

One
              of the overall goals of the NW Atlantic/Georges Bank GLOBEC Study is "to
              determine the processes that control the Georges Bank circulation and transport
              of biological, chemical, and geological materials in a strongly tidal- and
              buoyancy-driven system and to determine the physical and biological processes
              that control the population dynamics of the target species  For Phase III of
              this program, the primary focus of research will be on cross-frontal exchange
              processes.  For this project, the investigators  will determine the
              three-dimensional circulation associated with the Northeast Peak Front (in late
              March/early April), the Shelf/Slope Front, and the Tidal Mixing Front on the
              southern flank of Georges Bank (in mid-June).  The dynamics of these different
              fronts over a fortnightly period will be studied.  The effect of the
              variability in the tidal currents (both at the semi-diurnal and fortnightly
              time-scales) on the cross-frontal exchange processes will be examined.  An
              attempt will be made to determine the dynamics of the cross-frontal exchange
              and the rate of cross-frontal exchange for each front.  To address these goals,
              high-resolution SeaSoar surveys will be made around an isopycnal Lagrangian
              float placed initially in the center of the front.  The SeaSoar will have dual
              temperature and conductivity sensors on the CTD, a WET LABS ac-9 optical
              package (absorption and attenuation data collected at 9 frequencies), a
              fluorometer and MicroSoar.  MicroSoar has fast temperature and conductivity
              sensors allowing estimates of the temperature variance dissipation rate (i.e.,
              temperature microstructure) to be made.  A shipboard Acoustic Doppler Current
              Profiler (ADCP) will provide horizontal velocity data.  The trajectory of the
              isopycnal float will provide the cross-frontal exchange pathway for one
              location for each deployment.  Analysis of the CTD and ADCP data will be used
              to determine the dynamics of this exchange pathway.  The salinity, temperature
              and ac-9 data will be used to characterize the water masses present. 
              Combinations of the nine absorption and attenuation channels can be used as
              surrogate "tracers" to track cross-frontal exchange pathways.  Repeated surveys
              may allow the exchange rates to be determined.  The microstructure data will
              provide information if turbulent mixing processes are important and, if so,
              where they occur.  The results of this work will provide insight on how water
              (and other properties of the water) are exchanged across the different types of
              fronts found on Georges Bank.  With the measurements of biological processes
              and distributions at the same location made by other GLOBEC PIs, the effect of
              physical forcing on these biological processes can be addressed.


