Title       : Transfer Function for Photochemically Produced Chemical Species in Greenland
               Snow, Firn and Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9813311

Award Number: 9813311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger C. Bales roger@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
 Abstract
OPP-98-13311


The Principal Investigators will develop a record
              of past atmospheric photochemistry, primarily hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), from
              Greenland snow, firn, and ice.  These reconstructed atmospheric records will
              provide an important data constraint for atmospheric photochemical modeling of
              past regional and global hydroxyl radical (OH) levels to evaluate the apparent
              change in atmospheric OH over the past few centuries.  Oxidation capacity
              determines the atmospheric lifetime of many trace chemical species and
              greenhouse gases.  The Principal Investigators will evaluate and validate a
              model of air-snow exchange using H2O2 as a model compound and the degree of
              spatial and temporal averaging needed to distinguish statistically significant
              changes in the concentrations of H2O2 over the past few hundred years.  Their
              approach includes: 1) analysis and synthesis of ice-core data, 2) analysis of
              prior atmospheric and surface snow data, and 3) modeling of air-snow exchange
              processes and atmospheric chemistry for interpretation of concentrations in
              snow, firn, and ice.  One previous constraint on the modeling was the lack of
              availability of co-registered, sub-annual resolution ice-core data for model
              testing.  The Principal Investigators are currently doing continuous analysis
              on 120-150 m deep cores from four sites in northern Greenland, which will
              provide excellent data for modeling and will continue these analyses on a new
              100-m core from Summit.  Another constraint was the lack of availability of
              year-around records suitable for inferring the deposition and accumulation
              patterns of snow and chemical species.  The 1997-98 winter-over monitoring
              program at Summit should expand the physically-based model and relate
              atmospheric and surface snow concentrations to the South Pole data base for
              model calibration, testing and evaluation.  Modeling will continue the
              framework of physically- based models of air-snow exchange of H2O2 and
              atmospheric chemistry that the Principal Investigators have developed and
              tested using data from two sites in Antarctica and preliminary data from
              Summit.
 DIARY NOTE

This proposal is overage.  It was submitted on April 1
              for the April 1, 1998 Arctic Natural Sciences (ANS) deadline.  The remaining
              FY1998 ANS budget was committed to funding a few ANS standard grants and an
              executive decision was made to hold all of the proposals that were submitted
              for April 1 for FY1999 funds.  In addition, most of the proposals were
              discussed at the SCICEX panel held on August 5-6, 1998.  Due to the heavy
              travel schedule of our Office of Naval Research (ONR) counterpart, we were
              unable to meet to discuss which proposals would be transferred to ONR funding
              until September 23.  Our highest priority then was to complete the declinations
              before they became overage while the uncertainties with the FY1999 budget were
              being addressed.  Further delays in processing this award were due to the
              co-Principal Investigator transferring from the University of Arizona to Desert
              Research Institute at the same time that I told Dr. Bales that I was
              recommending funding of this the proposal.  
 





