Title       : Carbon and Oxygen Fluxes in the Central Arctic Ocean Based on Samples from the
               U.S. N. SCICEX 1999 Cruise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9813656

Award Number: 9813656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond N. Sambrotto sambrott@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Langdon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9813656
Sambrotto 

This project is part of the SCICEX program which makes
              use of U.S. Navy nuclear submarines as a research platform. This is a joint
              science program between the Arctic Natural Sciences Program,  the Office of
              Naval Research and the operational Navy. SCICEX 99 will be the sixth cruise in
              this program. The initial SCICEX submarine cruises to the Arctic Ocean have
              provided a much more detailed view of the geographic distributions of Arctic
              Ocean properties than has been recorded previously. This project will address
              the respiration of organic matter in the basins of the Arctic Ocean and the
              extent to which this carbon is redistributed beneath Arctic ice. The permanent
              Arctic ice cover profoundly alters biological and chemical conditions. The ice
              both restricts the light available for the creation of organic matter, as well
              as prevents much of the respiration signal in surface waters from
              re-equilibrating with the atmosphere. These unusual conditions create a
              situation in which the flux of carbon in this basin may be dominated by
              horizontal processes. Samples obtained from the 1996 cruise of the USS Pogy
              provided a geographically broad and coherent data set for the major variables
              in the ocean carbon system: the dissolved inorganic (DIC) and organic (DOC)
              carbon pools as well as the particulate carbon (PC) pool. In addition, the
              submarine mapped oxygen distributions in the surface waters of each basin,
              providing important evidence as to where the respiration of organic matter
              occurs in the Arctic. The comparison of these variables in the Canada, Makarov,
              Amundsen and Nansen basins are now underway with fall data from the SCICEX-96
              cruise. The sampling program in 1999 will gather analogous information in the
              late spring months and extend coverage into the waters near the Canadian
              Archipelago. These measurements will be critical to sort out the importance of
              locally produced versus advected respiration signals as well as to determine
              how much of the large amount of organic matter that enters the Arctic from
              rivers escapes remineralization. Such rates are critical for understanding the
              Arctic's role in the carbon cycle of the ocean and atmosphere.

