Title       : Use of the Transposon Ac as a Gene-searching Engine in the Maize Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9813364

Award Number: 9813364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1334173            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugo K. Dooner dooner@waksman.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Most of the maize genome (>90%) is made up of repetitive DNA, a large fraction
              of which is methylated. Genes comprise less than 3% of the genome and are found
              in contiguous stretches of less methylated DNA known as hypomethylated islands.
              Because of the repetitive DNA content in maize, sequencing the entire maize
              genome (2.5xl09 bp) is impractical. Some laboratories, mostly in industry, have
              adopted the strategy of large-scale sequencing of the RNA products transcribed
              from genes (cDNAs). An attractive alternative is to specifically sequence
              genes. One can take advantage of the tendency of the maize transposon Activator
              (Ac) to insert in hypomethylated DNA, the genomic component containing genes,
              to identify genes as sites into which Ac transposes (tac sites) and, then, to
              sequence the DNA adjacent to the transposon. An advantage of this approach is
              that, in addition to a sequence that can be compared to the existing database,
              it generates an insertion library. The collection of lines carrying Ac at many
              different locations in the maize genome will enable investigators to screen for
              subtle mutant phenotypes, particularly after obtaining information on where in
              the plant the genes are expressed. Many genes are expected to have minor
              effects and could be missed from a conventional transposon mutagenesis screen
              designed to identify gross changes in phenotype.

Taking advantage of the
              powerful endosperm genetics of maize, a simple and efficient Ac transposition
              assay based on the well-studied endosperm markers bz (bronze) and wx (waxy) has
              been developed. A collection of over 1200 independent Ac transposants has been
              generated and over one-third of these Ac sites have been mapped relative to the
              donor locus. In parallel, a panhandle PCR method, originally used in the human
              genome, has been adapted for the isolation of DNA adjacent to the insertion
              (tac sites). By sequencing tac sites, insertions have been identified, for
              example, in genes encoding a sulfur transporter, a MAPKK, and a sesquiterpene
              synthase.

This Ac mobilization scheme allows the isolation of tac sites that
              are either genetically linked or unlinked to the donor locus. However, because
              Ac has a strong tendency to transpose to closely linked sites, about one-half
              of the tac sites are linked to wx on chromosome 9. Clearly, it would be
              desirable to mobilize Ac from different starting sites in the genome. Toward
              that end, suitable maize lines that are readily transformable and regenerable
              are being developed. These lines will be transformed with a construct carrying
              an Ac element modified to facilitate the isolation of tac DNA. This construct
              should integrate at random sites in the genome, providing starting platforms
              for future Ac mobilization.

The expected outcomes of this proposal are: (a)
              The sequence of more than 1000 maize genes or gene fragments. (b) The
              elucidation of the function of a set of 50 genes based on the sequence of tac
              sites, the phenotype of Ac insertion mutations, and the pattern of gene
              expression. (c) The map location of those genes that correspond to unique
              sequences in the maize genome. (d) The development of transgenic maize lines
              that will facilitate the future isolation of genes (tac sites) from any
              location in the genome.

