Title       : AMS Summer Research Institute on "Smooth Ergodic Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1998   
File        : a9813732

Award Number: 9813732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180472             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Maxwell jwm@ams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yakov B. Pesin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard N. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anatole Katok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rafael de la Llave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This American Mathematical Society project supports a mathematical research
              institute during the summer of 1999.  The institutes in this series bring
              together a group of mathematicians interested in a particular field of
              mathematical research.  Emphasis is placed on instruction at a very high level
              with seminars and
lectures by distinguished mathematicians in related fields
              and to promote interaction between participants while broadening their
              mathematical perspectives.

Smooth Ergodic Theory and Applications has been
              selected as the topic of the 1999 Summer Research Institute by the AMS
              Committee on Summer Institutes and Special Symposia, whose members at the time
              were Michael D. Fried (chair), Robert Osserman, Jeffrey B. Rauch, Leon
              Takhtajan, and Ruth J. Williams.

Members of the Organizing Committee for the
              proposed 1999 Summer Research Institute on Smooth Ergodic Theory and
              Applications are Anatole Katok, Pennsylvania State University; Rafael De La
              Llave, University of Texas at Austin; Yakov Pesin, Pennsylvania State
              University; and Howard Weiss, Pennsylvania State University.

The 1999 Summer
              Research Institute will be held at the University of Washington, Seattle,
              Washington.  The Society will be responsible for making suitable arrangements
              for lecture and seminar rooms, and for the
handling of local administrative
              matters.  The Institute is expected to be held during a three-week period in
              late July and early August.

