Title       : Resource Controlled Active Network Elements (RCANE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9813875

Award Number: 9813875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $453248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Smith jms@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Advanced applications of Active Networks require support for robust configurable
              Quality of Service (QoS), and to also prevent or mitigate sophisticated "denial
              of service" attacks on security. A major unsolved problem for active networks
              is mapping application requirements into a distributed resource multiplexing
              strategy.  Since this problem bedevils the Internet community as well (viz., IP
              Telephony, RSVP, etc.) a solution would have broad and immediate impact on the
              networking community beyond Active Networks.

The Penn/Bellcore SwitchWare
              active networks project uses programming-language restrictions to balance
              flexibility, security, usability and performance. In contrast to operating
              system enforced memory protection, the programming language approach can be
              viewed as restricting the addresses which can be generated by programs. The
              advantage of this approach is that some restrictions can be enforced once, at
              compilation time, versus repeatedly at run-time. In addition, programming
              language technologies such as ML provide strong type-checking, a key to
              automated checks of program behavior. The SwitchWare project has used the
              Caml-lite ML dialect to build an active bridge and an ultralightweight
              Programming Language for Active Networks (PLAN) appropriate for
              capsules.

The Cambridge Nemesis Operating System supports "soft" real-time
              continuous media traffic. To avoid QoS crosstalk, it performs processor
              multiplexing at a single point, the lowest possible layer in the system, so
              that even a large portion of interrupt handler execution is performed under
              scheduler control. Nemesis is an
operational single-address space operating
              system, providing protection by means of virtual-address permissions. 
              Protocols on Nemesis are "vertically-structured", meaning that applications are
              responsible for resources involved in their own protocol processing, using
              either default shared libraries or private
libraries.

Resource Controlled
              Active Network Elements (RCANE) can be constructed with a synthesis of
              SwitchWare and Nemesis. This synthesis will entail: (1) extending the QoS
              management of Nemesis to be managed by
programming language stubs; (2)
              supporting Caml-lite under Nemesis; (3) developing Caml support for specifying
              QoS; and (4) developing robust support for co-scheduling based on multiple
              resources, e.g.,
CPU cycles, real memory, network bandwidth. This
              co-scheduling is particularly relevant to Active Networks, where new resources
              are exposed to users of the network element. RCANE will produce a novel
active
              network element able to support QoS for multimedia traffic and limit or resist
              denial-of-service attacks of many forms, including "receive-livelock" and TCP
              SYN-ACK attacks.

The two research groups have broadly similar interests, a
              tradition of excellence in experimental systems work, and a history of
              cooperation, personnel exchanges and collaborations. RCANE is a unique
              opportunity
to provide secure, controlled virtualization of active network
              elements. This proposal requests funds for the U.S. (Penn) portion of this
              collaborative effort; Cambridge is applying for funds from European analogues
              of the National Science Foundation.

