Title       : MRPG: Mutation and Selection in Clonal Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9813335

Award Number: 9813335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria E. Orive orive@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1228,9136,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Orive  9813335    Clonal reproduction, or the nonsexual production of new
              individuals, is widespread throughout both plant and animal species, including
              marine invertebrates such as corals.  Existing population genetics theory does
              not adequately address many important details of clonal life histories,
              including indeterminate growth and development; the existence of both clonal
              and sexual reproduction in the same species; the spread of somatic mutations;
              and the existence of multiple levels where natural selection can act.  The
              overall aim of this research program is to expand evolutionary genetic models
              to incorporate the unique life history characteristics of clonal organisms,
              allowing an examination of fundamental evolutionary issues, such as the origin
              and maintenance of genetic diversity and the rate at which new mutations arise
              and spread.    This research will involve the development of a basic model of
              mutation and selection in clonal organisms that incorporates the various
              aspects of their life histories. The model is unique in incorporating both a
              population genetics framework (where, for example, allele frequencies in the
              entire population are followed) and a demographic model (which incorporates
              details of the organism's particular life history); it may also be extended to
              populations that are structured in other ways.  Some of these extensions will
              require the use of computer simulation studies, especially in exploring the
              stochastic nature of the origin and spread of mutations within individuals and
              the effects of selection on individuals carrying these somatic mutations.  By
              expanding theory to include organisms outside of the those previously
              considered, this work will add considerably to the understanding of processes
              such as somatic mutation, selection at different levels of organization, and
              the origin and maintenance of genetic diversity.  This work will also provide a
              basis for considering topics such as the evolution of clonal life histories and
              the relative roles played by  forces governing this evolution.
