Title       : GOALI: Development of Transferable Force Fields for Phase Equilibria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1999  
File        : a9813601

Award Number: 9813601
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120331             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joern Ilja Siepmann siepmann@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1414,1504,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9813601
J. I. Seipmann/U. of Minn.

GOALI:  Development of
              Transferable Force Fields for Phase Equilibria

The goal of the proposed
              research is to design two levels of transferable force fields for a large
              spectrum of organic molecules and water.  The first level, called TraPPE
              (Transferable Potentials for Phase Equilibria),employs the united-atom
              representation and simple Lennard-Jones and Coulombic terms.  In the second
              level, called TraPPE-pol (polarizable), all atoms are modeled explicitly, and
              both the van der Waals and electrostatic interactions can respond to changes in
              the environment.  Whereas the first level is, designed for simplicity and
              computational efficiency with good accuracy, the second level is aimed solely
              at the highest possible accuracy and transferability.  These force fields will
              allow us to study single and multi-component phase equilibria, excess
              properties of mixing, and to predict partition coefficients and
              separation
factors.  The transferable force fields will encompass linear,
              branched, and cyclic alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alcohols, ethers, ketones,
              carboxylic acids, alkylbenzenes, and last, but not least, water.

In addition
              to the force field development, this proposal also addresses novel simulation
              algorithms which are targeted at efficient simulations of mixtures containing
              very polar and/or hydrogen-bonding species, and which will allow efficient
              Monte Carlo sampling for polarizable force fields.  Molecular simulations using
              the transferable force fields will be employed as engineering tool to predict
              thermophysical properties of a variety of systems, thereby adding to the
              experimental database.  The simulations will provide
a wealth of
              microscopic-level information for complex chemical systems, thereby giving new
              physical insight into how molecular architecture and composition determine
              macroscopic phenomena.

This interdisciplinary project will profit from
              extensive collaboration of people with different knowledge, expertise, and
              perspective.  On the one side, a tight university-industry team consisting of
              the PI and Drs. George Parks and William Parrish of Phillips Petroleum will
              advance the project.  On the other side, Dr. Stanley Sandler, Univ. of
              Delaware, will provide additional guidance from the viewpoint of an experienced
              experimental properties worker.  

