Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Micromammal Paleoecology: Past and Present
               Relationships Between African Small Mammals and their Habitats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9813706

Award Number: 9813706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11976              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Marean   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Curtis Marean, Mr. Denne Reed will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct 14 months of field research in
              northern Tanzania and study the foraging behavior of two species of owl - the
              barn owl (Tyto alba) and spotted eagle owl (Buo africanus) - in a variety of
              environmental contexts. The goal of the research is to determine the
              relationships between environment, foraging behavior and prey skeletal remains.
              Owls feed primarily on small rodents which they swallow whole. They later
              regurgitate the prey hair, bones and other indigestible remains in the form of
              a "pellet" which most often drops to the ground below their nesting or roosting
              area. Owls often live in caves or other sheltered environments and abundant
              numbers of pellets are incorporated into the ground deposits. Because
              prehistoric people also lived in such sites, owl pellets are often found
              intermixed with archaeological remains. Most small rodents have very specific
              and limited habitat requirements and thus owl pellets can be used to
              reconstruct the prehistoric environments within which people lived. Scientists
              however do not yet know how sensitive an indicator this provides, the hunting
              range of African owl species or the effects of rodent abundance and
              microhabitat diversity the species represented in pellets. Mr. Reed will
              attempt to fill these gaps.

In his study Mr. Reed will trap two species of
              owl and attach radio tracking devices to determine hunting range. Working with
              satellite maps, he will map vegetation types within individual areas and ground
              truth them. He will then collect pellets below individual nests and roosts and
              develop a key to identify the rodent species they contain. With these data it
              will then be possible to determine the utility of pellet analysis in
              environmental reconstruction and develop effective procedures to achieve this
              goal. The research is important not only to archaeologists but to a range of
              paleoenvironmental and ecological specialists. The project will also assist in
              training a promising young scientist.

