Title       : Mechanisms for Secure and Robust Agent-Based Distributed Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1999  
File        : a9813703

Award Number: 9813703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201131             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anand Tripathi tripathi@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A mobile agent is a program  capable  of  migrating  autonomously from
node  to
               node, to perform computation on behalf of a human user.  The
mobile agent
              paradigm can play a significant  role  in current  and  future
network-centric
              applications, especially in the context  of  the  Next
Generation  Internet.  
              Security  and robustness  concerns about mobile
agents are currently
              identified as the biggest obstacle preventing the
widespread deployment  and
              use of agent-based applications.

The primary objective of the proposed
              research is to  investigate security
and  robustness  issues  in  building  a 
              mobile  agent programming system,
in an open distributed environment,  such 
              as the  Internet.  The proposed
research addresses issues related to
              programming primitives and
system-level mechanisms  for  building agent-based 
               applications.    The
approach  presented  in  this proposal is based on
              supporting the mobile
agent  paradigm  using mobile  objects.   This  raises 
              a  number of
research challenges related to protection of host  resources, 
              protection
of  mobile agents,  and  secrecy  and authenticity of information
              carried
by agents. It also requires mechanisms  for  remote  monitoring 
              and
control  of  agents,  and recovery from failures. Another related
              challenge
to be addressed by this effort is in building  scalable mechanisms 
              for
naming and locating objects in the network.  The proposed research will
              be
based on the Java language and will use cryptographic  techniques to
              design
protocols to solve several of the security problems.  The
              facilities
provided by Java (such  as object  serialization,  reflection,
              security
features, etc.) will be used in devising mechanisms for agent
              mobility and
supporting protection  domains  for  agent  execution  on  remote
               hosts.
A prototype implementation of a mobile agent system will  be  built
              to
serve  both  as  a  research  infrastructure  as  well  as  a
              demonstration
of the  mechanisms  to  be  developed  during  this effort.  
              The system
will be evaluated using both theoretical and experimental
              analyses.


