Title       : Conference on Lattice-Mismatched and Heterovalent Thin Film Epitaxy, Barga,
               Italy, September 13-18, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9813068

Award Number: 9813068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles V. Freiman engfnd@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene A. Fitzgerald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                9813068  Freiman    An International
              Conference will be held in Barga, Italy  September 13-18, 1998 on
              Lattice-Mismatched and Heterovalent Thin  Film Epitaxy. The goal of the
              conference is to bring together  world leaders in the field of semiconductor
              heteroepitaxy to  discuss the most recent developments, stimulate
              collaborations  and identify critical issues for future research. International
               invited speakers who work on different materials systems will  form the
              foundation of the meeting. An objective is to benchmark  domestic progress in
              this area against the international  community, and to stimulate collaboration
              and discussion between  researchers, especially between young professionals and
               established experts. The conference also serves to bring together  industrial
              and academic scientists in an effort to encourage  collaboration between these
              groups. Support from NSF will be used  to partially compensate young scientists
              (junior faculty,  graduate students and postdoctoral fellows) for travel and 
              accommodation expenses. This will help the young scientists to  establish vital
              contacts with International academic and  industrial scientists working in the
              field. The conference is  expected to provide an effective forum for discussion
              of critical  scientific issues in heterovalent lattice-mismatched systems. 
              Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future  directions, it is
              expected that new ties will be established  between universities, research
              institutions, and industry.  %%%   Semiconducting lattice-mismatched materials
              have far reaching  economic potential since applications range broadly across 
              electronics and photonics associated with computing,  communications, and
              information processing. An evaluation of the  progress and status of this field
              along with current assessments  of the most important developments will be of
              great value to the  understanding and enhanced utilization of these materials
              in  applications beneficial to societ y.  ***
