Title       : U.S. Participation in the IARP Workshop on Micro Robotics and Systems to be held
               in Beijing, China, October 22-24, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9813273

Award Number: 9813273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52586              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tzyh-Jong Tarn tarn@wurobot.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tien C. Hsia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9813273
Tarn
This grant provides funding for U.S. scientists and engineers to
              participate in the IARP Workshop on Micro Robotics and Systems to be held in
              Beijing, China, October 22-24, 1998.  This workshop has been offered by China
              and is jointly sponsored by Germany, France, Italy, Austria, Japan, Russia and
              the U.S.A.  The funds requested is for travel by U.S. participants and
              technical reporting.

The workshop will be hosted by the Expert Group of
              Robotics, National High-Technology R&D Program of the National Committee of
              Science and Technology of China.  The main objective for attending the workshop
              will be to allow the invited U.S. participants and their foreign colleagues to
              identify specific topics of common interest for long-term research.

The
              benefits of the proposed international cooperative activities for the U.S. will
              be many.  They include:

i) Finding the future directions of research in
              micro robotics and systems,

ii) Finding potential applications of micro
              robotics and systems in the underwater environment, manufacturing and
              medicine,

iii) Coordination and integration of research efforts in micro
              robotics and systems between the U.S. and China,

iv) Maintenance of the U.S.
              dominance as a research leader in the area of micro robotics and systems,

v)
              Developing the basis for future joint seminars, workshops, exchanges, etc.,
              which enhance the international perspectives of U.S. scientists and
              engineers,

vi) Generating reports on workshop activities and coordination
              for distribution, and

vii) Discussing a potential U.S./China cooperative
              program.

Finally, it is proposed that participants attending the conference
              will be selected based on the quality of the paper that they wish to present. 
              Professor Steve T.C. Hsia of the University of California at Davis will chair a
              committee to select the papers.  Partial funding from the NSF is requested in
              this proposal to support travel and subsistence for U.S. participants.
***


