Title       : Performance Limits of Fish Dorsal Fin Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9813730

Award Number: 9813730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam A. Ashley-Ross rossma@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9813730  Ashley-Ross  In vertebrates, very fast muscles are scattered among
              widely separated taxonomic groups.  The fastest vertebrate muscles are
              associated with two activities: sound production and locomotion.  Sound
              producing muscles tend to have the faster contraction times, but are thought to
              contract nearly isometrically, and thus to do little mechanical work.  In
              contrast, fast locomotory muscles tend to have lower frequencies of
              contraction, but must produce considerable mechanical work and power as they
              propel their bearer about.  The dorsal fin musculature of the seahorse
              (Hippocampus) is the primary locomotor organ of the animal, and is especially
              noteworthy for contracting at a high frequency against the load of the viscous
              medium.  No systematic studies of dorsal fin work and power output or in vivo
              activation pattern have been made.    Dr. Ashley-Ross proposes to characterize
              a number of properties of the dorsal fin musculature of seahorses, pipefish,
              grouper and perch, the latter two being non-specialized fish.  The PI will
              record kinematics of fin movement using high-speed video, motor pattern using
              electromyography, in vivo muscle length-change pattern using sonomicrometry. 
              The PI will also make a number of in vitro contractile measurements, including
              twitch force, twitch time course, maximum isometric force, mechanical work, and
              power output under conditions mimicking those of normal operation.    A major
              aim of this proposal is to establish the limits of dorsal fin muscle
              performance in these species.  My initial hypothesis is that the seahorse
              dorsal fin muscle is extremely specialized for rapid contraction in comparison
              to that of other more "typical" fish.
