Title       : Utility-Based Control of Hierarchical Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a9813194

Award Number: 9813194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349305             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis I. Steinberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Berk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development and characterization of a
              method for controlling multi-level design optimization.  This method is
              intended to apply to design problems that are carried out in a series of stages
              or abstraction levels, where the result of each level sets the problem for the
              next level.  For instance, in microprocessor design one level might represent
              the microprocessor as a set of boolean logic formulas, another might convert
              these formulas into wiring diagrams of transistors, and another might convert
              the wiring diagram into a specific layout of wires and doping regions on the
              chip.  The method assumes that we have an optimizer for each level and that
              each optimizer uses stochastic methods, such as simulated annealing, genetic
              algorithms, or multi-start hill climbing.  The method coordinates and controls
              the use of these optimizers to explore the space of alternative designs in an
              efficient way, based on an estimate it makes for each current alternative at
              each level of what the `utility` would be of using that alternative as the
              basis for generating the desired final design, where utility is the value of
              the resulting final design minus the cost in design effort to find it. 
              Currently this method has had an initial feasibility test on one task domain. 
              The primary goals of this research are to better test the generality of this
              approach and to extend it to as broad as possible a class of problems and
              models of cost.       If successful, the research funded by this grant will
              result in a version of this method that is applicable to a broad spectrum of
              design optimization tasks, along with a characterization of what kinds of tasks
              it is most useful for, of how best to apply it to a given task, and of how well
              it can be expected to perform.  This should lead to improved tradeoffs between
              design time and design quality in many design domains.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
