Title       : Synoptic and Mesoscale Structure and Evolution of Occluded Winter Storms and
               Their Associated Precipitation Bands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2000   
File        : a9813398

Award Number: 9813398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan E. Martin jon@meteor.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While the larger-scale aspects of fronts and cyclones has been studied for some
              years, the regional and local-scale characteristics are not as well known. 
              This research aims to extend prior studies of the structure, dynamics, and
              precipitation distribution associated with occluded winter cyclones.  This work
              will be accomplished through employment of a case study approach involving
              analysis of observations and diagnosis of output from high resolution numerical
              simulations of selected events performed using an advanced mesoscale numerical
              model.

A component of the research will focus on documenting the fine-scale
              structure and precipitation distribution of warm occlusions using the
              unprecedented observational data set collected during the recent SNOWBAND field
              experiment.  Questions regarding the mesoscale structure of warm occlusions as
              well as the mesoscale dynamical processes responsible for the production and
              sustenance of heavy snowbands in the occluded sector of cyclones will be
              addressed in this component of the research.

Investigation of the
              ageostrophic dynamics operating in the occluded sector along with an
              examination of the evolution of the static stability in the occluded quadrant
              are also components of the research.  In addition, piece-wise potential
              vorticity (PV) diagnostics will be employed to specifically examine the role of
              discrete PV anomalies in altering the frontal structure of mature cyclones. 
              

Successful completion of this research should produce important advances in
              understanding of the processes that contribute to the structure, dynamics and
              precipitation distribution characteristic of extratropical cyclones.


