Title       : Economic Processing Models for Modern Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9813177

Award Number: 9813177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191233             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manbir Sodhi sodhi@egr.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9813177
Sodhi
     Modern manufacturing systems routinely employ machining
              centers with integrated tool magazines, tool usage tracking devices, tool
              delivery and monitoring systems and new tool materials for high speed machining
              in a variety of configurations such as cells, flexible layouts etc.  This grant
              provides funding for the investigation of models for determining economic
              processing rates, i.e. processing rates that are optimal with respect to some
              measure of performance, for such systems. Mathematical programming and
              heuristic techniques will be applied to the modeling and solution of a set of
              tool usage decision problems. Tool life models will be embedded into these
              decision problems.  Among the objectives that will be considered are the
              maximization of processing rates, minimization of processing costs and
              minimization of processing times for a batch of parts. The optimization will
              take place by taking into account the multidimensional tradeoff between
              simultaneous loading of duplicate tools, periodic replacement of tools,
              selection of cutting parameters such as speed, feed and depth of cut, choice of
              cutting tool material, increasing failure probability of tools, allocation of
              operations across multiple machines etc. Industrial collaborators, involved in
              the operation of modern manufacturing facilities, will validate some of the
              models being investigated in this research. When possible, the optimization
              methods developed as a part of this research will be tested with data from
              these collaborators.
     If successful,  this project could result in methods
              for planning and control of modern manufacturing systems that include tool life
              related issues.  It may also  augment advanced computational tools and
              methodologies available to operators of modern manufacturing systems for
              planning production and control, thereby improving operations. These
              improvements can potentially lower manufacturing costs, and reduce product
              turn-around times.
