Title       : FASEB Conference - Transcriptional Regulation In Cell Growth and Development To
               Be Held In Snowmass, CO on July 25-30, 1998.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9813438

Award Number: 9813438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Struhl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Struhl  9813438  Gene regulation through transcription is a fundamental
              process common to all biological systems. Transcriptional regulation underlies
              critical aspects of cell behavior including proliferation, response to
              environmental signals, differentiation, and the development of multicellular
              organisms. This award provides partial funding for a summer FASEB conference
              entitled "Transcriptional Regulation During Cell Growth and Development." The
              intent of this conference is to bring together researchers engaged in studying
              a broad range of transcriptional processes using different methodologies and
              biological systems. The goal is to provide an in-depth view of this rapidly
              expanding field so that experimental and conceptual advances in specific areas
              can be rapidly disseminated and applied to new problems. Each session of the
              conference groups together talks that focus on different approaches to key
              areas of research of gene regulation. The sessions are designed to provide an
              overview of recent advances in knowledge of fundamental mechanisms of
              transcriptional activation and repression, chromatin structure, long-range and
              epigenetic effects on gene expression, and their relationship to the biology of
              response to environmental signals, development, and cell-cycle control. The
              conference will underscore the important role that transcriptional regulation
              plays in normal differentiation and development. Transcriptional and biological
              regulatory mechanisms across a wide range of species (yeast, worms, flies,
              mammals) will be discussed so that the similarities and differences can be
              appreciated.  The conference will be held at Snowmass, Colorado, from July 25
              through July 30, 1998. The meeting will include formal talks, informal poster
              sessions, discussion periods, and ample opportunity for interaction among the
              attending scientists. Attendees will include principal investigators,
              postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students. The conference will provide an
              up-to-date and cost-effective overview o f one of the most fundamental and
              rapidly moving fields in biology and is expected to generate strategies for
              further research.
