Title       : Shaping the Preparation of Future Science and Mathematics Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a9813876

Award Number: 9813876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1309307            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie B. Sims lsims@cgs.nche.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne S. Pruitt  (Principal Investigator former)
              Joyce E. Jentoft  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jerry G. Gaff  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Coun of Grad Schls
	      1 Dupont Circle NW
	      Washington, DC  200361110    202/223-3791

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to improve the quality of undergraduate education in
              mathematics and the sciences by providing restructured doctoral education for
              advanced graduate students planning of faculty careers.  It builds on the
              "Preparing Future Faculty"  PFF  program that the Council of Graduate Schools 
              CGS  and the Association of American Colleges & Universities  AAC&U  have been
              piloting since 1993.      The objective is to create model graduate programs in
              5 disciplines with the aid and support of aligned scientific societies:   
              chemistry and The American Chemical Society  ACS     computer science and the
              Association of Computing Machinery  ACM , Special Interest Group on   Computer
              Science Education  SIGSE     Mathematics and the American Mathematical Society 
              AMS  and the Mathematical Association of America  MAA     Microbiology and the
              American Society for Microbiology  ASM     physics and the American Association
              of Physics Teachers  AAPT   Each society will be awarded an equal sum of funds
              to carry out the objectives of this project.      In the first year, each
              society will plan promote and implement the project among its membership, and
              will select at least 4 academic departments as pilots.    In year 2, each
              society will distribute modest grants to each of the pilot departments to
              implement their new programs.  This will be repeated in the third year.  These
              grants will be cost shared by the department or the university.  Societies will
              use NSF funds to support communication among leadership team members,
              highlighting PFF progress, publishing materials, operating electronic networks,
              traveling to working conferences, and for providing materials and supplies. 
              (These NSF funds are intended to supplement the society's internal resources.) 
                 Each professional society will:     appoint a leadership team for oversight,
              advice, and assessment with appropriate experience with earlier PFF efforts   
              select at least 4 pilot departments for awards based on a set of strong
              criteria      offer technical assistance to keep participating departments on
              task    develop a set of dissemination activities aligned with the society's
              ongoing operations    report back to CGS and AAC&U    participate in assessment
                 Each participating department will:     create a cluster of partner
              departments in a broad range of institution types, and appoint a cluster
              steering committee to plan and oversee the collaboration    provide students
              intensive & hands-on experiences to learn about faculty life in this broad
              range of institutions    prepare guidelines for selection and training of
              mentors    collaborate with current PFF departments in the same discipline   
              expose students to new and emerging pedagogies and course enhancements
