Title       : RUI: Layered Manufacturing Decision Support and Design Feedback
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9813042

Award Number: 9813042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65441              (Estimated)
Investigator: Constance W. Ziemian cziemian@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9148,9229,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This research will develop a methodology for the automated determination of
              Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) process performance for a given part.  The
              primary goal of this project is to provide the knowledge and the means through
              which manufacturing and prototyping decisions can be made by the design
              engineer, thus improving the interface between the design and the manufacture
              of SFF parts, and providing important evaluation capabilities for design
              feedback.  The project plan includes the formulation, development, and software
              implementation of: (1) tolerance representation schemes, algorithms, and
              methods for extracting feature-based process information from computer-aided
              design models, (2) algorithmic solutions for defining part orientations that
              optimize feature-specific precision constraints, and (3) a computerized process
              model used to quantify and assess the quality of fabricated features with
              minimum human effort.  The project intends to focus on the special needs of
              small business manufacturers, who (by nature) sometimes suffer from the
              limitations of a smaller work force.  Demonstration and validation of the
              decision support system will utilize industry data provided through
              collaboration with local manufacturers and the Small Business Development
              Center (SBDC).       If successful, this research will serve to provide
              time-saving tools that facilitate the rapid identification of design
              possibilities and the early integration of manufacturing considerations.  SFF
              throughput improvements will be complemented by the automation of feature-based
              optimization routines.  The developed methodology will highlight the important
              elements in manufacturability assessment, and demonstrate how they can be
              linked back to the product model in investigating redesign options.  Improved
              decision support and assessment capabilities will also serve to promote the
              further use and industry approval of layered manufacturing methods as more than
              a rapid prototyping technique.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
