Title       : Linear Algebra Algorithms and Tools for Emerging Computing Environments and User
               Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a9813362

Award Number: 9813362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $626702             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Demmel demmel@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Numerical linear algebra is the subfield that solves systems of
              linear
equations on digital computers. These systems appear in many fields
              of
applied science and engineering, as linear equations are the simplest
              and
most common approximation to many more complex equations.
              Numerical
solutions to these systems are routinely used to solve problems
              ranging
from structural engineering to electromagnetic radiation studies.
              Because
of their ubiquitous nature, subroutine libraries for solving these
              problems
Has been one of the most important (and most studied) areas
              in
computational science. This project extends one of the most widely-used
              of
these software packages - the LAPACK project - to use new algorithms and
              to
run on the next generation of hardware.

This project will pursue a broad
              range of synergistic activities to design
and implement numerical linear
              algebra algorithms. It targets a range of
dense and sparse linear systems and
              eigenvalue problems. The overall goal
is to produce the fastest and most
              accurate solvers for these problems, and
make them available to a broad and
              changing user community. Besides the
existing large LAPACK user community, the
              software will be made available
as a Grid-enabled service to the PACI,
              Millennium and ASCI user communities
(Millennium is the Berkeley high
              performance computing environment).
Indeed, much of the proposed research is
              motivated by particular
applications demands from these communities. Given the
              size and diversity
of these communities, part of the project is educational in
              nature, to
enable users from experts to beginning students to find what they
              need
among the wealth of tools available. Finally, the researchers are
              motivated
to meet the opportunities and challenges of new architectures in
              growing
use; besides the distributed environment mentioned before, they
              include
clusters of SMPs (or "CLUMPs").



