Title       : CEDAR: Detectors and Data Acquisition System for the Rayleigh and Resonance
               Lidars at USU/CASS Atmospheric Lidar Observatory (ALO)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9813903

Award Number: 9813903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent B. Wickwar wickwar@aeronomy.cass.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This investigators will upgrade Rayleigh scatter and resonance lidars at the
              Atmospheric Lidar Observatory (ALO) at the Center for Atmospheric and Space
              Sciences (CASS) at Utah State University.  The upgrade includes detectors and a
              data acquisition system so that scientific observations can be made with the
              two lidar systems from the stratosphere into the lower thermosphere. 
              Currently, there is one detector and a one-channel data acquisition system. 
              The funds will be used to purchase new detectors for both lidars, a data
              acquisition system, and software for controlling the data acquisition and
              telescope pointing.  This combination of hardware and software will enable ALO
              to contribute middle atmosphere temperature and wind observations in support of
              CEDAR/TIMED science goals.  CEDAR, which stands for Coupling, Energetics, and
              Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions, is a global change program that combines
              theoretical modeling with ground-based measurements to study the upper
              atmosphere and ionosphere.  TIMED, for Thermosphere, Ionosphere, Mesosphere
              Energetics and Dynamics, is a NASA satellite program to study similar regions
              of the atmosphere.  The joint CEDAR/TIMED program aims to coordinate
              ground-based and space-based observations to achieve better understanding of
              physical processes in the lower thermosphere and ionosphere.   



