Title       : Collaborative Research: Parasitism of Bloom-Forming Dinoflagellates: Host
               Specificity and Ecological Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9813542

Award Number: 9813542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Gunderson jgunderson@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan H. Goss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Increasing  concern over the global spread of red tides produced  by  toxic 
              and non-toxic dinoflagellates has focused research interest on physical and 
              biological  interactions that influence the accumulation, persistence,  and 
              demise  of bloom-forming species. The harmful effects imposed by red  tides  on
               marine  fauna  and  associated risks to public  health  and  commercial 
              fisheries  have  also  prompted interest in means to detect,  predict,  and 
              potentially  control harmful algal blooms. Recent studies have  shown  that 
              microparasites, including viruses, bacteria, and protozoa, are abundant  in 
              marine    environments.   Furthermore,   parasite-induced   mortality    of 
              bacterioplankton  and phytoplankton can cause population level  changes  in 
              host  abundance  on  time scales of hours to days.  Infection  of  red-tide 
              dinoflagellates  by their parasitic relative Amoebophrya ceratii  has  been 
              linked  to rapid declines in host populations. This parasite has also  been 
              implicated as an important factor in preventing bloom formation. while  all 
              such  infections of free-living dinoflagellates have been attributed  to  a 
              single  species  of  parasite, recent data suggest that  A.  ceratii  is  a 
              species  complex  composed  of  multiple  host-specific  parasites.    This 
              research  will further the understanding of red-tide ecology by considering 
              the  interplay  between  host specificity and parasitism  of  bloom-forming 
              dinoflagellates in Chesapeake Bay. It will also help define the  complexity  of
              host-parasite interactions in planktonic systems and provide new insight  on 
              the  role of parasitism in microbial food-web dynamics.  Five  specific 
              hypotheses   will  be  tested  using  state-of-the-art  morphological   and 
              molecular methods.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
