Title       : An International Workshop on the Methodology of Incorporating Adaption into
               Assessments of the Impact of Global Climate Change: Pittsburgh, PA; Fall 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9813490

Award Number: 9813490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59220              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary W. Yohe GYOHE@WESLEYAN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hadi Dowlatabadi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9813490  Yohe, Gary W.  Wesleyan University  Title: An
              International Workshop on the Methodology of  Incorporating Adaption into
              Assessments of the Impact of Global  Climate Change: Pittsburgh, PA; Fall 1998 
                The proposal requests the National Science Foundation support for  a three or
              four day international workshop designed to further our  ability to assess the
              impact of climate change across the globe  when adaption is based on limited
              information and constrained by  local political, cultural, social and economic
              structures.  The  proposed workshop will focus on sea level rise and coastal 
              management, but it will be conducted with an eye toward producing 
              generalizable insights that can both support the inception of  coastal studies
              for Egypt and the Indian subcontinent and offers  researchers in other sectors
              some guidance in creating fruitful  methods of analysis.    The workshop should
              produce significant results in two distinct  directions.  First, collaboration
              of active researchers will allow  the principal investigators to work with
              others to contribute a  methodologically focused paper to the literature that
              will inform  not only the next generation of coastal analyses extended beyond 
              developed market economies, but also (and more importantly) the  broader IPCC
              interest in working adaption throughout the  contributions of Working Group II
              to the Third Assessment Report.    The workshop will also build understanding
              of the differences  between the various models that have developed specially to
              examine  the impact of sea level rise.  It is expected that differences will 
              be found along both natural and social dimensions; and a paper that  explores
              their resources and consequences should feel well into the  IPCC TAR process.  
               The comparative and development work will, in addition, provide  insight into
              (1) representing sea level rise more appropriately  into sufficiently
              desegregated integrated assessment models and (2)  including impacts more
              broadly defined in the g rowing list of  "vulnerability assessments."
