Title       : SGER: An Online Repository of Large Data Sets for Data Mining Research and
               Experimentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9813584

Award Number: 9813584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99737              (Estimated)
Investigator: Padhraic Smyth smyth@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Kibler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Pazzani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Over the last two decades there has been an explosive growth in online data
              storage of various forms. These large datasets have motivated the rapid
              development of data mining methods. However, until now, there has been a lack
              of an online repository of large data sets for researchers to evaluate and
              compare their methods. In this project, an online repository of large and
              difficult data sets are being gathered that are representative of the diverse
              character of many important scientific and business domains. This repository
              includes high-dimensional data sets as well as data sets of different data
              types (time series, spatial data, transaction data, and so forth). The primary
              role of the repository is that of a benchmark testbed to enable researchers in
              data mining (including computer scientists, statisticians, engineers, and
              mathematicians) to scale existing and future data analysis algorithms to very
              large data sets. Each data set in the respository contains online
              documentation, metadata, and links to relevant background domain information
              such as prior published work. Availability of a standard set of large benchmark
              data sets will directly stimulate and foster systematic progress in data mining
              related research, similar to the affect that the UCI Machine Learning Data
              Repository has had on machine learning research. This repository will play a
              substantial role in brokering the gap between research-oriented algorithm
              development in the laboratory and the real-world practicalities and challenges
              of very large data sets.     http://www.ics.uci.edu/~mlearn/MLRepository.html
