Title       : Collaborative Research: "Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? Observation of
               Others Versus Cheap Talk as Coordination Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1998  
File        : a9813622

Award Number: 9813622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25020              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Duffy jduffy@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                How do individuals achieve coordination on `good outcomes` in simple one shot
              strategic situations? One much explored possibility is that they engage in some
              kind of preplay communication- cheap talk-in which they endeavor to convince
              one another of the actions they intend to play. Another, less explored,
              possibility is that individuals take account of the past actions of their
              partners when deciding which actions to play. While these two possibilities
              have been considered separately, there has been no research that compares the
              relative importance of these two devices as aids in solving coordination
              problems. This project involves an experiment with human subjects that will
              allow for a comparison of the roles played by cheap talk and observation of
              past actions as devices for achieving coordination on good outcomes. The effect
              of cheap talk or observation of past actions will also be compared with the
              standard (control) case where cheap talk or observation of past actions is not
              allowed. In all cases, subjects will play simple two player games and will be
              paid according to their performance in each game.  The results of this
              experiment will be used to extend game theoretic models of how individuals
              incorporate notions of fairness into their decisions and how they make use of
              the different types of information available in strategic environments. At a
              more aggregate level, the experimental results will provide a better
              understanding of the relative merits of cheap talk and observation of past
              actions as devices for ensuring `good outcomes` in simple one shot strategic
              contests. Such information will be useful not only to economists but to a much
              wider audience, including policymakers and others who are in a position to
              influence the actions or expectations of the public.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
