Title       : Design for Manufacturing with Advanced Composite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9813157

Award Number: 9813157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy G. Gutowski gutowski@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this project is to develop design for manufacturing guidelines
              for advanced composite materials.  The principal methods to be used in the
              development of these guidelines will be cost models, processing knowledge,
              virtual manufacturing simulations, structural analysis, and close cooperation
              with industry.  These tools will be integrated and applied to case studies for
              evaluation of current design for manufacturing strategies.  The `engine` for
              the design analysis, capable of differentiating between design details, will be
              a cost model with part size and part complexity scaling.  It is well known that
              larger and more complex parts are more costly.  Previous work has suggested
              size and complexity scaling laws.  In that work,  shape complexity was
              calculated by viewing the fiber structure as an information storage medium. 
              This approach led to a rigorous definition for information content that showed
              a close correlation with manufacturing time. In this project, this idea will be
              further developed with the aid of fiber mapping software.  This will allow
              automation of this task and the opportunity to evaluate alternative complexity
              measures if needed. An important feature of the proposed cost model will be a
              logical and transparent data structure which allows easy modifications for new
              developments in process technology.  This work will build upon a previously
              developed model and database (270 cost equations).  Specific new features to be
              developed include the shape complexity modeling and the factory design and
              simulation.  Industrial input will be provided by Northrop Grumman and other
              composites manufacturing companies.       The desired outcome of this project
              is the development of a design for manufacturing  methodology for advanced
              composites materials.  Of specific interest is the development of
              recommendations and an evaluation of the integration of parts strategy for
              several  large composite structures.  This work is intended to focus attention
              of critical elements of cost reduction strategies for composites.  In addition,
              the work proposed here should lead to several new software tools in the area of
              part complexity evaluation, cost modeling, factory representation, and cost
              model structure.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
