Title       : Lithospheric Mantle Evolution Beneath the Bering Sea Volcanic Province: An
               Isotopic, Elemental and Oxygen Fugacity Study of Peridotite Xenoliths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a9813609

Award Number: 9813609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel B. Mukasa mukasa@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-98-13609

Ultramafic xenolith suites from the Bering Sea
              Volcanic Province (BSVP) of northwest Alaska, the Bering Sea, and northeast
              Russia provide an excellent opportunity to examine and describe the geochemical
              evolution of mantle lithospheric materials at the boundary of two major plates,
              Eurasia and North America.  A well-documented, diverse suite of xenoliths
              exists, but little is known about these rocks and the lithospheric mantle from
              which they were generated.  The principal objectives of this research are to: 
              1) model the magmatic and metasomatic processes that affect upper mantle
              lithosphere during rifting;  2) determine the provenance of magmas which
              intrude the lithosphere at various times during its evolution, and 3) ascertain
              how much material is depleted in large ion lithophile elements in the
              lithospheric mantle beneath the BSVP.  Understanding the processes that control
              lithospheric evolution during extension will provide important constraints on
              thermo-mechanical models of rifting and on the chemical evolution of the mantle
              beneath continents.

On Nunivak Island, many coarse-grained ultramafic
              xenoliths contain amphibole and a small number contain phlogopite and apatite. 
              These xenoliths have similarities in rare earth elements'  patterns and
              neodymium and strontium isotopic compositions to the host rocks, suggesting a
              strong link between the two types of xenoliths.  They also show 1) light rare
              earth elements and heavy rare earth elements, 2) normalized abundance ratios of
              greater than one, and 3) their potassium, rubidium, strontium, and barium and
              light rare earth element abundances exceed the estimates for primitive mantle. 
              These characteristics support the idea that amphibole in Nunivak Island
              xenoliths has a metasomatic origin.  However, it is not known whether this
              phenomenon was pervasive in the mantle lithosphere below the BSVP or limited to
              a few localities suggesting metasomatism by subduction.

To advance our
              understanding of how the mantle evolves through introduction and expulsion of
              melts and metasomatic fluids, the Principal Investigator will determine the: 1)
              major element concentrations of whole rock samples by X-Ray fluorescence and of
              minerals by electron microprobe; 2) trace element concentrations by secondary
              ionization mass spectrometry on thin sections; 3) platinum-group element
              abundance patterns for peridotite bulk samples by the multi-collector
              inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer; 4) oxygen fugacities in spinel by
              electron microprobe and Mossbauer spectroscopy; and 5) initial strontium,
              neodymium,  and lead isotopic compositions and corresponding elemental
              concentrations on clinopyroxenes and glass, and amphibole and phlogopite when
              present.

