Title       : Dissertation Research: Comparative Household Archaeology in the Zapotitan
               Valley, El Salvador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9813627

Award Number: 9813627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Patrick Culbert tpc@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. T. Patrick Culbert, Mr. Brian McKee will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. His research focuses on a comparison between two
              archaeological sites, Ceren and San Andres, both occupied during the Classic
              Period and located in the Zapotitan Valley, El Salvador. The sites differ in
              terms of both position in a regional settlement system and of preservation.
              Ceren is unique in Middle America because it represents a Pompei like
              situation. The small rural village is buried under a protective layer of
              volcanic ash. Although most (although not all) inhabitants had time to flee
              before the cataclysmic volcanic eruption, they were able to take few of their
              possessions with them. Delicate organic materials such as storage gourds are
              well preserved and objects were left where they were used. The site therefore
              provides unparalleled insight into the range and spatial distribution of
              material culture. In the course of their activities, the Ceren people discarded
              objects which were no longer of use and trash pits similar to those preserved
              in many Middle American sites were discovered. It is very likely that the
              inhabitants of adjacent San Andres had a range of material culture and way of
              life similar, in most essentials, to their Ceren contemporaries. San Andres
              however was not subject to similar volcanic forces and abandonment occurred in
              a more gradual manner. Because discarded objects were not suddenly buried,
              preservation is not of the same high quality. Therefore a comparison of the two
              sites and a determination of systematic differences can give scientists
              insights into the nature of abandonment and post abandonment changes which
              pattern materials recovered through excavation. Likely material recovered from
              buried trash deposits will be similar. Assuming such to be the case, the
              differences in remains associated with house floors and surrounding surface
              areas will be particularly instructive.  Although research has been conducted
              at Ceren for many years, much less is known about San Andres. Mr. McKee will
              conduct systematic excavations at this latter site. A surface survey will be
              followed by a testing program and analysis of recovered artifacts. In addition
              to providing insight into preservation and abandonment processes, the data will
              allow for a comparison between rural hinterland and political center. The
              information will be of interest to many archaeologists and assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
