Title       : Sequencing of Arabidopsis Chromosome 2 (and beyond), and Development of
               Resources for Arabidopsisgenome Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a9813586

Award Number: 9813586
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15806875           (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire Fraser cmfraser@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Rounsley  (Principal Investigator former)
              J. Craig Venter  (Principal Investigator former)
              Owen White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samir Kaul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoying Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher D. Town  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1131,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9813586

   The small crucifer, Arabidopsis thaliana, has become the most
              widely used experimental model planet system used in research laboratories. 
              Its small size and rapid growth cycle combined with a small, diploid genome
              with few repetitive elements make it an ideal model system for studying many
              aspects of plant biology.  Since 1990, preparative work has been underway to
              develop the resources needed to study its genome.  In 1996, TIGR was one of the
              three US groups funded to initiate genome sequencing on Arabidopsis.   Their
              initial sequencing efforts have concentrated on chromosome 2 and have generated
              over 3.3Mb of finished annotated sequence containing over 750 genes, a further
              4.5 mb of sequencing clones in progress, and have produced a large number of
              BAC end sequences used for the selection of sequencing clones.  TIGR has also
              led the discussion on the importance of annotation to this project and
              developed guidelines for a more uniform annotation format for Arabidopsis
              genomic sequences.  It is planned in this  project to increase the sequencing
              capacity to approximately 12 Mb per year and use this capacity to complete the
              sequencing of chromosome 2, and to sequence in other regions of the genome in
              coordination with the other sequencing groups.  In addition to the continued
              genomic sequencing, TIGR proposes to generate 5,000 sequence fragments from
              Landsberg erecta for use in identifying polymorphisms and therefore markers for
              fine mapping mutations.  Finally, to address the variation in annotation
              standards currently facing the Arabidopsis community and the problem of
              outdated annotation due to rapid database changes, TIGR will establish an
              annotation resource for the entire Arabidopsis genome.  This resource will
              update annotation for the entire genome, presenting it in a uniform and
              informative manner.  The data format will be developed in collaboration with
              the Arabidopsis database, AtDB, so that the results can be linked to the wealth
              of non-sequence data used by the research community.  The increase in
              sequencing capacity combined with the establishment of these two resources will
              further accelerate our understanding of Arabidopsis thaliana and therefore
              plant biology in general.

