Title       : Prediction of Hole Quality in Drilling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a9813457

Award Number: 9813457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. DeVor r-devor@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shiv G. Kapoor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9813457
DeVor
	One of the most economical, and therefore commonly used
              machining processes for hole making is conventional drilling. However, hole
              quality, surface damage, process efficiency, and tool life are severely
              affected by problems such as excessive forces, process dynamics, and chatter,
              drill breakage, burr formation, regrinding errors, and process faults. 
              Traditionally, these problems have been overcome by trial-and-error methods
              through drill point re-design and extensive testing.  Such an approach is time
              consuming, expensive, and lacks a rigorous theoretical basis.  A more
              comprehensive, scientifically-based method that provides useful computer-aided
              engineering tools to evaluate process performance in terms of the quality
              characteristics of the drilled hole is offered by this project.  A computer
              integrated environment for the modeling and performance valuation of the
              drilling process and hole quality, expressed in terms of location accuracy,
              diametral tolerance, roundness, and straightness will be developed.  Using both
              first principles and data-driven approaches, a drill performance prediction
              model that accounts for the dependence of hole quality of drilling process
              faults, dynamic effects (initial skidding and wandering), deflection and
              vibration within the hole, temperature effects, and deformations imposed by
              static and dynamic loads will be established.  A closed-loop environment
              facilitating a quick turnaround in customized drill development will be
              represented by the model, and the foundation to supply the user with optimal
              technological information related to the drilling process will be developed. 
              The models for hole quality that emerge from this research will undergo
              extensive experimental evaluation in controlled laboratory environments at all
              three of the participating institutions.
	Scientific contributions of the
              project include theoretical advances in the modeling of phenomena that drive
              the quality of the drilled hole, including both mechanical and thermal
              distortions as they are influenced by the force system created during the
              drilling process.

