Title       : Furthering U.S. Interests and Leadership in International Geoscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9813754

Award Number: 9813754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christine Galtizine                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1049177            (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamae M. Wong twong@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy D. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 5984      OFFICE OF TRANS-REGIONAL AFFAI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1314,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              U.S. scientists will interact with the International Council of Scientific
              Unions' (ICSU) four unions concerned with geosciencies -- the International
              Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG), the International Union of Geological
              Sciences (IUGS),  the International Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA), and
              the International Union of Soil Science (ISSS).    These Unions consider all
              aspects of the earth system, including its interior, lithosphere, hydrosphere
              and atmosphere, as well as solarterrestrial relations and analogous aspects of
              Earth's relationship with the Moon and other planets, and applied studies of
              the earth, inlcuding its mineral resources, natural hazards, and the
              environment.  U.S. National Committees (USNC's) at the National Academy of
              Sciences (NAS) will:  lead U.S. preparations for meetings of the International
              Unions and for scientific conferences, symposia, and workshops organized by
              these Unions to identify research topics, issues, and programs of interest to
              their specific disciplines; identify and support U.S. scientists to participate
              in union activities; and arrange for payment of U.S. dues to the four unions. 
              The USNC's will also seek to improve exchange of information between the
              international geosciences unions and U.S. scientific community; identification
              of interdisciplinary scientific problems, both within the geosciences and
              involving the geosciences and other fields of science; and geosciences needs
              for a global observing system.  These Committees are expected to meet generally
              twice each year.

