Title       : Combined Research-Curriculum Development: Nontraditional Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a9813028

Award Number: 9813028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. Lawrence Yao yly1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Feiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9813028
Yao

Nontraditional manufacturing (NTM) processes refer to processes
              in which nontraditional energy transfer mechanisms and/or nontraditional media
              for energy transfer are involved.  This proposal is focused on nontraditional
              material removal or machining processes.  They include electrical discharge and
              electrochemical machining (EDM/ECM), laser machining processes (LMP), and
              abrasive waterjet machining (AWJM), among others.  NTM processes can machine
              precision components from sophisticated materials.  They offer the advantages
              of a reduced number of machining steps and a higher product quality.

Driven
              by the increasing interest in the vastly superior properties of innovative
              materials such as superalloys, composites and ceramics, and requirements for
              high quality and flexibility, research in NTM process innovation, quantitative
              analysis and process simulation, and monitoring and control has been very
              active and considerable progress has been made in recent years.  These advances
              have made NTM processes more attractive and sometimes the best or only choice. 
              At the same time, these research results have been introduced into engineering
              curricula in order to prepare a new generation of engineers who keep abreast to
              the latest developments.  Due to the high diversity and multidisciplinary
              nature of NTM processes, however, more orchestrated efforts are needed to
              expand the range of expertise needed in the curriculum development.

The
              curricular deliverables of this project include a set of seven modules
              including five instructional modules and two software based modules.  These
              seven modules will form an in-depth course on NTM at the upper level
              undergraduate and introductory graduate level.

To prepare a new generation
              of engineers who would have analytical background knowledge, appreciation for
              the vital area of NTM processes, and skills to use recent research based modern
              tools to tackle process innovation, design and optimization problems will have
              a significant impact on whether the potential of NTM technologies can be fully
              and properly realized and in turn whether the promise held by these advanced
              materials can be fully realized. 

