Title       : Arctic Basin Earthquake Detection with the Spinnaker Hydrophone Array
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1998  
File        : a9813140

Award Number: 9813140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65079              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Sohn   (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Hildebrand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP 98-13140

The Principal Investigators will use hydrophone array
              data recorded by the U.S. Navy under the Arctic ice cap to study the seismicity
              of the Gakkel Ridge. Hydroacoustic techniques allow for the detection and
              localization of seismic events through the analysis of T waves generated by the
              conversion of seismic to acoustic energy at the seafloor interface.  Because T
              waves propagate much more efficiently than body waves, hydroacoustic methods
              can allow for the detection of large numbers of small-magnitude earthquakes
              that are not detected by land based stations.  Hydroacoustic techniques have
              been applied very successfully in the northeast Pacific, where thousands of
              mid-ocean ridge tectonic and volcanic episodes, too small to be detected by
              local land seismic stations in the Pacific northwest, have been detected and
              localized with hydrophone data, including the first ever real-time seismic data
              from seafloor spreading events. 

The U. S. Navy "Spinnaker" array is a
              unique, 128 element hydrophone array deployed at 84'N, 62'W.  Three months of
              Spinnaker array data have been acquired.  The Principal Investigators will
              demonstrate the feasibility of regional and teleseismic earthquake studies in
              the Arctic Basin in a pilot study by using T wave travel time and beamforming
              techniques to localize a regional event from the Spitsbergen Fracture Zone, and
              to detect teleseismic phases from large earthquakes at ranges up to 11,000 km.
              These studies have demonstrated that the signal-to-noise ratio and frequency
              response characteristics of the Spinnaker array are well-suited to the
              detection of seismic energy from within the Arctic Basin.

This research
              should advance Arctic Basin tectonic studies by using bearnforming and array
              processing techniques to "point" the array towards the Gakkel Ridge and search
              for low-magnitude earthquakes that were not detected by the Global Seismic
              Network (GSN) or Arctic land arrays.  Based on previous hydroacoustic
              experiments, they expect to lower the earthquake detection threshold from body
              wave magnitude Mb ~! 4.5 to Mb ~! 2.0, which should result in the observation
              of several hundred times more events than currently seen by the
              GSN.

Decreasing the detection threshold of Arctic Basin seismicity is
              important for unraveling the tectonics of the region.  The Gakkel Ridge is an
              enigmatic feature with an apparent lack of transform offsets, anomalously large
              free-water gravity anomalies, and the slowest spreading plate boundary in the
              world.  Because the deployment of local seismic arrays on the Gakkel Ridge is
              logistically difficult and expensive, hydroacoustic techniques may provide the
              most cost-effective means to study this region.  This study should provide a
              better understanding of Gakkel Ridge seismicity, and the techniques developed
              can be directly applied towards a comprehensive seismic monitoring system for
              the Arctic Basin and the Gakkel Ridge.

