Title       : Triad Alliance for Gender Equitable Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9813926

Award Number: 9813926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $901600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth S. Chatman liesl@itsa.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Santos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1588,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Traid Alliance for Gender Equitable Teaching is a project of the Science and
              Health Education Partnership (SEP) of the University of California San
              Francisco (UCSF), in strong collaboration with the San Francisco Unified School
              District (SFUSD).  Through this initiative, SEP will pioneer a multi-tiered
              professional development program in gender equity for teachers that will change
              the equity climate for girls in school classrooms.  These efforts will be
              pursued in the context of teacher-scientist partnership, a novel approach to
              gender equity and science education reform.  Through the NSF's Experimental
              Program for Women and Girls, SEP and SFUSD established a network of Traid
              Girls' Science Clubs which provided single-sex science enrichment experiences
              for girls, an important strategy to increase the recruitment and retention of
              women in science.  However, this strategy does not address the experiences of
              girls in science classrooms.  Only permanent change in the gender equity
              climate of classrooms, where girls spend the majority of their science
              instructional time, will fully provide girls equal opportunity in science. 
              Those with the most influence over these classrooms are K-12 teachers.  By
              combining Triad Alliance for Gender Equitable Teaching, SEP will develop a
              unique approach to promoting gender equity through teacher-scientist
              partnership that is institutional, sustainable, and expandable.

Through the
              Triad Alliance for Gender Equitable Teaching, SEP will: 1) engage teacher and
              scientist partners iterative professional development focused on implementing
              equitable teaching strategies and engaging in reflective practice, 2) develop a
              cadre of gender equity leaders and mentors in the public schools and the
              university, and 3) enable teacher and scientist partners to pursue action
              research into the effectiveness of their gender equity efforts on girls.  These
              goals will be accomplished through three integrated programmatic strands: 1) 
              the Triad Introductory Program in Gender Equity, 2) the Triad Leadership &
              Mentorship Network, and 3) the Triad Equity Action Research Group.  The goals
              and programmatic structures will address three target populations: middle
              school girls, middle school science teachers, and university scientists at the
              beginning of their professional careers.  Goals for each of these target
              populations include: for girls, to increase their self-confidence and
              assertiveness in science and deepen their abilities in scientific
              problem-solving; for teachers, to increase their ability to understand and
              implement teaching behaviors that promote gender equity and student learning in
              science; and for scientists, to raise their awareness of gender equity issues
              and increase their leadership abilities, self-confidence, and teaching
              skills.

Since the outcomes of the Triad Alliance will be of national
              interest, documentation of the effort and its outcomes will be assembled into a
              "how to" dissemination package designed for use by universities and school
              districts across the US.  The goals of the dissemination effort are to: 1)
              document the key components of both the Triad Girls' Science Clubs and the
              Triad Alliance for Gender Equitable Teaching; 2) create a comprehensive
              dissemination package Triad: A Guide to Promoting Gender Equity through
              Partnership that includes both a handbook and a video; and 3) field-test these
              dissemination materials in collaboration with two other sites.

A team from
              the Stanford University School of Education will evaluate and conduct research
              on the Triad Alliance for Gender Equitable Teaching and will be highly
              integrated into all professional development and dissemination activities.
