Title       : Fast Scalable Level Four Switching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9813723

Award Number: 9813723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $965353             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan S. Turner jst@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Subhash Suri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Varghese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 4095,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Looking up the route to send a message is a major bottleneck in
              traditional
Internet Routers.   Traditional routers only use the destination
              address in
a message to determine how to forward the message.   However, in
              the last
few years, there have been proposals for more sophisticated routers
              that
are capable of what is called Layer 4 Switching.  We believe that
              the
capabilities provided by Layer 4 Switching in terms of security, quality
              of
service, and guaranteed service will make Layer 4 Switching an
              integral
part of the Next Generation Internet.

In Layer Four switching, the
              route and resources allocated to a packet are
determined by the destination
              address as well as other header fields of the
packet (such as source address,
              TCP port numbers etc.).  Layer Four
Switching unifies a number of recent
              trends (such as firewall  processing,
resource reservation, providing virtual
              private networks) into a single
framework.  The forwarding database of this
              new kind of router consists of
a potentially large number of filters on key
              header fields.  A given packet
header can match multiple filters; thus each
              filter is given a cost, and
the packet is forwarded using the least cost
              filter that matches the packet
headers.

The flexibility and service
              differentiation provided by Layer 4 Switching
comes at a cost.  Given that
              traditional Internet forwarding based only on
destination addresses is itself
              a challenge to implement at Gigabit speeds,
Layer 4 Switching at Gigabit
              speeds is a difficult problem for next
generation routers.  In this proposal,
              we address the question of designing
and implementing fast algorithms for
              Layer 4 Switching that can be
implemented at Gigabit speeds even with hundreds
              of thousands of filters.
We introduce three promising candidate algorithms
              (cross-producting, Grid
of Tries, and Tuple Search).  We propose to implement,
              evaluate, and
fine-tune these new ideas, consider combination schemes, and to
              search for
other fast algorithms for fast filter matching.  As part of our
              proposal we
plan to design a chip capable of doing Layer 4 Switching at
              Gigabit speeds.


