Title       : LEXEN/ SGER: The LAREDO Sampler: Novel Equipment for Experimentation at High
               Temperature and Pressure on the Seafloor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a9813728

Award Number: 9813728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48920              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jody W. Deming jdeming@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1075,1319,1650,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The concept of a subsurface biosphere on Earth has recently captured the
              imagination of researchers and the public worldwide. Evidence for a hot
              subsurface biosphere associated with deep sea hydrothermal vents includes
              submersible observations of flocculent microbial material emerging from recent
              eruption sites and the detection of hyperthermophiles in diffuse (cool)
              hydrothermal fluids, microorganisms that must have originated in deeper
              (hotter) realms of the subsurface given their thermal growth requirements.
              Active sulfide structures or black smokers on the seafloor, releasing high
              temperature fluids that have presumably flushed through such subsurface
              habitats, provide an opportunity to test for the upper thermal boundaries of
              the subsurface biosphere on Earth and, by extrapolation, elsewhere in the
              Universe. This proposal is to complete the development and submersible testing
              phase of a novel in situ titanium device, called the LAREDO sampler, that can
              be deployed in the focused flow of a black simoker for insitu microbial
              experimentation at high temperature in the absence of decompression effects.
              The same or successive models can also provide for in situ tests of the thermal
              stability of organic compounds under hydrostatic pressure or of other abiotic
              processes critical to assessing the possibility that life may have originated
              in the subseafloor. A (future) streamlined version of the sampler, deployable
              deep within a hot oil well or a legacy hole of the Ocean Drilling Program,
              could be used to extend the geographic testing range to terrestrial and non
              vent sites. The recent explosion of interest in the subsurface biosphere, in
              life in extreme environments, and in the new field of astrobiology, suggests
              that the time is ripe to proceed with development of effective, if high risk,
              deep sea experimental tools that can provide novel information not obtainable
              in laboratory simulations.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
