Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Proposal on Feature Extraction in Spoken Language
               Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9407050

Award Number: 9407050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaac Chavel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Auslander  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kris Ukraincik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Gorin  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : CUNY Graduate School
	      365 Fifth Avenue
	      New York, NY  100164309    212/817-7523

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9407050  Auslander       There are many ascpects of automated speech 
              understanding, but the overall problem is often divided into  two main tasks,  
              The first is the transcription of spoken  language into text and the second is
              the derivation of  meaning from the transcribed speech.  These tasks are 
              traditionally addressed separately, assuming a clean  interface at the level of
              transcription.  However, it is  clear that the acoustic and semantic problems
              must  be  intimately related.  It is also felt that traditional tools  of
              acoustic analysis of speech signals, based on the Fourier  spectrum, are
              insufficient for the robust recognition of  fluent speech.  The substance of
              our project will be to  study time-frequency feature extraction techniques for
              the  purpose of clarifying the acoustic-semantic relationship,  with the goal
              of improving the performance of systems for  spoken language understanding. 
              Specifically, we purpose the  integration of time-frequency techniques being
              developed at  CUNY with existing acoustic and semantic processing already  in
              place at AT&T Bell Laboratories.       A primary issue will be to understand
              the relationship  of the extracted time-frequency objects to traditional 
              phonetic subword units, with emphasis on providing improved  acoustic
              discrimination in regions of semantic ambiguity.  While primary features
              extracted by the auditory periphery  are innate in humans, the perceptual
              metric, subword and  word symbols are acquired knowledge.  We want to
              understand  how  time-frequency feature extraction techniques might  simulate
              this behavior in a machine, for the purpose of  improving the robustness of
              spoken language processing.
