Title       : Relationships Among Holartic Hylid Frogs: Insights From a Nuclear Gene, Serum
               Albumin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9407605

Award Number: 9407605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla A. Hass   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda R. Maxson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407605  Maxson  The relationships among the Holarctic hylid treefrogs
              (Anura:Hylidae) remain only partially resolved, in spite of extensive
              behavioral, morphological, developmental, and molecular work.  Immunological
              estimates of amino acid sequence divergence in the protein serum albumin have
              provided information on relationships within many lineages of hylid frogs,
              including Holarctic hylids.  The PIs have cloned and sequenced part of the
              coding portion of the serum albumin gene from several frog species.  They
              propose to clone albumins and sequence the serum albumin gene transcript from
              at least 30 species of Holarctic hylid frogs.  Based on preliminary results,
              and published albumin sequences from other vertebrate taxa, it is clear that
              albumin sequence data can provide valuable information on the relationships
              among and within Holartic hylid frog species groups.  The PIs will clone and
              sequence serum albumin cDNAs from representatives of the remaining subfamilies
              within Hylidae and other select frog families as a pilot survey to ascertain
              the genealogical levels at which nucleotide and amino acid sequence data from
              this nuclear gene will be most informative.    In addition to providing
              information on phylogenetic relationships among the Holarctic hylids,
              translation of the DNA sequence data from the coding portion of the serum
              albumin gene will allow tests of the accuracy of estimates of protein sequence
              divergence collected by the quantitative immunological technique of
              microcomplement fixation (MC'F).  Such immunological data have been used to
              explore relationships within the Holarctic hylids and also within all major
              tetrapod lineages, as well as to investigate historical processes such as
              speciation.  This study will permit evaluation of both Holarctic frog
              relationships and the accuracy of MC'F estimates of sequence divergence and,
              consequently, assessment of the reliability of the many studies in which MC'F
              has been employed.
