Title       : Structure and Function of a Chloroplast Processing Enzyme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1996   
File        : a9407739

Award Number: 9407739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gayle K. Lamppa gklamppa@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407739  Lamppa     Most of the proteins of the chloroplast are encoded by  the
              nuclear genome, synthesized as precursor polypeptides in  the cytoplasm and
              subsequently imported into the organelle.  Although an outline of the pathway
              of protein import is  known, the mechanism underlying each step is not well- 
              understood.  The long term goal of this project is to  elucidate at the
              molecular level the components involved in  individual steps of the pathway and
              how they function.  The  project focuses on the proteolytic processing enzyme
              that is  responsible for precursor maturation.  Processing enzymes  play a
              critical role in organelle biogenesis; they are  responsible for the
              proteolytic removal of the N-terminal  transit peptide from the precursor,
              releasing the mature  protein.  In peas, two proteins of 145 and 143 kD
              co-purify  with an activity that cleaves the precursor for the major 
              light-harvesting chlorophyll protein (LHCP).  The processing  enzyme appears to
              be responsible for the maturation of other  proteins as well, including the
              small subunit of Rubisco and  the acyl carrier protein.  Using antibodies
              raised against  the 145/143 kD proteins, genes will be isolated by 
              immunoscreening a cDNA expression library in order to  determine the primary
              sturcture of the chloroplast  processing enzyme (CPE), both in peas and in the
              model plant  Arabidopsis.  CPE will be synthesized in E. coli, and  isolated
              under conditions to recover an active enzyme, or  synthesized in vitro.  The
              mechanism of precursor  recognition and cleavage will be investigated by in
              vitro  binding assays and mutational analyses.  Peptides  corresponding to
              regions of the transit peptide will be  employed in in vitro competition
              experiments to determine if  they inhibit processing.  The pattern of
              expression of CPE  during development and in response to light will be explored
               at the transcript, protein, and enzymatic activity levels in  Arabidopsis. 
              This analysis will reveal the importance of  CPE in different organs , and
              provide information on how its  synthesis is regulated.  CPE activity will be
              downregulated  in Arabidopsis using antisense genes to assess if CPE is  indeed
              a general processing enzyme utilized for the  maturation of a diversity of
              proteins, and thus a key  component of the import machinery.  It will be
              established  how far organelle biogenesis proceeds in the absence of  normal
              levels of CPE and protein complexes that depend on  this enzyme for their
              assembly.  Biochemical and  morphological studies will be performed to monitor
              changes  in plant phenotype.  %%%  The chloroplast is the plant organelle which
              is responsible  for photosynthesis, the process whereby sunlight is  converted
              to biologically usable chemical energy.  The  activity of the chloroplast is
              thus the key biological  function underpinning life as we know it on earth. 
              Understanding how the chloroplast works is of major  importance to agricultural
              biotechnology, since such  understanding is absolutely  prerequisite to any
              efforts to  enhance food production by plants through chloroplast  manipulation
              by bioengineering methodologies.  This project  addresses how the proteins of
              the chloroplast, most of which  are synthesized in the cytoplasm, get into the
              chloroplast.  It is already well established that the chloroplast protein 
              import process involves a transit peptide extension on the  incoming proteins
              which are required for import, and that  the newly-imported proteins lose their
              transit peptides  through the action of a processing protease inside the 
              chloroplast.  However, although the general pattern of how  proteins get into
              the chloroplast is understood, very little  is yet known about the actual
              biochemical machinery of the  process.  The specific focus of this project is
              the  processing protease.  A candidate protease has been  identified in
              chloroplasts of pea.  This enzyme will be  studied using biochemical, cell
              biological, and genetic  approaches, to learn how it functions in terms of its
              role  in protein im port, and also to learn its significance for  the biology
              of whole plants.  The biochemical and cell  biological approaches will be
              carried out using pea  chloroplasts, and the genetic and whole plant
              developmental  studies will be carried out in the model flowering plant, 
              Arabidopsis.  The results of these studies will lead to a  greater
              understanding of both the machinery of chloroplast  protein import and the role
              of that machinery in the  development and physiological function of whole
              plants, and  thus will be of great significance to agricultural  biotechnology.
               ***
