Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Improved Algorithms for Functional Analysis of Genomic
               Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9407039

Award Number: 9407039
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64040              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane L. Souvaine   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Farach-Colton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9407039  Souvaine       Computational techniques are needed to assist in the
              analysis of  genomic information to determine structural and functional
              properties  of the genome.  An example is the problem of differential gene 
              expression.  The identification of genes expressed differently in  different
              states of a disease is essential for the characterization  and classification
              of the biological and clinical behavior of the  disease.  Algorithms are needed
              to accurately and efficiently compare  "gene fingerprints" in order to provide
              detailed quantitative  information on differential gene expression.  To devise
              such  algorithms, it will be necessary to provide both useful data  structures
              for representing fingerprints and comparison algorithms to  determine the
              essential differences and similarities between two  fingerprints.  I propose to
              develop and implement such data  structures and algorithms, as well as
              investigate other mathematical  and computational problems that arise in the
              analysis of genomic  function.       The first year of the proposed fellowship
              will be a DIMACS  "special year" in Mathematical Support for Molecular Biology.
               As  part of this special year, DIMACS will be holding a 25-month  intensive
              training plan for its postdoctoral associates.  This  training plan will
              include ongoing mentoring biology seminars,  tutorials and courses, and visits
              to the Waksman Institute of  Molecular Genetics at Rutgers and the NSF Science
              and Technology  Center for Molecular Biotechnology at the University of
              Washington.  In addition to the postdoctoral training plan, the special year
              will  involve a distinguished lecture series, a seminar series, workshops  and
              mini-workshops, and ongoing discussion and collaboration between  the
              postdoctoral associates, graduate students, and long- and short-  term visitors
              to DIMACS.  While the training provided by CuraGen will  be less organized than
              the training provided by DIMACS, it will be  equally valuable, and will consist
              of day-to-day contact with   CuraGen's molecular biologists and physical
              scientists, as well as  unlimited access to the biology and instrumentation
              laboratories.
