Title       : RUI: "Remote Sensing Methane Emissions from Typha Wetlands"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9407216

Award Number: 9407216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Hardisky hardiskym1@uofs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Scranton
	      Linden Street and Monroe
	      Scranton, PA  18510    717/961-7400

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1325,9178,9229,9251,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hardisky  Rooted macrophytes  are key mediators of methane efflux from wetland
              sediments to the atmosphere.  Reduced carbon compounds released upon senescence
              of plant roots provide carbon substrates for a series of anoxic degradation's
              culminating in the production of methane within the sediment.  Diffusion of
              methane into the apoplastic pathways within the plant, facilitate the movement
              of methane via aerenchyma tissues, through the plant and ultimately to the
              atmosphere.  The critical boundary controlling both the release of carbon
              compounds to the sediment and diffusion of methane into the vascular plant is
              the root surface / sediment interface.  This research will address the effects
              of various quantities and types of root biomass upon the efflux of methane from
              Typha marshes.  To this end, we have proposed to plant natural mesocosms of
              Typha at four different densities and determine resulting differences in pore
              water methane and methane flux.    The oxidizing/reducing nature of the edaphic
              environment is a second critical factor in controlling the rate of methane
              flux.  We are proposing to investigate an existing hydrologic gradient where
              water table depth and Typha canopies vary from an open pool to the upland. 
              Superimposed upon this gradient will be planned alterations in the water
              available to the marsh, creating the opportunity to investigate short term
              effects of water table fluctuations upon methane flux.    Crucial to our
              understanding of the impacts of global climatic change is an ability to assess
              the impacts of change at the ecosystem level.  Our most viable option for such
              study is through the use of remote sensing data.  Our proposed research will
              relate canopy biophysical properties to canopy reflectance measures with
              ground-based instrumentation.  We will in turn relate root biomass, pore water
              methane concentrations and methane flux to canopy reflectance.  These
              ground-based models will then be used to quantitatively assess satellite (TM or
              XS) data and provide a methodolo gy capable of large area methane flux
              estimation.
