Title       : The Physical Origin of Initial Discharge Processes in Lightning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1996   
File        : a9407085

Award Number: 9407085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352373             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ewen M. Thomson thomson@ece.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9407085  Thomson, Ewen M.  University of Florida  Title:    The
              Physical Origin of Initial Discharge Processes in            Lighting   
              Transient electric fields have been recorded in a 800 Hz to 5 MHz  bandwidth at
              four to five stations at Kennedy Space Center since  October 1991.  These
              fields are radiated from lighting and other  electrical processes of a much
              smaller scale than lighting.  The  primary focus of this proposal is the
              analysis of these data to  establish the physical origin of their sources, with
              an emphasis on  the initial discharge processes in lighting and the initial 
              lightings in a cell.     According to recent theory that employs a
              transmission-line model,  four electric field measurements on a sub-microsecond
              time scale  can be processed to give the three-dimisional location, vector 
              velocity, and peak current of an in-cloud source.  Wideband  electric fields
              pulses are associated with both step formation in  streamers and the
              propagation of large current pulse downs ionized  channels.  The objective of
              the modeling is to characterize  physically the sources of processes that
              previouly have been  characterize only in terms of features of their electric
              field  waveshapes.  This will enable us to investigate the physical origin  of
              processes that produce large microsecond-scale electric field  pulses.    Or
              particular importance are the sources of wideband electric field  that occur in
              the initial stages of lighting, since these are most  likely to reflect the
              pre-existing thunderstorm charge, and the  initial lightings in a cell, since
              these are a manifestation of the  thunderstorm charge generator.  Our analysis
              will result in the  physical characterization of the bipolar pulses that have
              been  detected in the early stages of both intracloud and cloud-to-ground 
              flashes, narrow bipolar pulses that may result from a discharge of  much
              smaller extent than typical lighting, early stepped leader  steps, and sources,
              and sources of fine structure in first return   strokes.
