Title       : RPG: Pollinator-Mediated Selection on Flower Color in Snapdragons (Antirrhinum:
               Scrophulariaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1994        
File        : a9407790

Award Number: 9407790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristina N. Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9221,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407790  Jones   Pollinators can strongly influence the reproductive success of
              the plants they visit.  Floral variation is therefore subject to natural
              selection mediated by pollinator behavior.  Theoretical models have shown how
              selection on fertility can affect the relative frequencies of alternative
              alleles from one generation to the next in idealized situations.  Many field
              studies have indicated that pollinator visitation patterns are correlated with
              male and/or female plant reproductive success.  However, theory and empirical
              work have not yet been put together to predict accurately the precise outcome
              of pollinator-mediated selection for the next generation of plants.  Close
              examination of the microevolution of a single trait will yield insights into
              the mechanisms of selection by pollinators on plant populations.  Are male and
              female components of reproductive success equally responsible for differential
              fitness of two floral phenotypes?  Would a favored trait increase more quickly
              in frequency if it is controlled by a dominant or a recessive allele?  Is
              selection dependent on the relative frequencies of the floral phenotypes in a
              population?  The purpose of the PI's research is to address these questions
              about pollinator-mediated selection on single-locus floral traits.   The
              planning activities described in this proposal will address several important
              questions before the long-term experiments begin.  First, the PI will determine
              the feasibility of using pollinator observations and/or indirect measures of
              pollen movement to estimate the relative reproductive success of the color
              morphs and the pattern of mating (random or non-random) with respect to the
              polymorphism.  The preliminary experiments will investigate: 1) whether there
              are phenotypic differences other than flower color between the genotypes that
              might affect pollinator behavior or plant fitness; 2) what the relationships
              are between pollinator visitation and pollen export and receipt for
              snapdragons, and 3) whether there ar e any postpollination processes
              (fertilization or seed maturation) that are nonrandom with respect to genotype
              and therefore need to be taken into account in the selection model.  The
              snapdragon-bumblebee interaction appears to be an excellent system for the
              study of pollinator-mediated selection.  Investigation of these important
              preliminary questions will determine exactly how the selection experiments will
              proceed.
