Title       : Regulation of the Growth and Activity of Leaf-Decomposing Fungi by Dissolved
               Nutrients (N and P) in Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1994  
File        : a9407232

Award Number: 9407232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keller Suberkropp ksuberkp@biology.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407232  Subberkropp   This study is designed to examine the role of dissolved
              nutrients (N and P) in regulating the growth and activity of leaf-decomposing
              stream fungi. Most quantitative studies of stream fungal communities have
              occurred in streams with high nutrient concentrations. Consequently, little is
              known concerning fungal activities in streams with low nutrient concentrations
              even though much of our current understanding of stream ecosystem function has
              come from studies of such systems. Rates of fungal growth and sporulation,
              concentrations of fungal biomass and fungal production in both hardwater and
              softwater streams with very low nutrient concentrations will be determined and
              compared with similar data from streams containing higher nutrient
              concentrations. Recently, a method for estimating instantaneous growth rates of
              natural fungal communities by determining rates of incorporation of 14C-acetate
              into ergosterol has been described. This method has been adapted for use with
              stream fungal communities and will be used on decomposing leaf litter in the
              study streams. These data, together with determination of ergosterol contents
              as a measure of fungal biomass will allow estimation of fungal production
              during leaf degradation and in streams over an annual cycle. Both types of
              production estimates will be used in the comparative studies mentioned above.
              The effects of N and P will be measured directly in field experiments in which
              water flowing through streamside artificial channels will be amended with N, P
              or both nutrients and the response of fungal communities determined. Organic
              matter budgets for fungal isolates from nutrient poor and nutrient rich streams
              growing on leaf litter in environmental simulating laboratory studies will be
              constructed to determine if fungi exhibit different strategies of resource
              allocation in response to varying nutrient concentrations.  %%%  This project
              will provide the first research effort concentrating on the role of nutrient
              limitation of fungal  community structure and biomass in streams. The PI will
              be using a novel technique to measure fungal growth rates and community
              structure.
