Title       : Are enzymes of the oxidative limb of the Pentose Phosphate Pathway in soybean
               nodules organized in a macro molecular complex?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9407122

Award Number: 9407122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel H. Kohl kohl@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Georgia B. Shearer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9407122  Kohl  The oxidative limb of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) in the 
              cytoplasm of soybean nodules may be an important source of ribose- 
              5-phosphate, the starting point for the synthesis of ureades and  the form in
              which biologically fixed nitrogen is exported from the  nodule to the whole
              plant.  Results with soybean suggesting that  glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) in
              nodule extract is not in equilibrium  with the concentration of G6P in bulk
              medium, and that half of the  PPP activity precipitates at a relatively modest
              centrifugal force  (290,000 x g) have led to the proposition that the PPP
              functions as  a macromolecular complex (metabolon).  Within this metabolon, PPP
               intermediates are channeled from one enzyme to the next.  Examples  of
              metabolic channeling in other systems has proved to be important  in conserving
              the limited solvent capacity of cell water,  protecting intermediates which are
              unstable if not enzyme bound,  and maintaining metabolite concentration
              gradients inside cells.   If our hypothesis is correct about PPP channeling,
              this example of  "channeling" would contribute not only to understanding about 
              nodule metabolism but also to understanding pentose phosphate  metabolism in
              other plant and animal cells.  Several approaches  will be used to investigate
              the idea of PPP channeling including  (i) determining which PPP intermediates
              are out of equilibrium with  their counterparts in the bulk medium, (ii)
              measuring  "metabolon"  size via its centrifugal and gel filtration behavior,
              and (iii)  comparing the kinetics of pathway function by metabolons vs. 
              "collections" of dissociated enzymes.  %%%  Metabolic pathways consist of a
              series of reactions, each catalyzed  by a specific enzyme.  The product of one
              reaction becomes the  substrate (food) of the next enzyme until a final product
              is  formed.  In some cases, the enzymes of a pathway are associated  with each
              other such that the product of one reaction does not  leave the site of
              "formation."  In this way product(s) m ay be  "channeled" directly from one
              enzyme to another.  When this  happens, channeling can be important in
              improving metaboliic  efficiency by speeding up a series of reactions and
              protecting  certain unstable intermediates on the way to a final product.  Work
               in this laboratory has led to the hypothesis that enzymes of the  pentose
              phosphate pathway, a key pathway in carbohydrate formation,  operates as a
              macromolecular complex to channel intermediates from  one enzyme to the next. 
              The present work will test this idea and  add to the body of evidence that
              similar enzyme arrangements occur  in the metabolic pathways of other cells as
              well.   ***
