Title       : Videomicroscopy and Microinjection Studies of Maize Meiocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1996     
File        : a9407867

Award Number: 9407867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Wick swick@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9161,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407867  Wick     This is a Career Advancement Award to support research 
              activities during Dr. Wick's sabbatical.   The aim of the  project is to
              develop maize meiocytes as a useful system for  studying the dynamics of
              cytoskeletal elements during  meiosis.  In collaboration with her sabbatical
              hosts, the PI  will establish a culture system for maize meiocytes that  will
              allow their observation by differential interference  microscopy in the living
              state as the cells undergo meiosis.  Specific antibodies will be microinjected,
              or specific  reagents known to disrupt microtubules or actin  microfilaments
              will be applied to the cells, and the effects  of these perturbants on meiosis,
              division plane  determination, and cytokinesis in wild-type and male-sterile 
              mutant maize will be assessed.  %%%  This is a Career Advancement Award to
              support research  activities during Dr. Wick's sabbatical.  The process of 
              meiosis, or "reduction division," is critically important to  sexual
              reproduction in eukaryotes, but is very poorly  understood.  Meiosis is a
              specialized , complex, multi-step  type of cellular division, in which a
              diploid cell gives  rise to a haploid gamete.   In this process, the genetic 
              material of the diploid progenitor cell, which is present as  pairs of
              chromosomes one each of which was originally  derived from each parental
              gamete, is very accurately split  into two separate but functionally equivalent
              portions, each  portion containing one each of each of the pairs.  The 
              ultimate fate of the resulting gamete is sexual union with  the corresponding
              other-sex gamete, to give rise to a new  diploid zygote which then develops
              into a new organism.  In  this project, the model organism under study is maize
               (corn), which is not only a potentially useful model system  for higher plant
              meiosis in general, but is in its own right  an important subject of study
              given the agricultural and  nutritional significance of hybrid corn.  The
              experiments  proposed will provide important insights into  the cellular 
              mechanisms whereby the meiotic chromosomes are separated  from each other.  ***
