Title       : Information Processing in Social Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1994     
File        : a9407058

Award Number: 9407058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Wyer 2173338130  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9407058  Wyer                              ABSTRACT         This research is
              part of a continuing investigation of  the cognitive processes that mediate the
              use of information about  people and events to make social judgments and
              decisions.  Previous research has focused largely on the interpretation of  and
              reactions to information that is presented out of its social  context.
              Consequently, the factors that underlie the  comprehension of and reactions to
              information that is exchanged  in a conversation or in other social situations
              are not well  understood. The present research addresses this question by 
              investigating the determinants of reactions to a particular type  of social
              information-- that which is intended to elicit humor.   Specifically, the
              conditions in which such information has the  intended effect as opposed to
              eliciting other types of reactions  (anger, confusion, or no reaction at all)
              will be investigated.  The results will contribute to the understanding of
              those factors  that underlie the identification of statements as witticisms 
              rather than serious attempts to criticize or to convey hostility  or prejudice.
              In its initial stages, (1) the cognitive processes  that underlie the
              comprehension of jokes will be identified, and  the situational, informational
              and individual difference  variables that influence these processes will be
              examined. Then,  (2) the processes that underlie the identification of
              witticisms  of the sort that occur in conversations will be investigated. In 
              later phases of the research, the factors that govern the  communication and
              identification of humor in actual social  interaction situations will be
              determined.        When information is exchanged in a conversation or in other 
              social situations, its interpretation depends partly on  perceptions of why the
              information is being conveyed (to  persuade, to criticize, to entertain, to
              tease, or simply to  transmit new knowledge). It also depends on recipients'
              prior  knowledge about the referent of the  information, other  communications
              about the referent that have preceded it, and the  communication's source.
              Depending on this knowledge, information  can elicit several different
              reactions--anger, sadness, or  amusement. The factors that determine whether
              communications,  such as sexist or ethnic stories and comments, provoke anger 
              rather than amusement are poorly understood. Yet, the nature of  these
              reactions can be an important mediator of attitudes toward  both the referent
              of the communications and their source.  In  addition to its theoretical
              implications for an understanding of  humor elicitation and social perceptions,
              the results of this  research will contribute to the understanding of how to
              minimize  miscommunication in social interactions.   ***
