Title       : Resource Competition Between Rotifers in a Variable Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9407241

Award Number: 9407241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin L. Kirk klkirk@jupiter.nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to experimentally investigate the effects of
              temporal variation in resource supply on the outcome and dynamics of
              competition between consumers. The proposed research would use planktonic
              rotifers (small, multicellular zooplankton) as model systems. Experiments would
              test the predictions that temporal variation in resource supply changes
              competitive outcome, slows the rate of competition exclusion, and allows
              competing species to coexist. These experiments would go beyond existing
              experimental studies by combining the following aspects: (1) using
              multicellular organisms instead of microbes, (2) using a temporal pattern of
              resource supply that is more realistic than that used in previous experiments,
              (3) measuring the effect of temporal variation in resource supply on the
              threshold resource concentration for positive population growth, and (4)
              predicting changes in competitive outcome, dynamics, and species diversity at
              different scales of temporal variation.   %%%  The question of the maintenance
              of species diversity in natural systems has intrigued ecologists throughout
              this century. Many theories have been proposed, but few are tested or testable.
              The notion that resources and resource competition controls community structure
              is compelling, but nature is highly variable. This is the first study to
              adequately test the role of resource variation in maintaining species diversity
              in communities. The results of this work will have important implications for
              understanding mechanisms controlling biodiversity in aquatic and terrestrial
              systems.
