Title       : Molecular Genetic and Cellular Analysis of Light Response inMaize Leaf Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1994       
File        : a9407834

Award Number: 9407834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jen Sheen sheen@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407834  Sheen    Light regulates many aspects of plant growth and development 
              among which the conversion of dark-grown etiolated leaves to  photosynthetic
              competent green leaves (greening) is most  essential to plant life and best
              documented in higher  plants.  Although both red and blue light photoreceptors,
               phytochrome and cryptochrome, have been implicated in light  signal
              perception, very little is known about the molecular  basis of the
              intracellular signal transduction pathways  mediating the light-inducible
              developmental processes marked  by chlorophyll accumulation and photosynthetic
              gene  activation.  We are interested in elucidating the molecular  mechanisms
              mediating light responses in leaf cells by  combining the genetic power with
              other biochemical, cellular  and molecular approaches offered by the maize
              experimental  system.  We will investigate systematically maize mutants  that
              are defective in light-inducible gene expression and  chloroplast biogenesis. 
              A versatile and powerful singlecell  transient expression system will be used
              to clone and  characterize regulatory genes controlling light-inducible  gene
              expression and chloroplast biogenesis which are cell  autonomous activities. 
              The studies will facilitate our  understanding of photosynthetic functions and
              signal  transduction in higher plants.  %%%  Light regulates many aspects of
              plant growth and development  among which the conversion of dark-grown
              etiolated leaves to  photosynthetic competent green leaves (greening) is most 
              essential to plant life and best documented in higher  plants.  Although both
              red and blue light photoreceptors,  phytochrome and cryptochrome, have been
              implicated in light  signal perception, very little is known about the
              molecular  basis of the intracellular signal transduction pathways  mediating
              the light-inducible developmental processes marked  by chlorophyll accumulation
              and photosynthetic gene  activation.  We are interested in elucidating the
              molecular  mechanisms mediating light respo nses in leaf cells by  combining
              the genetic power with other biochemical, cellular  and molecular approaches
              offered by the maize experimental  system.  We are planning to analyze
              systematically the  existing maize photosynthetic mutants by RT-PCR and 
              protoplast transient expression assays.  We will make  expression cDNA library
              and conduct pilot experiments to  explore the possibility of complementing
              mutants using the  protoplast transient expression assay.  New cell surface 
              reporter genes and fluorescence activated protoplast sorting  techniques which
              offer the efficiency and high resolution  for expression cloning and mutant
              complementation will be  tested. It is likely that the system will serve as an 
              excellent tool to unravel unexpected new insights into the  molecular
              mechanisms of light signal transduction and gene  regulation in higher plants. 
              ***
