Title       : Systematics, Cytogenetics and Life Histories of Nearctic Blepharicera (Diptera:
               Blephariceridae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9407153

Award Number: 9407153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Courtney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/336-7105

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9407153  Courtney   Net-winged midges (Diptera: Blephariceridae) are a
              distinctive, specialized, and unusual group of insects.  The group has a
              world-wide distribution and includes approximately 300 described species. 
              Because of their unusual morphology and intimate association with clean, cold,
              rapidly flowing streams, net-winged midges have been of interest to
              morphologists, systematists, and ecologists; yet these flies are one of the
              most under-appreciated groups of aquatic insects.  Recent studies have shown
              that the larvae of these insects are significant to stream ecosystems, not only
              as consumers of algae but also as food for vertebrate predators (e.g. trout). 
              Because net-winged midges are a diverse, widespread group with individuals
              short-lived and closely associated with mountain streams, their patterns of
              speciation and distribution should closely reflect historical events (e.g.
              mountain building, glaciation).  These attributes make net-winged midges a
              model taxon for studies of the relationships and biogeography of montane and
              aquatic organisms.   This study of the systematics, cytogenetics, and life
              histories of North American species in the genus Blepharicera will 1) examine
              the taxonomy, relationships and biogeography of native species; 2) analyze the
              chromosomes of Blepharicera populations for relationships and cryptic or
              sibling species; 3) test for congruence between chromosomal and traditional
              morphological characters; and 4) compare and contrast the life histories of
              North American Belpharicera, in order to identify isolating mechanisms in
              species and sibling species.  By incorporating all of these objectives into a
              single investigation, this will be one of the most comprehensive systematic
              studies of any group of aquatic flies.   The significance of this research
              extends well beyond systematics, genetics, and ecology of an unusual group of
              aquatic flies.  Because of their dependence on cold, clean, well-oxygenated
              water, net-winged midges hold considerable promise as bioind icators of stream
              quality.  However, such determinations require baseline information on
              biodiversity, distribution and biology of net-winged midges and associated
              organisms.  This study will provide these data and identify sites of taxonomic
              and biogeographic significance.  Simultaneously, the results of this study will
              provide insights into management and conservation practices for mountain
              streams in North America.
