Title       : Direct and Indirect Effects of Foliar Herbivory on Floral Traits, Insect
               Pollination, and Male and Female Plant Fitness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9407362

Award Number: 9407362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195914             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon Y. Strauss systrauss@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407362  Strauss/Conner       The main goal of this work is to  examine how
              damage by  herbivores affects both male plant fitness (number of seeds sired) 
              and female fitness (number of seeds produced) simultaneously.   Results from
              these experiments will contribute to several areas of  cmntroversy, and will
              provide a new angle to examining the  relationships between plants, herbivores
              and pollinators.  One  controversy is how some plants seem to be able to
              compensate  completely for herbivory in terms of plant fitness.  Fitness has 
              classically been estimated through seed production in plants, but  the approach
              taken here will examine total plant fitness.   Preliminary data suggest that
              plants may shift allocation from  aspects of male fitness (pollen, nectar and
              petal production) to  female fitness (seed production).  Because of these
              shifts, plants  may not truly compensate for leaf damage, since the number of
              seeds  sired by damaged plants may be reduced, even if total seed number 
              remains the same.  This proposal also contributes to current theory  by linking
              the processes involved with pollination to those with  herbivory.  For example,
              if damaged plants have lower fitness  because they are less attractive to
              pollinators, then natural  selection may act on plant response to damage.  In
              particular, the  needs of pollinators, either through rewards or through
              required  cues, may shape how plants allocate resources for damage.  The  kinds
              of effective pollinator species and their needs may determine  whether damaged
              plants produce fewer flowers of equal quality, or  whether they produce as many
              flowers as undamaged plants, but some  of lower quality (i.e., smaller, with
              fewer rewards).  These are  exciting new areas that merit further
              investigation.       One goal of this work is to determine the degree to which
              male  versus female fitness in plants is affected by herbivory to leaves.  
              Many crop plants suffer reduced yield as a result of leaf damage.   It is
              generally assumed that reduced yie ld in herbaceous crops is  a result of fewer
              resources available to plants (through loss of  leaf area) rather than the
              result of diminished pollination  (although orchard growers have known for
              years of the importance of  good pollination).  results from this work may
              elucidate more  clearly the mechanisms through which herbivory reduces yield. 
              This  research may indicate that for a given level of damage, crop  quantity or
              quality could be better improved by increasing  pollinator visitation rather
              than by reducing leaf area lost to  herbivores.  Spraying plants with
              pollinator attractants (e.g.,  products like "Bee Scent") may improve yield
              more than by spraying  with pesticides, especially since pesticides can be
              toxic to  beneficial insects.  This research may suggest an alternative or 
              supplement to pesticides.
