Title       : U.S.-Hungary Developmental Research Efforts: Biodiversity and Long-Term
               Ecosystem Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1996      
File        : a9407794

Award Number: 9407794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102255             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana H. Wall diana@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra P. Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 5916,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407794  Freckman    This U.S.-Hungary developmental effort will create new
              links  among a broad community of ecosystem specialists in the United  States
              and Hungarian specialists in taxonomic biological surveys.  The intent is to
              broaden the NSF supported activities at Long  Term Ecological Research (LTER)
              sites through an extended  international network with sites in Eastern Europe,
              beginning  with Hungary.  Dr. Diana W. Freckman of Colorado State University 
              will serve as the U.S. principal investigator.  Her Hungarian  counterpart will
              be Dr. Edit Kovacs-Lang at the Institute of  Ecology and Botany of the
              Hungarian Academy of Sciences.    Together they will organize a series of
              interactive visits. The  first will bring LTER scientists to Hungary to examine
              sites  which possess extensive biological surveys and long-term data  sets of
              species assemblages.  U.S. and Hungarian researchers will  discuss methods for
              collecting and organizing this wealth of  biodiversity data.  A second visit
              will bring Hungarian  counterparts to LTER sites to discuss methods of managing
              such  vast sources of long-term ecological data.  The final visit will  bring
              the U.S. and Hungarian participants together for a workshop  in Hungary to
              formulate plans for collaborative, long-term  research in biodiversity that
              will draw upon the strengths of  both communities.  Results are expected to
              build considerable  impetus for integrating biodiversity research with ongoing 
              research at LTER sites and to lead to a strengthened capacity for 
              international comparisons for study of global problems.    These developmental
              ecological exchanges fulfill the program  objective of advancing scientific
              knowledge by enabling leading  experts in the United States and Eastern Europe
              to combine  complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of 
              strong mutual interest and competence.  ***
