Title       : Ecological and Quantitative Genetics of Growth and Growth Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9407844

Award Number: 9407844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stevan J. Arnold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Arnold  9407844   This project explores the nature of variation among different
              populations of the mountain dusky salamander along an elevational cline in the
              southern Appalachian mountains.  Two populations that have been studied show
              pronounced differences in many life history characters such as body size, egg
              size, and clutch size.  Such patterns are extremely common in a wide diversity
              of animals, but ecologists know surprisingly little about the underlying
              reasons for this clinical variation.  Previous work suggests that the early
              life stages of these salamanders seem to be the most sensitive to variation in
              local habitats.  For example, the harsh winters of high elevation sites are
              thought to exact a far more severe toll on larval growth rates than low
              elevations sites.  The goal of this study is to rigorously study the possible
              ways in which these differences in the habitat may contribute to the overall
              patterns that have been observed.  Concomitantly, it will be possible to
              critically explore various ways in which the salamanders are moved between
              habitats, after which their growth will be monitored in each habitat.   In
              general this work will be of interest to biologists who will study clinical
              variation.  One potential applied use of this research is to understand how
              organisms such as these salamanders will respond to global warming.  This is,
              by studying the ways in which salamanders have already responded to clinically
              varying temperature and habitat differences, it will be possible to gain
              insights into the more general issue of how warmer and drier climates will
              influence the survival and distribution of many species.  This information, in
              turn, is highly relevant to attempts to manage biological diversity in the
              richly diverse southern Appalachians, much of which is held in the National
              Parks and National Forests.
