Title       : Molecular Phylogenetic Studies of Parasitic Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9407984

Award Number: 9407984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Nickrent nickrent@plant.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407984  Nickrent       A diverse group of flowering plants, through the course
              of  their evolution, has become parasitic on other plants.  These  include the
              familiar Christmas mistletoe and sandalwood as well as  less familiar plants
              such as Rafflesia, known for producing the  largest blossom among all flowering
              plants (one meter in diameter).   Some plant parasites (so-called
              holoparasites) have lost their  ability to make nutrients via photosynthesis
              and must rely entirely  upon their host for nutrition.  Loss of photosynthesis
              has occurred  because genes required for this process that reside on the 
              chloroplast have been mutated or lost.  One goal of the project is  to
              determine which such genes are present or absent on the  chloroplast of several
              holoparasites.  Although chloroplast genes  have proven especially useful in
              resolving phylogenetic  relationships among many flowering plants, such genes
              may not be  present in the holoparasites.  For this reason, alternate nuclear 
              ribosomal genes are being analyzed and sequenced.  Preliminary data  show high
              rates of mutational change in ribosomal genes of several  parasites, indicating
              that these sources will prove useful in  examining genus and family level
              relationships.       Because ribosomal DNA is essential for protein synthesis,
              high  levels of mutational change in holoparasitic plants should provide 
              insight to structural and functional constraints on protein-related 
              physiologies in these plants.  As well, the nuclear DNA characters,  and where
              available the chloroplast data, will help answer  questions about the
              genealogical affinities of various parasitic  plants with reduced morphologies.
