Title       : Protein Phosphatases: 1994 FASEB Conference to be held July 17-22, 1994, Copper
               Mountain Resort, Copper Mountain, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9407321

Award Number: 9407321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Brautigan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Mumby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407321  Brautigan    This grant will provide partial support for the third
              FASEB summer conference on Protein  Phosphatases.  Research on protein
              phosphatases is proceeding at a brisk pace, revealing the  fundamental
              importance and unexpected complexity of these enzymes in the signal
              transduction  pathways that govern cell growth, structure and metabolism. 
              Within the past year dozens of new  phosphatases and phosphatase regulatory
              subunits have been cloned.  Now there is appreciation  that protein
              phosphatases initiate important intracellular events such as G2 to M
              progression in  the cell cycle.  Particular phosphatases already have been
              identified as the targets for natural  toxins such as microcystius and
              cantharidin.  Like other FASEB summer conferences this meeting  will select
              about 150 participants from applications, including representatives from
              industry and  academia, including senior scientists, postdocs, and graduate
              students.  There is a constant  infusion of new researchers into this area and
              the 1994 conference will be important for a  focused, yet comprehensive,
              introduction to the genetics, biochemistry, and cell biology of protein 
              phosphatases.  The conference will consist of eight sessions, each with a
              discussion leader and  four speakers who will be selected from investigators
              that have made important recent  contributions.  In addition, two poster
              sessions will be organized, with published abstracts.  At  the prior conference
              on this subject more than eighty posters were presented for two days, each 
              providing an important format for scientific exchanges.  Inclusion of women,
              minorities, and  students as speakers and participants is a special priority. 
              The 1994 summer conference on  Protein Phosphatases will orient new
              researchers, disseminate current information and identify  areas for
              investigations.  ***
