Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships of Birds to Other Dinosaurs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1997       
File        : a9407999

Award Number: 9407999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Norell norell@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis M. Chiappe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9407999  Norell  Four field seasons of fossil collecting in Late Cretaceous
              deposits of Mongolia by joint expeditions of the American Museum of Natural
              History and the Mongolian Academy of Sciences amassed a large collection of
              theropod dinosaur skeletons, including taxa considered to be among the closest
              relatives of birds.  This collection and the vast dinosaur collections of the
              American Museum are the focus of a proposed analysis assessing the
              relationships of birds to other theropod dinosaurs.  Emphasis will be placed on
              developing new character systems in the skull based on CAT scan images.   
              Evidence for the hypothesis that birds are most closely related to theropod
              dinosaurs, and indeed are theropod dinosaurs, has rapidly mounted during the
              last decade.  However, the precise relationships of birds to theropod dinosaurs
              is controversial, as are the relationships among the most primitive birds.  A
              great deal of evidence relevant to these questions exists but can only be made
              available by CAT scans and manual preparation of fossils followed by comparison
              with other specimens widely scattered in museums around the world.  The
              anatomical details elucidated by this study and the historical hypotheses it
              generates will provide a solid foundation for studies of bird origins and the
              origin of avian flight.
