Title       : Lipid Metabolism and Photosynthesis in Fatty Acid Mutants ofArabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9407902

Award Number: 9407902
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $518192             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Browse jab@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Kahn  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                          9407902  Browse  The acyl lipids of chloroplasts contain
              characteristically high  proportions of trienoic fatty acids.  However, the
              free radical by-  products of the photosynthetic light reactions can lead to 
              oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids.  Because this might be  expected to
              mediate against a high degree of unsaturation, it has  been inferred that
              trienoic fatty acids must have some crucial role  in supporting photosynthesis.
               Other unusual lipid features typical  of chloroplasts have provoked similar
              speculation about membrane  structure and function.  To approach this research
              area in a novel  way, a series of Arabidopsis mutants with specific alterations
              in  leaf fatty acid composition have been isolated.  In the last six  years,
              these have provided a means to study both the synthesis of  chloroplast
              glycerolipids and the physiological significance of  membrane lipid
              composition.  This proposal describes experiments in  which the mutants and the
              desaturase genes will be used together to  produce plant lines with
              progressively more severe alterations in  thylakoid lipid composition.  These
              lines will be studied under a  range of environmental conditions using
              non-invasive chlorophyll  fluorescence techniques, assays of photosynthetic
              electron  transport, and measurements of membrane fluidity.  These  experiments
              will provide data on the minimum levels of particular  fatty acid types that
              are needed to sustain chloroplast function.   They should also reveal which
              photosynthetic processes are most  susceptible to membrane disruption.  The
              improved understanding of  membrane lipid metabolism and photosynthesis that
              will result from  this work are important prerequisites to modifying these
              processes  for increased plant productivity.   ***
