Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Development and Evolution of
               Crustacean Limbs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9407753

Award Number: 9407753
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35570              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri A. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9407753  Williams      This award is under the International Junior Investigator
               and Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S.  scientists and engineers
              to conduct three to twelve months  of research abroad at research centers of
              proven excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint 
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities,  expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Terri A. Williams to work with Dr. Gerd B. 
              Muller at the University of Vienna on the development and  evolution of
              crustacean limbs.    The relationship between the development and evolution of 
              limb morphology has been explored mostly by comparing  cellular mechanisms
              responsible for generating vertebrate  limbs and by dissecting the role of
              patterning molecules in  early Drosophila embryology.  Dr. Williams proposes to
               bridge these two approaches by examining crustacean limb  development.  Little
              is known about the cellular mechanisms  that form limbs in arthropods.  Much of
              the patterning found  in Drosophila may be unique to an animal that undergoes 
              radical change in form and during metamorphosis develops  adult limbs  from
              small pockets of epithelial cells.  She  will look for underlying themes of
              limb development by  directly comparing the cellular mechanisms involved in the
               formation and proliferation of different crustacean limb  morphologies.  ***
