Title       : Biochemical Analysis of the Defective Signaling Pathway in Anergic CD8+ Murine T
               Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9407894

Award Number: 9407894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43392              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela J. Fink   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9125,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407894  Fink    The discovery that tolerance to self antigens encountered in 
              the lymphoid periphery can be induced by rendering self-  reactive T cells
              immunoincompetent has stimulated the  analysis of the signaling machinery in
              these anergic  populations.  The experiments described in this proposal are 
              aimed at understanding the nature of the signaling defects  in a subpopulation
              of murine T cells that has been rendered  refractory to normally stimulatory
              signals.  These T cells  are derived from mice that are transgenic for a T cell
               receptor (TCR)  chain gene whose expression mediates the  recognition of a
              self antigen.  Encounter of the T cell with  this self antigen is unusual in
              that it results in the  downregulation of the cell surface expression of both
              the  TCR and its CD8 coreceptor, and renders these cells  immunoincompetent,
              even upon stimulation by signals not  thought to be affected by receptor
              density.  These studies  are designed to localize the impairment in signaling
              in  anergic cells by analyzing:       (1) their ability to mobilize internal
              calcium stores  in response to antibody-mediated crosslinking of surface TCR 
              molecules       (2) their patterns of tyrosine phosphorylation before  and
              after TCR crosslinking       (3) the mobility shift of the CD8-associated 
              nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinase p56lck upon cell  activation       (4) the
              activity of mitogen-activated protein kinase  upon TCR crosslinking, and      
              (5) the transcriptional activity of the genes encoding  the transcription
              factors c-fos and c-jun upon activation.  %%%  The lymphocyte effector arm of
              the immune system is divided  into two main compartments, B and T Cells.  While
              B cells  make antibody molecules that can recognize soluble foreign  substances
              or antigens, T cells concentrate on cell-bound  antigens using a two chain
              surface receptor (the T cell  receptor or TCR).  Much of T cell differentiation
              takes  place in the thymus, including the induction of self  tolerance, a
              process that often resu lts in the deletion of  thymocytes whose TCRs recognize
              self proteins.  This  distinction between "self" and "nonself" is critical to
              the  functioning of a healthy immune system.  T cell tolerance to  antigens
              expressed outside the thymus can be induced and  maintained by mechanisms in
              addition to clonal deletion.  Encounter of self-reactive T cells with antigens
              in the  lymphoid periphery can render these cells nonfunctional or  "anergic"
              frequently resulting in their elimination.  This  investigator has defined a
              population of relatively long-  lived anergic T cells that can purified from
              murine blood on  the basis of an unusual surface antigen phenotype.  Using 
              this system, she will define the aspects of the complicated  pathways of
              signaling that lead inward from the TCR on the  cell surface that are altered
              in anergic relative to  immunocompetent cells.  These studies are aimed at 
              understanding this nondeletional mechanism for maintaining  self tolerance, and
              why it occasionally fails.  ***
