Title       : The Role of N-terminal Phosphorylation of the Photosystem IIProteins CP-43 and
               D2 as Probed by Site-Directed Mutagenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9407187

Award Number: 9407187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy Putnam-Evans evansc@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9109,9169,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407187  Putnam-Evans     This is a Research Planning Grant.  The project
              focuses  on the production and preliminary characterization of  Synechocystis
              mutants lacking the N-terminal threonine  residues in the Photosystem II
              proteins CP43 and D2.  These  threonine residues are phosphorylated in CP43 and
              D2 in  higher plants.  It is not yet clear what role(s) this  phosphorylation
              may play in PSII function, although a number  of hypotheses have been put
              forward.  The goal of the  project is to determine whether reversible 
              phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of these two proteins is  important to PS II
              function in Synechocystis.  This  cyanobacterium is a well defined genetic
              model system whose  photosystems bear strong homology to those of higher
              plants.  Replacement of endogenous genes with ones that have been  altered by
              various methods is easily accomplished and  provides a means for studying the
              functional role(s) of  individual amino acids or small stretches of amino acids
               within proteins.  The N-terminal threonine residue in both  CP-43 and D2 of
              these proteins is conserved between higher  plants and cyanobacteria. 
              Oligonucleotide-directed  mutagenesis will be employed in vitro to produce
              mutations  in the N-terminal threonine codon in the genes encoding  these
              proteins.  Mutations will be re-introduced into  Synechocystis along with a
              closely linked antibiotic  resistance marker.  Mutants will be screened for
              antibiotic  resistance and possible loss of photoautotrophic growth.  Mutants
              with altered PSII function will be selected and  studied in greater depth.  %%%
               Phosphorylation, or the addition of phosphate groups to  certain serine or
              threonine residues of proteins, is a post-  translational event. 
              Phosphorylation-dephosphorylation  reactions, in general, are means whereby
              cells control the  activity of certain enzymes or structural proteins.  One way
               to determine the role of phosphorylation on the function of  a specific
              protein is to create a variant of the protein  which lacks th e appropriate
              site (i.e., the serine or  threonine residue), by molecular genetic
              manipulation, and  look for alterations in function.  This approach will be 
              used to look at the role of phosphorylation in two proteins  of Photosystem II,
              a multi-protein complex in chloroplasts  which is responsible for the
              photosynthetic reactions that  provide the chemical energy for most of life on
              earth.  If  successful, the results will be provide important  information
              about how cells regulate the photosynthetic  process.  ***
