Title       : Functional Morphology of Aquatic Locomotion in Labrid Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9407253

Award Number: 9407253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Westneat mwestneat@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9407253  Westneat         This project explores the engineering design and
              evolution  of swimming in fishes. This research asks two general questions: 
              What is the engineering design of propulsion systems in fishes in  terms of the
              skeleton, muscles, and tendons? And what patterns of  change have occurred in
              the design of fishes' bodies throughout  evolutionary history? The approach
              used to address these  questions is a combination of anatomy, video analysis,
              computer  modeling, and modern techniques of studying evolution. This  combined
              approach will reveal the mechanics and history of two  locomotor systems in
              fishes: side-to-side locomotion by the tail  and the rowing mode of propulsion
              with the paired fins.       The fishes to be studied in this project are fishes
              of the  family Labridae, which are one of the most diverse species  radiations
              in the oceans of the world. Labrid fishes use multiple  locomotor strategies,
              and they vary in their use of drag-based  and lift-based fin locomotion. A
              central goal of this research is  to develop and test computer models of the
              mechanics  (transmission of force and motion) of the swimming behavior of 
              fishes. Computer models will   use data on anatomical design to  establish the
              geometric relations between muscle contractions and  transmission of force to
              the fins that cause forward thrust.  These prediction are tested by measuring
              swimming in live fishes  using high-speed video analysis.       The
              significance of this research is that it will design  features of aquatic
              locomotion for which no complete mechanical  understanding exists. Mechanical
              testing of fish swimming may  provide practical information for application to
              bio-engineering.  Labrid fishes are indicators of biodiversity on tropical
              coral  reefs, and further understanding of their behavior and function  will
              contribute to our knowledge of high diversity ecosystems.  this project will
              culminate by tracing the evolutionary changes  in locomotor mechanics onto
              hypotheses of labrid evolutio n.  ***
