Title       : Metal binding and oxidation by spore coat proteins of marineBacillus strain SG-1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9407776

Award Number: 9407776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley M. Tebo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9407776  Tebo  Bacteria are known to be important agents in the transformations
              of metals in the environment,  however, in most cases the biochemical
              mechanisms by which metals are transformed are poorly  understood.   This
              proposal focuses on the bacterial oxidation of manganese (Mn) to particulate 
              Mn(III,IV) oxides, mineral phases that adsorb many other metals and which are
              strong oxidants  capable of oxidizing a number of toxic  xenobiotic, aromatic,
              and other organic compounds and  hydrogen sulfide.  Bacillus strain SG-1 is a
              marine bacterium whose spores bind and oxidize Mn.   SG-1 spores also bind
              other heavy metals such as cadmium, zinc and cobalt, the latter of which  it
              also oxidizes.  Because SG-1 is active over a side range of conditions of low
              and high ionic  strength (freshwater and seawater), pH, temperature, and Mn
              concentration (<nM to> mM)  it may also have useful application for a variety
              of different technologies involving metal  precipitation, immobilization and
              recovery.  Thus, this organism is a good model system both  for understanding
              the mechanisms of the biogeochemical cycling of metals in the environment  and
              for studying the potential biotechnological applications of metal precipitation
              by bacteria.   In our previous research with SG-1 we have developed a genetic
              system and have evidence that  Mn(II) oxidation is catalyzed by a spore coat
              protein.  We propose to further characterize the  genes involved in Mn
              oxidation, to isolate the active Mn oxidizing protein and characterize its 
              metal binding and oxidizing properties, and to determine whether the Mn
              oxidation (mnx) genes  we have identified in SG-1 have homologs in other
              Bacillus species or environmental Mn  oxidizing isolates.  The fundamental
              knowledge resulting from these studies may ultimately form  the basis for
              technologies for environmental remediation and metal recovery and recycling. 
              %%%  Metal pollution is frequently a problem in the environment.  unlike many
              other kinds of toxic  substances, metals ca nnot be destroyed, only transformed
              from one form to another.  For most  metals, certain forms are toxic while
              others are either non-toxic or less toxic.  In most cases, it  is the dissolved
              forms of metals that are toxic whereas their solid forms are not.  Bacteria
              transform metals between their various forms.  In some cases these are very
              general  mechanisms not specific to particular metals.  In other cases they are
              highly specific.  It is  important to study the mechanisms bacteria use to
              transform metals to understand the behavior  of metals in the environment and
              ultimately employ bacteria for clean up of metal pollution or  recovery of
              valuable metals.  This proposal focuses on an organism that transforms
              dissolved metals to solid forms.  It is a  marine bacterium that forms spores
              which are dormant seed-like structures.  The spores do the  metal
              transformations and accumulate metals on their cell surfaces.  Because the
              spores are  resistant to many kinds of damage they can capture metals from
              water under a wide range of  conditions making them suitable for environmental
              applications.  In previous work we have  cloned some of the genes involved in
              metal capture.  It appears that a protein on the surface of  the spores is
              responsible.  Such proteins could be genetically engineered for specific
              purposes.   The goal of this research is to isolate and study this protein and
              to learn whether such protein  are found in other bacteria that transform
              metals.  ***
