Title       : LTREB - Long Term Studies of African Lions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9407880

Award Number: 9407880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig Packer packer@biosci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Pusey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9407880  Packer    Over the next decade, the principal investigators will extend
              the long-term ecological, demographic and genealogical records on lions in the
              Serengeti National park and Ngorongoro Crater, Tanzania.  These populations are
              already among the best-studied vertebrates in the world, but lions have long
              life expectancies and lion population size responds slowly to ecological
              perturbation.  Extensionof these records will have three important
              consequences.  First, the relationship between small-scale environmental
              heterogeneity and local carrying capacity will be determined by collecting more
              complete and extensive data on survival, reproduction, and the physical growth
              rates of immatures.  Knowledge of this relationship will make it possible to
              answer a wide variety of research questions, including (a) the role of
              territoriality in lion population regulation, (b) the effects of
              territoriality, familiarity and kinship on female dispersal patterns, (c) the
              extent to which territorial neighbors collude to pre-empt settlement by
              potential newcomers, and (d) the impact of post-reproductive females on the
              reproductive rates of their younger companions.  Second, extending the
              long-term lion study will permit the ongoing monitoring of these populations in
              the face of impending ecological change.  By recording population changes and
              patterns of physical growth, it will be possible to measure the impact of the
              enormous increase in human population around the Serengeti.  Maintenance of the
              data in the Ngorongoro Crater will further  elucidate the consequences of
              chronic inbreeding in a small population.  Continued measurement of both
              populations will be invaluable in monitoring the effects of global climate
              change. Third, by maintaining the long-term records, the PI's and their
              collaborators will be able to incorporate highly detailed background data into
              cross-sectional studies that will receive funding from other sources.  At the
              minimum, these surveys will include studies of host-parasite coe volution,
              endocrinology, and behavior.  Not only will the lion project carry out basic
              research, but it will also have a practical application.  The long-term lion
              data will be incorporated into a new GIS project in the Serengeti along with
              all available data collected by the Serengeti Ecological Monitoring Program.
