Title       : Characterization and Cloning of a Putative Nuclear Receptor from Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9407923

Award Number: 9407923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances M. Sladek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407923  Sladek     This is a Research Planning Grant.  The long term goal of 
              this research is to determine the origins of nuclear  receptors and thereby
              shed light on how this important  family of transcription factors enables a
              cell to respond to  outside stimuli.  The short term goal of the planning 
              activities is to characterize and clone from yeast a  putative nuclear
              receptor.  There are two specific aims:  1,  to purify a factor from
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae that binds  specifically to a known nuclear receptor
              response element,  using conventional and affinity chromatography along with an
               electrophoretic mobility shift assay to purify sufficient  amounts of the
              protein for partial amino acid sequencing;  and 2, to clone the corresponding
              gene from a S. cerevisiae  genomic library, using oligonucleotides derived from
              the  partial amino acid sequence.  %%%  Transcription factors are DNA-binding
              proteins which control  whether or not specific genes are transcribed (active)
              or  not.  Many transcription factors act in response to external  "signals"
              (such as hormones) and represent an important part  of the mechanism whereby an
              organism responds to such  "signals" by turning specific genes on or off.  This
              project  is based on the hypothesis that there exist, in yeast,  transcription
              factors which are dependent on lipophilic  ligands.  Such factors exist in
              higher organisms, and  represent those transcription factors which are
              responsive  to certain lipophilic hormones (e.g., steroids) and other 
              lipophilic signalling molecules that control development,  differentiation, and
              hormone-dependent gene expression.  The  idea that similar factors exist in
              yeast is based in part on  theoretical arguments and in part by preliminary
              data.  If,  as is hoped, such factors can be identified in yeast, it  will then
              be possible to use genetic manipulations, which  are powerful and
              well-developed in yeast, to study them  further.  ***
