Title       : Molecular Phylogenetic Study of Apiaceae Subfamily Apioideae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9407712

Award Number: 9407712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240439             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Downie sdownie@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407712  Downie       The "umbellifer" group of plants, including economically
              and  pharmaceutically important plants such as carrots, parsnips,  celery,
              anise, caraway, coriander, cumin, fennel, dill, parsley,  and many toxic and
              medicinal plants, has attracted interest and  study for centuries.  Despite
              this attention, fundamental  disagreements persist regarding precise
              delimitation of genera and  tribes in the family Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae. 
              Existing  taxonomic treatments constructed largely on the basis of 
              morphological and anatomical characters give contradictory  interpretations of
              relationships, and many suprageneric taxa are  maintained largely on
              considerations of tradition and convenience.   Dr. Stephen Downie of the
              University of Illinois will bring  molecular data from chloroplast and nuclear
              DNA to bear on genus  and tribal level taxonomic problems in the subfamily. 
              Detailed  restriction site mapping of the entire chloroplast genome and 
              comparative nucleotide sequencing of the nuclear ribosomal DNA  internal
              transcribed spacer regions will be used to provide a  robust phylogenetic
              framework for the group.  Within this  framework, hypotheses about non-DNA
              character evolution can be  interpreted and the systematic value of such
              characters evaluated.       The DNA results obtained in this project will
              provide the  first modern phylogeny of the Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae.  These
               results will be an important reference for taxonomists, plant  breeders,
              ecologists, and pharmacologists as well as evolutionary  biologists interested
              in the interactions of umbellifers with their  associated insect herbivores.
              Future taxonomic and evolutionary  studies of the plants will benefit from this
              robust phylogenetic  analysis.
