Title       : Genes Involved in the Regulation of Seed Germination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1994    
File        : a9407264

Award Number: 9407264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent J. Bradford kjbradford@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Seed germination is a critical phase in the plant life  cycle, both ecologically
              and agriculturally, and is  sensitive to both endogenous hormones and
              environmental  factors.  Seeds integrate physiological and environmental 
              information to determine whether to germinate or remain  dormant.  Two
              important physiological regulators of  germination are gibberellin (GA), which
              generally promotes  germination, and abscisic acid (ABA), an inhibitor of 
              germination.  A key environmental determination of  germination behavior is the
              availability of water, since  radicle emergence requires water uptake and cell
              expansion.  Single-gene mutations in tomato which block synthesis of  either GA
              or ABA result in contrasting effects on dormancy,  germination rates, and
              sensitivity to reduced water  availability.  These mutants have been used in
              combination  with hormonal application to demonstrate that the regulation  of
              germination occurs via alterations in the water potential  threshold, allowing
              radicle emergence.  A quantitative  mathematical model has been developed that
              can describe the  responses of seed germination to the plant growth regulators 
              GA and ABA and to the seed water potential.  A key feature  of this is the
              recognition that individual seeds vary in  their threshold responses to GA,
              ABA, and water potential.  The sensitivity thresholds for tomato seed
              germination are  determined by the mechanical resistance of a thin endosperm 
              layer to penetration by the radicle.  When stimulated to  germinate, the walls
              of these endosperm cap cells are  degraded and weakened, allowing radicle
              emergence.  Multiple  factors are likely to be required for successful
              completion  of germination, with their combined influence setting the 
              sensitivity threshold for a given seed.  The goal of this  project is to
              determine whether the transition from  quiescence or dormancy to germination is
              associated with  specific changes in gene expression.  The effects of GA and 
              ABA on mRNA populations in mutant tomato endosper m caps will  be visualized by
              a differential display reverse  transcription PCR technique.  Imbibed wild type
              seeds will  also be sorted into dormant and nondormant categories prior  to
              visible germination using a single seed assay.  The mRNAs  expressed in the
              endosperm caps of the two categories will  be similarly displayed.  Messages
              that are consistently  associated with either dormancy or germination in all 
              comparisons will be evaluated by RNA blot and in situ  hybridization to
              determine whether their abundance, timing  and tissue location are regulated by
              GA, ABA, and water  potential as expected.  Expression of selected genes under
              a  range of hormonal and environmental conditions will be  investigated in
              single seeds using tissue printing to  determine whether they are regulated
              among seeds within a  population in keeping with the predictions of the
              threshold  models.  This approach will distinguish genes involved in  the
              regulation of radicle emergence from those that are  associated with
              post-germinative events such as reserve  mobilization.  Characterization of the
              function of these  genes and their promoters will provide insight into how 
              plants integrate multiple internal and environmental signals  to control a
              critical developmental process.
