Title       : Development of a Spin Polarized Inverse Photoemission Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9407933

Award Number: 9407933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80727              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Dowben pdowben@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger D. Kirby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Gay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Woods  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Sellmyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This work is concerned with building a new facility to study the  spin-polarized
              unoccupied bands of ferromagnetic thin films and  surfaces and Mott-Hubbard
              insulators. This facility will permit,  in conjunction with existing spin
              polarized photoemission  facilities, to identify the exchange splitting of
              large local  moment systems where spin mixing rather than exchange splitting 
              collapse occurs. As with ferromagnetic systems, we also plan, in  the case of
              systems exhibiting Mott-Hubbard transitions, to  identify the upper Hubbard
              band in systems where the Hubbard  bands exhibit ferromagnetic (as opposed to
              antiferromagnetic)  ordering. By building this facility, the characterization
              of not  only the occupied band structure (the occupied density of states)  but
              the unoccupied band structure (the unoccupied density of  states) is possible.
              This proposal is based upon existing  expertise of five research groups in
              photoemission, spin-  polarized photoemission, inverse photoemission,
              spin-polarized  electron sources, and magnetism.  %%%  Photoemission, has been
              the spectroscopy of choice in  characterizing electronic structure. The use of
              polarized light  in angle-resolved photoemission studies has made the 
              identification of electronic bands through symmetry selection  rules possible,
              greatly enhancing the technique. These techniques  probe the occupied part of
              the band structure: the valence bands  of semiconductors or occupied states of
              metals and condensed  matter systems. More recently, inverse photoemission
              studies have  found a unique role for exploring the conduction band of 
              semiconductors or the unoccupied states of metals and condensed  matter
              systems. Spin-resolved photoemission and spin-resolved  inverse photoemission
              have greatly enhanced the study of  electronic structure; particularly in the
              case of systems with  spin-ordered bands, such as ferromagnetic systems. We
              propose to  complement our existing facilities with spin resolved inverse 
              photoemission capability in order to chara cterize both occupied  and
              unoccupied parts of the band structure. This combination of  facilities will
              substantially enhance the ability to investigate  magnetic thin films and
              surfaces and nonmetal to metal  transitions. It is this combination of
              techniques at a single  center which would be unmatched by any other facility
              in the  world.
