Title       : Studies of the Cyanide-resistant Respiratory Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9407759

Award Number: 9407759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Siedow jsiedow@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407759  Siedow  An "alternative" oxidase is associated with the
              cyanide-resistant,  respiratory pathway found in the mitochondrial electron
              transfer  chain of all higher plants.  The role of this energetically  wasteful
              respiratory pathway in plant energy metabolism is unclear,  but recent progress
              has been made in characterizing regulatory,  structural and kinetic features of
              the oxidase.  The research  outlined in this proposal will focus on three areas
              that relate to  the alternative oxidase's regulation and structure:  1) The 
              involvement of a recently identified sulfhydryl-disulfide redox  system in the
              regulation of alternative pathway activity will be  further elucidated. 
              Specifically, the biochemical mechanism  involved in the interconversion of the
              alternative oxidase from the  less active, oxidized state to the more active,
              reduced state will  be characterized in isolated mitochondria.  In addition,
              studies of  the behavior of this regulatory system in vivo will be undertaken 
              to determine what physiological and/or developmental states affect  this
              sulfhydryl-disulfide system and to establish how this  regulation affects the
              overall capacity of the alternative pathway  in vivo.  2) Purification of the
              detergent-solubilized alternative  oxidase will be continued with the specific
              goals of characterizing  both the metal species found in the oxygen reducing
              catalytic site  and the specific nature of the metal site.  31 The ability to 
              functionally express the alternative oxidase in the bacterium  Escherichia coli
              will be exploited to select for mutants of the  alternative oxidase that are
              resistant to inhibitors acting at the  quinol oxidation site on the enzyme. 
              Mapping of these  inhibitor-resistant mutations will allow refinement of the
              current  model of thequinol oxidation site on the oxidase and provide  insights
              into functionally important amino acid residues involved  in catalysis.  Only a
              year ago, regulation of alternative pathway  activity appeared to be a simple
              function of a lternative oxidase  protein level and substrate (i.e., ubiquinol)
              concentration.  The  appearance of the sulfhydryl-disulfide redox system
              provides a  major new avenue for the in vivo regulation of this energetically 
              wasteful pathway.  The work outlined in this proposal will lead to  a better
              understanding of both the mechanism and role of this redox  system in the
              metabolic regulation of the alternative pathway ln  vivo.  In addition, the
              alternative oxidase is unusual in that its  structure appears to be simpler
              than that of any other known  water-producing oxidase.  Given its unique
              nature, it is important  to develop a better understanding of this enzyme's
              active  site, particularly as it relates to the regulation of enzyme  activity
              at the level of ubiquinol oxidation.  The studies outlined  in this proposal
              should help to clarify such structural features  associated with this enigmatic
              oxidase.    %%%  Higher plants possess a respiratory pathway, the "alternative 
              pathway," which is resistant to cyanide, an inhibitor of the  standard
              respiratory pathway common to both plants and animals.   The alternative
              pathway bypasses several sites of ATP synthesis on  the standard repiratory
              pathway, which means that large amounts of  potential harvested crop yield may
              be lost through operation of the  energetically wasteful alternative pathway. 
              The role of the  alternative pathway in plant metabolism is not known, but 
              possibilities include: 1) serving as a component of the response of  plants to
              environmental stresses such as chilling and 2) acting to  keep respiration
              operating in leaf tissues when photosynthesis is  taking place.  Crucial to
              knowing the role of the alternative  pathway is an understanding of both the
              structural features and the  regulatory mechanisms of the cyanide-resistant
              oxidase associated  with the pathway.  The research outlined in this proposal
              will  attempt to better characterize 1) the catalytic active site of the 
              alternative oxidase with respect to the nature of the m etals found  in it and
              the amino acids involved in the reactions carried out by  the protien and 2)
              the mechanisms by which the activity of the  alternative oxidase can be
              regulated to either enhance or reduce  the level of cyanide-resistant
              repiration taking place under any  given set of conditions.  Knowing more about
              the nature and  regulation of the alternative oxidase could ultimately lead to
              less  potential yield being lost to the alternative pathway and more  efficient
              crop production.  ***
