Title       : U.S.-Polish Cooperative Research on Development of Guidelines for Heat
               Straightening
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1994     
File        : a9407158

Award Number: 9407158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Roeder croeder@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1039,5953,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9407158  Roeder    This U.S.-Polish Joint Cooperative Research in "Development
              of Guidelines for Heat  Straightening" is between Dr. Charles Roeder of the
              University of Washington and Dr.  Henryk Zobel Warsaw Polytechnic University. 
              Plastic deformations occur when metals are  subjected to a stress or a thermal
              gradient at elevated temperatures.  This deformation is  commonly used in the
              heat straightening or heat curving method to repair damage or reduce  initial
              curvature in the member.  Though such deformations are of considerable
              importance,  they are poorly understood.  This lack of understanding results in
              limited use (and, in some  cases, misuse) of the heat straightening method. 
              With a rational understanding of the  method, engineers will be able to predict
              (1) the members suitable for straightening; (2) the  deformation resulting from
              heating; (3) the required location and quantity of heating; and (4)  the number
              and sequence of heat applications.  Such estimates now are made by experienced 
              metalworkers, whose estimates are highly variable and often grossly inaccurate.
               This  proposal seeks to extend the existing understanding of heat
              straightening.  The Polish P.I.  will draw on recent practical experience in
              using heat straightening to repair bridges in  Poland, and theoretical
              experience in developing an empirical model for predicting the  behavior of the
              model.  The American P.I. has had extensive research experience with  thermal
              effects and the heat straightening method.  He has performed many experiments
              and  a wide range of temperature-dependent inelastic analyses.  Ultimately, the
              researchers hope  to develop practical guidelines to use and control heat
              straightening and verification of  guidelines through monitoring several actual
              straightening projects.      This proposed research in civil engineering
              fulfills the program objectives of advancing  science by enabling leading
              experts in the U.S. and Poland to combine complementary talents  and pool
              research resources in areas  of strong mutual interest and competence.  ##
