Title       : Dissertation Enhancement in Japan: Investigation of Metal Impurities in Ultra
               Thin Oxide on Silicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1994       
File        : a9407043

Award Number: 9407043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frans Spaepen spaepen@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9407043  Spaepen    This award will enable Alison Shull, a Ph.D.  graduate
              student at Harvard University, to  conduct collaborative research with Dr. 
              Hirofumi Shimizu for three and a half months at  the Semiconductor Device
              Development Center,  Hitachi, Ltd., in Tokyo, Japan.  By  characterizing the
              surfaces of silicon and  silicon substrates before and after metal  deposition,
              the team will analyze the surface  flaws, metal contamination, and oxidation 
              induced defects in silicon wafers.    Today, the electronic industry is
              demanding  clean silicon wafer surfaces to produce ultra  large scale
              integrated circuits.  Metal  impurities can degrade various characteristics  of
              the silicon integrated circuit components,  and as the device geometries are
              reduced, they  become more sensitive to contaminants and  defects.  Prior to
              the vapor deposition of  metal, the team will utilize Dr. Shimizu's  expertise
              in non-destructive diagnostics of  metal contaminants using a scanning photon 
              microscope (SPM) as well as other instruments  at Hitachi to characterize the
              surface of  silicon wafers.  The team will then utilize Ms.  Shull's technique
              of measuring interfacial  stress with a laser scanning curvature  measurement
              device to study the effect the  contaminants and defects have on the vapor 
              deposition of copper and silver multilayers.   Similarly, the team will also
              study the effect  of a silicon oxide layer in preventing  crystallization of
              amorphous thin films of  metals and silicon.  Shull will provide samples  of
              thin film amorphous silica, both with and  without an oxide capping layer,
              which have been  subjected to various high vacuum thermal  anneals.  The team
              will utilize the SPM to  analyze the silicon/metal interfaces and the 
              silicon/silicon oxide thin film/metal thin film  layered structure.  The
              efforts of Shimizu and  Shull will further the fundamental  understanding of
              the behavior of metal  impurities in ultra thin films enhancing the  research
              and development of thin film,  multilaye r and surface coating technologies. 
              ***
