Title       : Effect of Processing Variables on the Structure and Properties of Plasma
               Polymerized Films on Metal Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1998      
File        : a9407809

Award Number: 9407809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. James Boerio fboerio@uceng.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1049,9146,9163,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary    Proposal Number:  CTS-9407809  P.I.:  Boerio  Institution: 
              University of Cincinnati     Plasma polymerization is a process in which active
              species such as ions and radicals are formed in a low pressure gas or plasma of
              a "monomer" by collisions between free electrons and monomer molecules when an
              electric field is applied to the gas.  The active species react with themselves
              or with monomers to form polymer coatings on the surfaces of solids that are
              exposed to the plasma.  Plasma polymerization is an extremely attractive
              process for pretreatment of investigations of metals since it enables materials
              synthesis and processing to be combined into one step.  Many investigations of
              plasma polymerization have been reported but most have focused on only one
              aspect, such as the effect of processing variables on the rate of film
              formation.  In this research, the University of Cincinnati is collaborating
              with Ford Motor Co. and Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co. to determine relationships
              between the processing variables that are used to deposit plasma polymerized
              films on metal substrates, the molecular structure of the films, especially the
              surface and interfacial structures, and the performance of the films as primers
              for rubber-to-metal and spectroscopy (XPS), secondary ion mass spectrometry
              (SIMS), Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), reflection-absorption infrared
              spectroscopy (RAIR), ellipsometry, surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS),
              scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and atomic force microscopy (AFM) will be
              used to determine the effect of processing variables such as discharge power
              and frequency, monomer, flow rate, pressure, and substrate surface chemistry on
              the molecular structure and morphology of the films.  Electrochemical impedance
              spectroscopy (EIS), fracture mechanics tests, and industrial test methods will
              be used to determine performance characteristics of the films such as the
              corrosion protection they impart to metal substrates, the interfacial fracture
              energy of  films deposited on metal substrates, and the properties of the films
              as primers for rubber-to-metal and structural adhesive bonding.  Surface
              analysis will be used to examine the failure surfaces of specimens after
              fracture mechanics and adhesive bonding tests to determine the failure
              mechanisms.  The results obtained will be used to develop relationships between
              the processing variables used to deposit the films, their molecular structure,
              and their properties and will represent a significant enhancement to the
              knowledge base in the important, rapidly expanding field of thin polymer films.
               Collaboration with Ford will mostly involve structural adhesive bonding of
              aluminum and surface analysis.  Collaboration with Goodyear will involve
              rubber-to-metal bonding and surface analysis.
