Title       : Control of Plant Hormone Levels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1996 
File        : a9407617

Award Number: 9407617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Bandurski bandurs2@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Szerszen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9407617  Bandurski  This investigator has cloned and sequenced a gene for
              the enzyme  catalyzing the reaction: IAA+UDPG ----- 1-0-IAA-glucose+UDP.  This 
              gene is important because the synthesis of IAA-glucose is the first  step in
              the biosynthesis of the conjugates of indole-3-acetic acid  (IAA) in Zea mays
              and because this is the first higher plant gene  of IAA metabolism to be cloned
              and sequenced.  Homologous sequences  are present in Arabidopsis and tobacco
              and in all the  monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants tested to date.  The
               overall goal of this work is to control the size of the endogenous  pools of
              the plant growth hormone, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA,  auxin), by genetic means.
               All plants examined contain most of  their IAA in a conjugated, and
              presumably, inactive form.  It is  the free acid which appears to be the active
              hormone.  The ability  to regulate the concentrations of free, versus
              conjugated, growth  hormone levels, will be of value in understanding how IAA
              levels  are regulated in plants; will possible provide information  concerning
              how the tip of the shoot regulates shoot elongation; and  will be of possible
              agronomic value in promoting or reducing plant  growth without application of
              growth-regulating chemicals.  During  this granting period, the cDNA and
              genomic homologs of the corn  cDNA encoding for IAGlu synthetase will be
              identifed and sequenced  from Arabidopsis or tobacco; transgenic Arabidopsis
              and/or tobacco  plants will be constructed with the IAGIu synthetase gene
              placed  under a promoter in an antisense orientation to block expression of 
              mRNA involved in synthesis of IAGlu synthetase; reported gene  constructs will
              be prepared in Arabidopsis to study the time and  localization of expression of
              the IAGlu synthetase gene; and, two  different cDNA clones believed to encode
              genes controlling  hydrolysis of 1-0-IAGlu and 6-0-IAGlu will be sequenced and
              their  enzymatic activity characterized in an E. coli expression system.  ***
