Title       : Improved Technologies for Protein Structure Determination by NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9407569

Award Number: 9407569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gaetano T. Montelione guy@nmrlab.cabm.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9407569  Montelione  The objectives of this work are to develop pulse sequences
              and  computer software which will automate the process of protein  structure
              determination by multidimensional NMR.  Pulsed-field  gradient (PFG) technology
              will be optimized to provide improved  sensitivity and better H2O solvent
              suppression by using two-and  three-gradient pulse sequences.  A family of PFG
              triple resonance  NMR pulse sequences will be designed which provide optimal
              input  for automated analysis software.  Artificial intelligence will be 
              applied in developing user-friendly software for analyzing these  data,
              including automation of the processes of resonance  assignment, compilation of
              experimental distance constraints, and  structure generation.  This software
              will accelerate the structure  determination process for small (<10 KDa)
              proteins.  This  technology development will be carried out on samples of
              isotope-  enriched protein growth factors, transcription factors, IgG binding 
              domains, and protease inhibitors for which prokaryotic production  expression
              systems are already available in the laboratory.   %%%  The technology will
              greatly enhance the applicability and  accessibility of NMR spectroscopy as a
              tool for protein engineering  and structural biology, and improve the
              competitiveness of the  United States in these important biotechnology areas. 
              It will make  amenable to NMR studies many proteins which are presently 
              inaccessible for various technical reasons, and accelorate the  process of
              molecular structure analysis.  The techniques and the  data which result from
              this work will provide important  infrastructure for determining the
              three-dimensional structures of  many different proteins by NMR, and will have
              important  implications in several related fields including protein 
              engineering, protein chemistry, protein folding and agricultural 
              biotechnology.  The work will have a significant impact on the  infrastructure
              of biophysical chemistry by enhancing the  effectiveness, informat ion content,
              and interpretability of NMR  technology.  ***
