Title       : Regulation of Growth in Rice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9407763

Award Number: 9407763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Kende hkende@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407763  Kende  Deepwater rice (Oryza sativa L.) is a subsistence crop in large 
              areas of Southeast Asia and West Africa which are flooded during  the rainy
              season.  Survival of this rice depends on its capacity to  elongate rapidly
              when it becomes partially submerged and to keep  part of its foliage above the
              rising waters.  In previous work,  these investigators have reconstructed the
              chain of events that  leads from submergence to accelerated growth.  They have
              shown that  the initial signal for elongation is the reduced partial pressure 
              of oxygen in the submerged internode and that three plant hormones  --
              ethylene, abscisic acid, and gibberellin -- participate in  regulating growth. 
              Reduced oxygen tensions promotes ethylene  synthesis; ethylene causes a
              reduction in the level of a growth  inhibitor, abscisic acid; gibberellin is
              the immediate growth-  promoting hormone; the rate of growth may be determined
              by the  balance of endogenous abscisic acid and gibberellin.  Internodal 
              elongation is based on increased production of new cells in the  intercalary
              meristem and on enhanced elongation of these newly  formed cells.  Experiments
              outlined in this proposal aim at  investigating further the mode of action of
              ethylene and  gibberellin and at studying biochemical and molecular reactions 
              that underlie enhanced cell elongation and increased cell division  activity. 
              This research may advance our understanding of plant  growth in general and may
              be important for the eventual transfer of  elongation capacity from
              low-yielding deepwater rice to high-  yielding rice cultivars.  ***
