Title       : Structural Studies of Spectrin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9407779

Award Number: 9407779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie Wo-Mei Fung lfung@luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407779  Fung  We propose to understand the structural of the human erythrocyte 
              spectrin  -subunit in forming head-to-head association with the    -subunit to
              give heterodimers and tetramers.  We will use cDNA and  PCR methods to express
              specific  -subunit segments in E. coli, with  a glutathione-S-transferase gene
              fusion system.  Spectrin segments  selected for this study will start from the
              N-terminus of the  -  subunit and ending at different positions in the
              sequence, giving  peptides of various lengths.  Binding studies of these
              purified,  -recombinant peptides with the  isolated  -subunit will be conducted
              to select peptides with  functional properties.  From the functional peptides,
              Fourier  transform infrared techniques will be used to select the peptides 
              that have secondary structure similar to that of intact spectrin.   The
              shortest peptide of these peptides will be subjected to site  directed
              mutagenesis to provide a set of peptides, each with one  cysteine per peptide
              but at different positions in the sequence, to  obtain topological information
              by spin label electron paramagnetic  resonance methods.  At the conclusion of
              this project, we expect to  have obtained structural information about the
              first 60 amino acids  in the N-terminal region of the  -submit that are
              required for     head-to-head association.  We believe that an understanding of
              the   -and  -subunit head-to-head association forms the basis for  further
              understanding the assembly of spectrin subunits to give  heterodimes and
              tetamers.  %%%  Underneath the human red blood cell membranes is a skeletal
              network  of proteins.  This skeletal network provides many of the membrane 
              properties, including mechanical and morphological properties, of  the red
              cells. Abnormal skeletal networks often lead to abnormal  red blood cells
              causing different types of anemia in patients.  The  major proteins in this
              network is called spectrin.  Abnormal  spectrin may lead to abnormal skeletal
              networks.  Thus it is  important to understand  the structure of the spectrin
              molecule.   However, spectrin is a very large protein molecule for detailed 
              structural studies.  In our project, we will synthesize a  subfragment of the
              spectrin molecule, using recombinant DNA methods  and bacterial cells, and use
              reporter group techniques to monitor  the structural features of the molecule. 
              In particular, we will  synthesize the region of the molecule that will bind
              its partner  subunit to provide interwoven molecules of two subunits (a dimer) 
              that will then bind to another spectrin dimer to form the skeletal  network
              underlying red blood cell membrane surfaces.  With the  spectrin fragment, we
              will attach a label which exhibits a signal  in a electron paramagnetic
              resonance instrument.  By following the  signal changes under different
              experimental conditions, we will be  able to extract molecular information on
              the spectrin molecule.   With the understanding of the spectrin molecule, we
              will gain  insights into the abnormalities of some o the red blood cells from 
              anemia patients.     ***
