Title       : Function of Acoustic Signal Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9407304

Award Number: 9407304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143239             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Greenfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Many animals that communicate with sound time their calls in relation to their
              neighbors' calling and collectively produce various forms of synchronous or
              alternating choruses.  Traditionally, these signal interactions have been
              described as cooperative events that serve to enhance species recognition,
              reduce attacks by predators or parasitoids attracted to the acoustic signals,
              or enhance the ability of a group to attract females.  Alternatively, a few
              researchers have suggested that acoustic signal interactions represent some
              form of competition among individuals.  Recently, Dr. Greenfield demonstrated
              experimentally and theoretically that synchrony and alternation in some
              sound-producing insects can be explained as by-products of jamming interactions
              between males competing to broadcast their signals to females.  These findings
              were largely restricted to the experimentally ideal and simple situations of
              isolated pairs of signalers with comparable signaling strategies.  Dr.
              Greenfield now will extend this work on jamming interactions by studying (1)
              how males in larger groups, such as found in most natural situations, control
              the timing of their signals, (2) whether or not individual males differ in how
              they jam neighbors' signals, and (3) whether or not the possible strategic
              differences between males depend on their energy reserves and/or the signaling
              of their neighbors.  The orientation of females toward individual males in
              choruses will also be studied to determine how female choice may influence, and
              possibly be influenced by, male signal interactions.  Dr. Greenfield's findings
              will provide critical information on neuro-behavioral timing  mechanisms, the
              role of learning in signal interactions, and the complex interplay between
              female choice and signal-jamming competition between males.  Because various
              sound-producing insects are agricultural pests, the behavioral information from
              this study may lead to improved control strategies via disruption of
              pair-forming activities.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
