Title       : Changes in Insect Epithelial Metabolism and Active Ion Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9407313

Award Number: 9407313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262034             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Chamberlin chamberl@oak.cats.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9407313  Chamberlin    Most people are aware of the dramatic transformation that
               takes place as a larval lepidopteran (caterpillar) changes  to a pupa
              (chrysalis or cocoon) and then to an adult (moth  or butterfly).  This
              remodeling of the insect has inspired a  great deal of research on the
              developmental changes in  epidermis.  On the other hand, changes in the
              physiology and  metabolism of internal tissues during insect growth and 
              development are not well-understood.  The proposed research  will reveal
              changes in the functioning of one such tissue,  the midgut, during larval
              growth, molting and metamorphosis.  The insect to be studied is the tobacco
              hornworm (Manduca  sexta).  This caterpillar is essentially an "eating machine"
               that consumes large quantities of food to support its  phenomenal growth rate.
               During the first 16 days of larval  (caterpillar) life, the insect increases
              in size nearly  10,000-fold.  This rapid growth rate is due, in part, to the 
              functioning of its large midgut which digests and absorbs  the ingested food. 
              The midgut also engages in high rates of  active ion transport and it is this
              process that is the  focus of the proposed research.  During larval growth, M. 
              sexta molts four times before it metamorphoses into a pupa.  Prior to each molt
              the gut is purged and during the molting  process new cells are added to the
              midgut.  The proposed  research will determine whether midgut ion transport
              changes  as the larva grows and whether the midgut temporarily ceases  to
              engage in active ion transport during the molting  process.  During the fifth
              and final larval stage, the large  larval midgut is destroyed and replaced by a
              smaller pupal  epithelium.  The PI has demonstrated that midgut active ion 
              transport is greatly diminished in the last half of this  period.   The
              proposed research will expand upon this work  of Chamberlin by measuring active
              ion transport across  midgut just after the molt to the fifth stage and at
              several  time points during the subsequent days .  These studies will 
              precisely determine when, in the metamorphosis of the  insect, active ion
              transport declines.  The energy for  active ion transport is supplied by
              aerobic metabolism and  therefore changes in midgut metabolism may affect
              active ion  transport.  The metabolic organization of the midgut during  larval
              growth and development will be determined by  measuring metabolite levels,
              maximal activities of key  metabolic enzymes, and the respiration of isolated 
              mitochondria, the organelle responsible for providing most  of the energy for
              active ion transport.  These studies on  midgut ion transport and metabolism
              will elucidate the  functional changes in an internal tissue during insect 
              growth and development.  Since molting and metamorphosis are  processes common
              to all insects, the proposed research will  provide fundamental information
              pertinent to understanding  the physiology of all insects.  ***
