Title       : Protein-protein Interactions in Membrane Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1994      
File        : a9407251

Award Number: 9407251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerda E. Breitwieser gbreitwi@pop.jhmi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407251  Breitweiser    Although hundreds of "seven transmembrane helix" G
              protein -  coupled receptors and a sizable family of heterotrimeric G  proteins
              (consisting of ,  and  subunits) have been  identified and cloned, there is as
              yet a minimal  understanding of the effector proteins of these signaling 
              pathways.  Most cells contain many types of G protein-  coupled receptors, a
              host of G protein subtypes, and  numerous effectors.  The ability to respond to
              a given  agonist with activation of the appropriate range of effector  enzymes
              may be controlled by subcellular localization of  signaling pathways, variable
              activation of G protein  subtypes and effectors by receptors, by modulation of
              the  levels of expression of components of the various signaling  pathways, or
              most likely, a combination of these and other  measures.  We have extensively
              characterized the kinetics of  muscarinic receptor-mediated activation of an
              inwardly  rectifying K+ channel in bullfrog atrium via a pertussis 
              toxin-sensitive G protein, Gk1, and have developed a minimal  model for
              regulation of muscarinic K+ current activation and  desensitization.  With the
              recent cloning of the muscarinic  K+ channel (GIRK1), we now have the means to
              test the  hypotheses derived from studies in intact myocytes by  expression of
              the complete signal transduction pathway (m2  muscarinic receptor, inhibitory G
              proteins and GIRK1) in a  heterologous system.  The experiments in this
              proposal will  yield significant new information about the protein-protein 
              interactions involved in G protein-mediated signal  transduction.  We will
              examine muscarinic K+ current  activation in a heterologous mammalian
              expression system,  which will allow kinetic analysis of G protein-channel 
              interactions with high time resolution, under conditions in  which the levels
              of expression of the various components in  the signal transduction pathway are
              known.  We will also  make GIRK1 - IRK1 chimeras, by exchanging the conduction 
              pore regions, to examine the r ole of cytoplasmic domains in  channel gating. 
              These chimeric molecules will be  transiently expressed in the mammalian cell
              line containing  m2 mAChR, to assess the functional consequences of the 
              cytoplasmically-localized domains on channel gating.  The  techniques
              implemented during the accomplishment of these  two aims will establish the
              approaches which can be used for  a more extensive examination of the role of
              protein -  protein interactions in membrane signaling.  %%%  Cells are capable
              of responding to a variety of signals  carried by small molecules which bind to
              specific receptors  on their surface membranes.  The mechanisms by which these 
              events at the cell surface are translated into appropriate  alterations in cell
              function are the focus of this study.  Many distinct receptors have been
              identified, and a large  number of them interact with a family of "signal 
              transducing" proteins, called G proteins, which carry the  signal from receptor
              to the appropriate enzyme which must be  activated or inhibited.  The ability
              to respond to a  specific small molecule (agonist) with activation of the 
              appropriate enzyme is a complicated process which may be  regulated in a
              variety of ways.  We have extensively  characterized the kinetics of activation
              by acetylcholine of  an inwardly rectifying K+ channel in bull frog atrium. 
              This  ion channel has  now been cloned, which permits us to insert  this signal
              transduction pathway into a cell type which does  not normally contain it, and
              to study it under controlled  conditions.  The experiments in this proposal
              will yield  significant new information about the interactions involved  in G
              protein-mediated signal transduction.  We will examine  how channel activation
              is regulated in a well-controlled  system in which the amounts of each protein
              in the signaling  pathway are known.  We will also examine the role of various 
              regions of the channel molecule in the activation process by  producing hybrid
              channels in which various regions are  intercha nged with similar, but
              distinctly regulated channel  types.  The techniques implemented during the
              accomplishment  of these two aims will establish the approaches which can be 
              used for a more extensive examination of the role of protein  - protein
              interactions in membrane signaling.  ***
