Title       : Mechanisms of Tolerance to the Self Antigen Myelin Basic Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1994      
File        : a9407222

Award Number: 9407222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Goverman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407222  Goverman    This is a Research Planning Grant.  The long-term 
              objective is to investigate mechanisms in the immune system  of establishing
              tolerance to self antigens.  During the  planning period of this award,
              experiments will be carried  out to address one possible mechanism for inducing
              tolerance  to the MBP121-140 epitope (amino acids 121-140 of mouse  myelin
              basic protein, a predominant protein in the myelin  sheath which has been used
              extensively as a model system for  antibody production to self antigen).  The
              proposed  experiments involve the molecular characterization of the T  cell
              receptors (TCRs) expressed on MBP121-140-specific T  cells from both "shiverer"
              mutant mice, which are unable to  express endogenous MBP (where the cells are
              not tolerized)  as well as wild-type mice (where tolerance results in a  minor
              response to these residues).  Comparing the  repertoires of these two different
              types of mice will permit  the testing of the hypothesis that affinity of the
              T-cell  receptor for its ligand is critical in inducing tolerance to  this
              epitope.  In this hypothesis, high affinity TCRs which  mature in the presence
              of antigen become tolerized.   The  minor response observed in wild-type mice
              could then arise  from a small number of cells that were not tolerized simply 
              because they escaped the stochastic process of interaction  with antigen,
              reflecting "leakiness" of tolerance  mechanisms.  The model predicts that a
              repertoire of TCRs  would be found in shiverer mice that are not found in non 
              shivering litter mates.  All possible MBP121-140-specific  TCRs would be
              present in shiverers because of the lack of  ligand to tolerize high affinity
              receptors.  However, only  receptors representing low-affinity clones would be
              found in  non-shivering mice that express MBP if the high affinity  clones are
              deleted or unresponsive.  These studies will lay  the basis for an
              investigation of the in vivo mechanisms for  establishing tolerance to MBP. 
              %%%  In its response to foreign p athogens, the immune system must  be able to
              discriminate between foreign and self molecules.  The recognition of "foreign"
              antigens is accomplished by  lymphocytes.  These cells undergo a developmental
              program in  which a large variety of clones of lymphocytes express  antigen
              receptors on their surfaces with different  specificities.  During lymphocyte
              maturation in the thymus,  a selection process occurs in which those cells
              bearing  receptors which recognize and bind to self-antigens are  either
              destroyed (negative selection) or somehow induced to  be non-reactive toward
              their antigens (anergy).  This  process is called tolerance.  Without
              tolerance, the immune  system would result in self-destruction of the organism.
              The  goal of this project is to understand the molecular  mechanism whereby
              this self-non self discrimination is  achieved, using a well established mouse
              system.  ***
