Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Problems in Fluids and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1996     
File        : a9407030

Award Number: 9407030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Y. Hou hou@ama.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Meiron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9161,9216,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9407030  Hou    This project will support research on several problems in the 
              areas of fluid mechanics and materials science.  Specifically, 
              three-dimensional subharmonic instability of three-dimensional  Stokes waves,
              three-dimensional weak water-wave turbulence,  singularity formation in fluid
              interfaces strongly mediated by  surface tension, reconnection of fluid
              interfaces, and  interaction of ocean free surfaces with moving objects will be
               studied.  Investigations will be conducted on fundamentally  difficult fluid
              dynamical and materials problems by developing  and applying robust, efficient
              computational tools, including  novel time integration schemes allowing large
              time-steps,  spectrally accurate spatial discretizations, fast summation 
              techniques and the level set formulation which can effectively  compute flows
              undergoing topological changes.    Large-scale computation and computational
              mathematics are now  primary tools in studying physical processes characterized
              by  randomness and strong nonlinearity.  Such processes include  complex
              pattern formation and growth problems in diffusion  dominated systems, and wave
              interactions on the ocean's free  surface.  Closely related are problems with
              singular or near  singular behavior, such as flows undergoing changes in 
              topological type, or the breaking of water waves.  These fluid  dynamical and
              materials problems will be studied by developing  and applying state-of-the-art
              numerical methods to large-scale  computation, and through analytical,
              numerical and modeling  studies of important constituent processes.  The
              research will  promote inter-disciplinary interactions among applied 
              mathematicians, physicists and material scientists and should  have a potential
              impact in application areas such as high  performance computation, interfacial
              fluid dynamics, and  materials science.  The work on water waves would have 
              application to the study of radar scattering from free surfaces.   The work on
              Ostwald ripening provides more detailed inf ormation  on the state of materials
              whose manufacture depends on phase  transitions.
