Title       : Cell Volume Regulation in Bivalves: Response to Fluctuating Salinity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1994  
File        : a9407997

Award Number: 9407997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Wright SHWRIGHT@CCIT.ARIZONA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407997  Wright    Because of the very large concentrations of salt in 
              seawater, marine animals live under constant salinity  stress. Marine
              invertebrates generally cope with this stress  by maintaining in their cells a
              combination of inorganic  solutes that together balance the large osmotic 
              concentration of full strength sea water. Estaurine  invertebrates face an
              added challenge. As a consequence of  the daily change in tides, the estaurine
              environment can  cyclically shift from full strength sea water to freshwater. 
              Animals living in the intertidal habitats can, therefore, be  exposed to
              changes in ambient osmolarity that can have a  profound impact on their
              physiology. In particular, when  exposed to reduced osmolarity (i.e., dilute
              sea water), the  cells and tissues of estaurine animals typically swell. It  is
              widely believed that the response of cells to this type  of stress includes a
              loss of solute that induces an  osmotically-obligated loss of water and hence a
              reduction in  volume back toward normal levels. Indeed, this has been  shown to
              be the case for many mammalian cells. For an  estaurine animal faced with large
              daily shifts in  osmolarity, any loss of solute must be met by an equal gain 
              in solute when the tide shifts and ambient osmolarity  returns to normal.
              Although these cyclic losses and gains of  cell solute could represent a
              substantial energy cost to the  animal, the actual extent of the energetic
              stress associated  with exposure to cycles is unknown. The present work will 
              examine the influence of cyclic changes in salinity on (i)  the extent of
              osmostically-induced changes in cell size;  (ii) the accompanying changes in
              cell solute concentration;  and (iii) the cellular mechanism of the regulatory
              response  to these changes. The experiments will focus on the response  to
              salinity stress of bivalve gills, a tissue uniquely  suited to measurement of
              cell volume using both direct  optical and direct radiotracer methods. This
              combination of  techniques will permit measu rement of the extent of volume 
              regulation in intact animals as well as in isolated tissues.  The results of
              the proposed studies will lead to the first  assessment of the impact of cell
              volume regulation on the  energy budget of an estaurine animal.
