Title       : Craniofacial Development in Eutherian and Metatherian Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9407616

Award Number: 9407616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen K. Smith kksmith@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9407216  Smith    Embryonic development in marsupial and placental mammals
              differs  in a number of ways, one of the most important being that  marsupials
              are born at an essentially embryonic stage. In  previous studies, the PI has
              examined the morphological  consequences of this pattern, with focus on what
              morphological  adaptations allow marsupials to survive at such a premature 
              level. In these previous studies a number of hypotheses about  significant
              differences in the way marsupial and placental  mammals develop were presented.
              In the current study some of  these hypotheses will be tested. These are three
              specific aims.    Specific aim 1 will test the hypothesis that the growth and 
              differentiation of the brain controls or constrains the  development of
              neurocranial skeletal tissues. To this end the  interface and interaction
              between neural and skeletal tissues  will be examined in detail in a variety of
              morphological ways.    Specific aims 2 will examine the differentiation of
              cranial  skeletal tissues at a molecular level. A number of extracellular 
              matrix proteins as well as bone specific molecules are important  in 
              accumulation of these molecules will be examined using in  situ hybridization
              and immunocytochemistry. This study will  provide information on the mechanisms
              of bone formation.    Specific aim 3 will test the hypothesis that patterns of 
              development observed in previously studied systems are  characteristic for
              other placental and marsupial mammals with  broad-based comparative studies of
              development in a variety of  mammals. This study will provide information on
              the variation in  the ways that the skull can develop in mammals.    This
              project  is expected to provide basic data on the  interaction of tissues
              during embryonic development and on the  constraints that these interactions
              place on the evolutionary  diversification of the skull in mammals.  ***
