Title       : RUI: Molecular Regulation of Sodium Transport Systems in Euryhaline Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9407261

Award Number: 9407261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272493             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Towle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Forest College
	      Sheridan & College Road
	      Lake Forest, IL  60045    312/234-3100

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9407261  Towle    Euryhaline animals by definition are capable of tolerating a
              broad  range of salt levels in their aquatic environments.  An example is  the
              green shore crab Carcinus maenas, an introduced species in many  intertidal
              habitats around the world.  This crab succeeds in a  range of environmental
              salinities by regulating its own salt levels  in the blood, depending on
              transport systems in its multifunctional  gills.  Two sodium transporters in
              crab gill, a sodium/hydrogen  exchanger and a sodium/potassium pump, are very
              similar to  transporters in the mammalian kidney.  If we can learn more about 
              how the green crab and other euryhaline animals cope with varying  salt loads
              under natural conditions, perhaps we will better  understand processes in our
              own kidney which may be related to  hypertension and other disorders of
              homeostasis.  We may also learn  enough about the specifics of the physiology
              of Carcinus to suggest  environmentally safe approaches to its control as a
              pest species.   Dr. Towle plans to study the two sodium transporters in the
              crab  using the techniques of molecular biology.  He will identify the  genetic
              code for each of the transporters using the polymerase  chain reaction (PCR). 
              Determining the DNA sequence of each will  permit a comparison with similar
              transporters in mammals and other  vertebrates.  He will also be able to study
              the molecular  expression of each transporter in different specialized tissues 
              under various salinity challenges.  He expects that the  transporters will be
              expressed most strongly in gills of animals  challenged with low environmental
              salt, conditions in which salt  uptake would be adaptive.  The research will be
              accomplished with  the assistance of undergraduates at Lake Forest College and
              Mount  Desert Island Biological Laboratory.  ***
