Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Methods for Large-Scale Ocean Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1995       
File        : a9407509

Award Number: 9407509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Higdon higdon@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Higdon       The investigator studies the numerical solution of partial 
              differential equations that describe large-scale ocean  circulation.  The main
              topic of investigation is operator splitting  for the governing equations. 
              These equations admit wave velocities  having widely varying magnitudes, and
              this situation creates  serious problems with the stability and efficiency of
              numerical  algorithms.  One common approach to resolving these problems is to 
              split the fast and slow dynamics into separate subproblems.  The  fast motions
              are essentially independent of depth, and it is  natural to try to model these
              motions with a two-dimensional  system of equations.  The slow motions would
              then be modeled with a  three-dimensional system.  However, if the splitting is
              inexact,  then the equations that supposedly model the slow motions may 
              actually admit fast motions, to some degree.  There then arises the 
              possibility that these fast motions might cause numerical  instabilities in the
              computational algorithm.  The main goal of  this project is to develop a
              stable, efficient, and accurate  operator splitting for the governing
              equations.  Secondary goals  are to develop open boundary conditions for
              limited-area models  and to examine higher-order difference methods for spatial
               discretizations.       One of the major scientific challenges of the present
              day is  to obtain high-resolution computer simulations of global ocean 
              circulation over periods of many years.  Such simulations are of  great
              interest because the ocean is a crucial component of the  earth's climate
              system, so studies of possible global change must  include a careful
              examination of the role of the ocean.  For  example, the ocean has a great
              capacity to transport heat energy;  part of this transport is due to bulk
              transport by major current  systems, and part is due to mixing caused by
              smaller-scale eddies  that are shed from currents.  Comprehensive data on these
              processes  are difficult to collect, and it appears that an accurate  
              understanding of the earth's climate system will require numerical  simulations
              based on an eddy-resolving model of the general  circulation of the ocean. 
              Such simulations will present great  computational demands.  The goal of this
              project is to contribute  to the development of suitable numerical methods for
              these  computations.  This work is being performed in collaboration with 
              members of the physical oceanography modeling group in the College  of
              Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences at Oregon State University.
