Title       : Structure-Function Analysis of Protein Synthesis Elongation Factor G
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9407936

Award Number: 9407936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23811              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline Breitenberger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407935  Breitenberger    Bacterial protein synthesis elongation factor G (EF-G)
              catalyzes the translocation step of protein synthesis, reconfiguring the
              ribosome after the formation of each successive peptide bond.  The complex
              translocation reaction catalyzed by EF-G is very poorly understood,
              underscoring the importance of analyzing the structure and function of
              bacterial EF-G.  The objectives of this research are to prepare site-directed
              mutations in defined regions of the E. coli EG-G gene and to use biochemical
              and genetic methods to analyze the effects of these mutations.  One of the
              proposed regions for mutagenesis includes the proposed ribosome-binding domain
              of EF-G and other GTP-binding protein synthesis factors.  A threonine to serine
              mutant in this domain has been isolated, which appears to be partially
              functional, even though threonine is invariable in wild-type elongation
              factors.  Interestingly, expression of mutants in which the same threonine has
              been changed to alanine or proline results in a slow-growing phenotype in vivo.
               A highly conserved arginine close to the threonine seems to essential for EF-G
              function.  Further characterization of these and other mutants described in the
              proposal will lead to a better understanding of EF-G structure and function, as
              well as to new insight into the structure and function of other members of the
              GTPase superfamily.  %%%  The synthesis of proteins inside living cells is an
              elaborate, multicomponent process, which consumes large amounts of energy.  The
              bacterial protein, elongation factor G, or EF-G, is an essential participant in
              this process.  The role of EF-G is to ready the protein synthesizing apparatus
              for the addition of each new amino acid to the protein being synthesized.  Very
              little is known about the mechanism of action of EF-G, although tantalizing
              clues come from comparisons of EF-G structures between different organisms.  In
              particular, structures which are always found in EF-G function.  The objective
              of this proposal are  to make discrete changes in conserved parts of the EF-G
              protein and to determine how the changes affect EF-G function, using a
              combination of biochemical methods and the powerful techniques of bacterial
              genetics.  These studies will lead to a better understanding of how EF-G plays
              its part in protein synthesis.  Knowing the details of how proteins are
              synthesized, and how protein synthesis is controlled and coordinated with
              intracellular processes.  ***
