Title       : Characterization of the acylCoA Binding Domain of E. coli FadR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1994       
File        : a9407220

Award Number: 9407220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21481              (Estimated)
Investigator: Concetta C. DiRusso   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407220  DiRusso    Fatty acids and higher lipids are essential to cellular and 
              organismal structure and function.  Our interests lie in  understanding how
              lipid metabolism is coordinated to meet  the nutritional, structural and
              regulatory needs of cells  and organisms.  Escherichia coli is a useful model
              system  since its lipids are confined to the cellular envelope and  this
              organism modulates its membrane fatty acid and  phospholipid composition in
              response to variations in the  nutritional and environmental state of the cell.
               The  research proposed here investigates the E. coli transciption  factor FadR
              which regulates at least nine genes required for  anabolism and catabolism of
              fatty acids.  FadR exerts its  effect by binding to DNA to cause repression of
              genes  encoding proteins required for fatty acid catabolism and to  activate
              genes required for fatty acid anabolism.  DNA  binding by FadR is specifically
              prevented by long-chain  acylcoenzyme A thioesters.  The FadR gene has been
              cloned  and sequenced; and the protein purfied and preliminarily  characterized
              by the Principal Investigator.  The present  proposal is designed to:  (1)
              address questions regarding  FadR protein structure and function, and (2)
              evaluate  physiologic parameters which result in induction and the  cascade of
              FadR-dependent alterations in gene activity.  The  expertise of the Principal
              Investigator is in the molecular  genetics of E. coli fatty acid metabolism. 
              The present  award supports research activities during a sabbatical leave  in
              the laboratory of Dr. Jens Knudsen at the Institute of  Biochemistry,
              University of Odense, Odense, Denmark to  acquire technical skills in
              additional areas of lipid and  protein chemistry.  The specific research to be
              conducted  involves investigations into:  (1) the regulation by acyl-  CoA
              thioesters of FadR-DNA binding activity and prevention  of transcription
              activation, and; (2) determination of  native FadR structure and FadR complexed
              with acyl-CoA.  %%%  Fatty acids an d higher lipids are essential structural, 
              regulatory and nutritional compounds in all organisms.  Our  interests lie in
              understanding how lipid metabolism is  coordinated to meet the nutritional,
              structural and  regulatory needs of cells and organisms.  The bacterium 
              E.scherichia coli is a useful model system since its lipids  are confined to
              the cellular envelope and this organism  modulates its membrane fatty acid and
              phospholipid  composition in response to variations in the nutritional and 
              environmental state of the cell.  The research proposed here  investigates the
              Escherichia coli transcription factor FadR  which regulates many genes encoding
              proteins required for  both synthesis and degradation of fatty acids.  FadR 
              regulates these genes by binding to DNA to decrease the  activity of those
              encoding proteins required for fatty acid  degradation and to increase the
              activity of  those required  for fatty acid biosynthesis.  DNA binding by FadR
              is  specifically prevented by fatty acyl-coenzyme A thioesters.  The present
              proposal is designed to: (1) address questions  regarding FadR protein
              structure and function, and (2)  evaluate physiological parameters which result
              in induction  and the cascade of FadR-dependent alterations in gene  activity. 
              ***
