Title       : Pillared Layered Compounds: Their Synthesis, Structure and Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1996      
File        : a9407899

Award Number: 9407899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abraham Clearfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9407899  Clearfield    Metal oxide pillared layered materials (PLM) are a
              relatively new  class  of microporous solid acids. Potential areas of
              application  include their use as catalysts, sorbents, ion exchangers, sensors 
              and  ionic  conductors.  In a previous grant  from  NSF,  a  wide  variety   of
               PLM  were  synthesized  including  clay   minerals,  phosphates,  oxides,
              layered double hydroxides (LDH)  and  single  metal hydroxides. Novel pillars
              were prepared in addition to more  traditional  alumina, zirconia and chromia
              pillars.  The  aim  of  this  work is to incorporate other transition elements 
              into  the  nickel  oxide or cobalt oxide pillars.  The long range objectives 
              are  to  obtain a fundamental understanding of the synthetic  and 
              post-synthesis  procedures for control of  pore  size  and  other  structural
              features, control of acidity or basicity by choice  of  layered material and
              pillars and subsequent pillar treatments and  to  develop  novel acid,
              bifunctional and redox  catalysts  based  upon this information. To acquire the
              needed structural data  for  the  new materials,  novel x-ray methods and
              procedures involving  electron  diffraction, lattice imaging, atomic  force 
              microscopy  and novel mass spectrometry methods will be used.  %%%  Solid-acid 
              catalysts are the backbone of the major processes  of  refining and
              petrochemistry. In the reformulation of gasoline and  petroleum  products  to 
              meet  environmental  standards  and  the  requirements of future vehicles, new
              solid acids directed towards  catalyzing specific reactions will be in demand.
              Redox  catalysts  also play a crucial role in many large scale industrial
              processes  and in the future, both catalyst types will be expected to play a 
              greater  role  in  the  preparation of fine  chemicals.  Pillared  layered
              materials represent a potential new class of catalysts of  astonishing  
              breadth   and  variety.   However,   before   their  application  becomes  a 
              reality, it is essential  to  develop  a  complete   understanding of their
              structures,  develop  strategies  for  altering  the  structures  in controlled
               ways,  and  relate  catalytic  behavior to structure and composition. These 
              problems  are addressed in this proposal.
