Title       : New Hypotheses on Life History Variation in Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9407587

Award Number: 9407587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225667             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Martin tmartin@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Martin  9407587              Differences among species in mortality of food
              limitation are generally assumed to cause   differences in fecundity.  This
              study examines a new hypothesis: fecundity increases, even at the   cost of
              reduced survival, as breeding opportunities become more limited.  A
              quantitative model   shows that even small reductions in breeding opportunities
              (e.g., 10% reduction) can have large   effects on fecundity and these effects
              are independent of any mortality effects.  Moreover, such   small reductions in
              breeding opportunities can commonly exist across any taxonomic group   through
              limited availability of nesting sites, oviposition sites, or social behavior
              restricting access   to mates.  Cavity-nesting birds that excavate their nest
              holes (excavators) provide a model   system for testing this hypothesis because
              they are so easy to study in their natural nests, they   include
              closely-related species that cover nearly the entire range of fecundities found
              among   small land birds, they vary in abilities to excavate nest holes and
              potentially obtain breeding   opportunities, and clutch size is correlated with
              this variation in excavation ability.  The proposed   study will include
              experimental analyses of 4 species to test the hypothesis.   The proposed work
              challenges long-standing theories of underlying causes of differences   in
              clutch size and fecundity among species.  Hence, this work will advance our
              understanding of   factors affecting demography of populations, and will
              provide new information on life histories of   several previously unstudied
              bird species.  In addition, this study will provide critical information   that
              is pertinent to conservation of cavity-nesting species; land management
              agencies have   explicit recommendations for maintenance of snag (nest site)
              densities that may be insufficient.     variety of studies indicate that nest
              sites are commonly limiting for cavity-nesting birds.  Such   limitations can
              affect populations in additional subtle ways  such as influencing fecundity,
              survival   and hence population fluctuations of such species.  This study will
              advance understanding of the   extent to which nest sites are limiting and
              affecting population dynamics and population size.
