Title       : A Formal Approach to Requirements Analysis and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9407318

Award Number: 9407318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty H. Cheng chengb@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This project addresses the difficulties associated with  requirements analysis
              and design by combining object-oriented analysis and design with formal 
              methods.    A formalization of an object-oriented diagramming method is being
              developed,  and a framework of rules for reasoning about the meaning of its 
              diagrams is being defined.  Diagrams are treated as data type definitions,  and
               the rules  enable the automated checking of the consistency  of the
              definitions.  The  diagramming method comprises three  commonly used graphical
              notations that  define the Object Modeling  Techniques; (1) object models, (2)
              data flow diagrams,   and (3) state charts,  which have been used to perform
              requirements analysis.    As such, the rules defined for these notations
              provide a formal basis  for   requirements analysis and allow the rigorously
              checked  diagrams to be used as   formal specifications.  Diagram  composition
              rules have corresponding proof  obligations regarding  consistency.  Automated 
              techniques are used to determine the consistency and  completeness of a
              system's  requirements as depicted by the  diagrams.  A set of transformation 
              rules for diagrams and their corresponding  formal specifications are used to
              derive designs, guide the implementation process,  and validate the developed 
              code. A  graphics-based prototype environment is  being developed that 
              encapsulates the formalization process and existing  specification  and program
              development tools.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
