Title       : Associative Structures in Instrumental Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9407326

Award Number: 9407326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth M. Colwill Ruth_Colwill@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    IBN9407326  Ruth Colwill    This award supports continuing analysis
              of the way in which information is represented about basic instrumental and
              Pavlovian conditioning operations.  The primary goal of this research is to
              characterize the nature of the associative structures that mediate
              instrumental, goal-directed behavior.     During the two year funding period,
              Dr. Colwill and her colleagues will pursue two issues.  First, they will
              examine the influence of multiple outcome associates of the response on leaning
              about stimuli that signal the occurrence of those outcomes.  They will analyze
              cues that resolve the ambiguity of the response's potential consequences and
              compare them with cues that predict multiple outcomes nondifferentially.  The
              hypothesis being tested is that the former condition generates hierarchical
              learning whereas the latter produces pairwise associations between the stimulus
              (S), response (R) and outcomes (O).  Second, they will examine the integrity of
              these two structures when the same stimulus is exposed concurrently to training
              situation, each of which separately promotes different associative structures. 
              In addition, they will continue their analysis of the properties of binary
              associations.  The focus will be on two questions; (1) the nature of the
              association between S and R, and (2) the relative contributions of R-O and O-R
              associations to performance of extensively trained responses.  This issue is
              important to settle not only for theoretical reasons but because knowledge of
              the associations influencing performance is crucial to understanding the
              mechanisms underlying sensitivity to the R-O contingency.
