Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Early Formative Pottery Production and Exchange in
               Southern Mesoamerica with Special Reference to the Gulf Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9819367

Award Number: 9819367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector Neff neffh@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. O'Brien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Drs Hector Neff and Michael O'Brien, Mr. Sergio Herrera
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his work is to
              gain understanding of, what archaeologists term, the "Olmec phenomenon." The
              Olmec culture flourished on the Gulf Coast tropical lowlands of Mexico and
              reached its cultural apogee between 1200-900 BC. The largest site, San Lorenzo
              was surrounded my many smaller ones indicating a ranked hierarchical system.
              Large dirt filled architectural features, monumental stone sculptures, wealth
              differences among inhabitants and evidence of expert craftsmanship all  point
              to a centrally organized stratified society. Some of the well known sculptures
              which include monumental heads, anthropomorphic and zoomorphic figures are
              estimated to weigh between 20 and 40 tons. The Olmec are important because they
              are the first society in Middle America to reach this level of complexity and
              this provided the foundation on which Mayan and other later civilizations
              arose. While archaeologists have gained insight into social organization within
              the Olmec Gulf coast heartland, their influence further away is poorly
              understood. Exotic materials found at the site indicate extensive trade
              networks and Olmec style ceramics have been found as far distant as the Valley
              of Mexico. Some archaeologists see these ties as evidence for direct Olmec
              influence over a very broad area while others argue that the concept of "Olmec"
              is too narrowly defined, and that it is in fact a generalized widespread
              phenomenon with no real Gulf Coast core.

     Mr. Herrera will address this
              issue through a compositional and petrographic analysis of pottery from a
              number of widely spread sites which exhibit Olmec influence. Neutron activation
              analysis will provide trace element data; in conjunction with similar
              information from clay sources it should be possible to determine whether the
              Olmec materials were produced locally or carried from the San Lorenzo region
              over long distances. On the basis of such analyses it is possible to determine
              the degree of economic centralization. This, in turn, reflects broader social
              factors.

     This research is important because it will shed new light on
              the rise of civilization in Middle America. It will provide data of interest to
              many archaeologists and assist in training a promising young scientist.

