Title       : Effective and Sustainable Professional Development for Hands-On Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a9819579

Award Number: 9819579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2548568            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlton R. Pennypacker crpennypacker@lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Gould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819579
PENNYPACKER

This three-year project, sponsored by the University of
              California (Lawrence Hall of Science), will scale up the Hands-on Universe
              (HOU) Teacher Enhancement program using the Internet and will develop
              supporting professional development materials.  Over the next three years
              methods to enable teachers to join HOU will be developed so that High School
              teachers who come from broad geographic and scientific backgrounds can
              effectively teach through the HOU Program which will be continuously upgraded
              in content and which will add embedded assessment options.  Teachers will learn
              a number of skills that support the new National Science Standards.  Thus
              teachers learn how to:  i) use a sophisticated global array of telescopes and
              other real astronomy data for science and math education; ii) undertake
              research-based explorations using the tools of professional astronomy; iii) use
              potent computer and technological tools to support inquiry-based education; iv)
              enable themselves and students to make real discoveries.  A plan of on-line
              tutorial materials and teacher guides will be developed and evaluated,
              including careful formative evaluations of any differential effects of
              interactive web-based workshops compared to face-to-face workshops.  The key is
              to use the Internet to access a powerful set of teacher training materials and
              resources which support a wide range of teacher interests and skills, so that
              many more teachers than is currently the case can easily use the HOU Program. 
              Altogether more than 1000 teachers will be served by the project.

The
              cost-sharing amounts to 30% of the NSF award.

