Title       : Hawaiian Ocean Mixing Experiment: Nearfield: SeaSoar/LAMP Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a9819530

Award Number: 9819530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405534             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Rudnick drudnick@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey T. Sherman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9819530 Rudnick
A large coordinated experiment (HOME: Hawaiian Ocean Mixing
              Experiment) is underway near the Hawaiian Ridge to determine whether sites with
              rough topography are responsible for the mixing of the global ocean. The goals
              are to identify the major energy pathways for ocean mixing and achieve an
              approximate energy budget for the region. The Near-field experiment of the HOME
              project focuses on the investigation of the dynamical processes in the
              immediate vicinity of the Hawaiian Ridge, and especially the response to
              barotropic tidal forcing including generation  of low- and high-mode internal
              waves, propagation and turbulent dissipation and mixing. This sub-project will
              focus on quantifying the role of advection, and measuring the evolution of
              shear, stratification and dissipation, especially in the off-shore direction.
              
Two instrument systems, SeaSoar and LAMP (Long-term Autonomous Microstructure
              Profiler) will be deployed to conduct surveys of the upper ocean. The SeaSoar
              is a towed vehicle capable of undulating between the surface and 400 m,
              completing a cycle every 3 km at a tow speed of 8 knots. Measured variables
              include temperature, salinity, pressure, and fluorescence. Velocity and shear
              will be measured using a shipboard Doppler Sonar. Repeated surveys consisting
              of several long offshore legs will achieve both fine horizontal and vertical
              resolution and wide range. The Nearfield SeaSoar component will, to some
              extent, revolve around the detailed measurements from FLIP. The time series
              obtained from FLIP are Eulerian, so changes will be both local and advective.
              The SeaSoar survey will resolve the horizontal structure advecting past FLIP,
              placing its velocity and density measurements into mesoscale context. The
              unique contribution of SeaSoar will be the ability to calculate statistics that
              require horizontal resolution and range. For example, the complete vertical and
              horizontal wavenumber-frequency spectrum is realizable from the combination of
              FLIP and SeaSoar measurements. 

Augmenting the SeaSoar work will be LAMP
              (Long-term Autonomous Microstructure Profiler), which is an autonomous profiler
              (based on the SOLO) outfitted with microstructure temperature probes, a
              Sea-Bird CTD, and an internal flash card. LAMP provides both temporal
              resolution and broader coverage than otherwise possible. After the survey
              resolves the current field, four LAMPs will be periodically seeded into the
              survey box where they will drift through and eventually out of the region. They
              will provide additional spatial sampling of the thermal dissipation c rates and
              the density field, as well as some profiles of c further off the ridge to help
              place the Nearfield measurements into a larger context.


