Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for High Resolution Shadowing for Electron
               Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a9819814

Award Number: 9819814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dohn G. Glitz  (Principal Investigator former)
              Reid C. Johnson rcjohnson@mednet.ucla.edu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9819814
Dohn Glitz
University of California Los Angeles
Instrumentation for
              High Resolution Shadowing for Electron Microscopy
Electron Microscopy is a
              powerful and adaptable approach to the determination of the structure of
              biological molecules and macromolecular complexes.  Shadowing with heavy metals
              is an established technique for the visualization of such objects in electron
              micrographs, but the relatively thick and granular metal layers that are
              typically deposited by thermal evaporation limit the resolution that can be
              attained.  This award supports the development and fabrication of an apparatus
              for carefully controlled freeze-drying and high resolution shadowing of objects
              including ribosomes, invertasomes, spliceosomes, and transcription complexes. 
              Design and construction of the instrumentation is necessary because no
              commercial apparatus with the desired capabilities is available.  The design,
              however, is intended to be reasonably adaptable to use with common vacuum
              evaporators.
Preliminary results indicate that layers of pure tungsten in
              which grain size (which limits potential resolution) is 0.7 to 0.8 nm will be
              generated.  This grain size is approximately seven-fold better than that
              attained using thermal evaporation of platinum.  The proposed instrumentation
              is based on experience with a prototype system.  The equipment includes devices
              for grid mounting and holding, their protected cryotransfer and controlled
              lyophilization within the chamber of the vacuum evaporator, and their shadowing
              at angles as low as 5 degree Celsius with the further capability of sample
              rotation.  The apparatus will include two electron guns designed such that the
              electrical field is auto-focussed on the tip of wire of the metal or other
              material to be evaporated.  Almost all of the energy of the electron beam is
              thus absorbed within a very small local volume at the tip of the wire, which is
              melted and vaporized in a very controlled manner.  The geometry of the system
              will be flexible and adaptable, and the inclusion of two electron guns within
              the system should allow independent evaporation of two different substances
              without reconfiguration of the system: e.g. tungsten and carbon evaporation
              could be done independently, or the two metals could be evaporated to shadow
              the same sample at two angles.  The instrumentation will be valuable to a wide
              range of structural investigations in molecular biology.  

