Title       : Active Fluorescence Assays of Phytoplankton Physiological State: Population and
               Individual Cell Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9819206

Award Number: 9819206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Olson rolson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi M. Sosik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Olson
9819206

Active fluorescence techniques such as Fast Repetition Rate
              (FRR) fluorometry are becoming commonly used to monitor phytoplankton condition
              in the sea, but many questions remain about the relationships between these
              measurements of photosynthetic potential and ecologically relevant
              phytoplankton properties such as growth rate. Photosynthetic parameters such as
              the fraction of functional reaction centers, the functional absorption cross
              section of photosystem 2 (PS2), and the rate of electron transfer between PS2
              and PSI appear to be valuable diagnostic indicators of specific suboptimal
              conditions, but it is not clear how quantitatively we can interpret these
              indicators, or how important a role heterogeneity among phytoplankton species
              and individuals might play in such interpretation. Olson and Sosik therefore
              will conduct a series of studies designed to investigate the effects of
              environmental conditions on phytoplankton growth and active fluorescence
              parameters, and to determine the extent of variability in active fluorescence
              responses among phytoplankton species and individual cells in natural
              populations. Specifically, Olson and Sosik will investigate relationships
              between nitrogen-, iron-, and light-limitation on phytoplankton growth and
              photosynthetic parameters as measured by active fluorescence techniques.
              Observations of wide areas of ocean in which active fluorescence indicates
              suboptimal phytoplankton condition, and experiments in which growth rate
              appears to be uncoupled from active fluorescence parameters raise questions
              about these relationships. Batch and continuous cultures of phytoplankton will
              be used to study transient and steady-state limitation (including supraoptimal
              light intensities) of cell growth and the accompanying effects on photochemical
              energy conversion efficiency of PS2 (i.e., the fraction of functional
              photosynthetic reaction centers), the functional absorption cross section of
              PS2, and the rate of electron transfer from PS2 to PS 1. Fluorescence responses
              of natural populations of phytoplankton to changing environmental conditions
              will be assessed through observations of local waters, transects between Woods
              Hole and the Sargasso Sea in spring and summer, and through bottle incubation
              experiments.

	The approach the investigators will use focuses on examining
              inter- and intra-species heterogeneity in active fluorescence parameters, and
              in active fluorescence responses to environmental conditions. Olson and Sosik
              will analyze the samples described above by both FRR fluorometry (a bulk
              method) and individual cell "pump-during-probe" (PDP) techniques. A PDP flow
              cytometer will be used to measure pico- and nanophytoplankton populations and
              individual larger cells, and a PDP microfluorometer will be used to analyze
              individual cells of selected species larger than 5 gm. The distribution of
              active fluorescence parameters both within and between species will thus be
              assessed in pure cultures under different growth conditions, including
              transient and steady state situations. Application of both bulk and individual
              cell techniques to natural samples will allow the investigators to determine
              the influence of various phytoplankton groups on the bulk measurements, and
              analysis of the distribution of properties among individual cells may enable
              them to deduce the recent nutrient history of the phytoplankton.

The
              combination of bulk and individual-cell measurements of active fluorescence
              will provide new insights into the regulation and growth of marine
              phytoplankton, including a new way to evaluate the dynamics of nutrient
              availability.

