Title       : Dissertation Research: The Nature Conservancy, Science, and the People of Adams
               County
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9819293

Award Number: 9819293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8482               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Gieryn gieryn@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project is a study of the relations between an
              international, science-based conservation organization (The Nature Conservancy)
              and the people of a rural county in southern Ohio. The Conservancy has
              established a preserve in this area, but more importantly is attempting to
              enroll the local residents in a program of county-wide assessment and planning.
              The study addresses important theoretical and practical issues in the sociology
              of knowledge and of science in public controversies, drawing as well on
              sociological theory of small towns, organizations, and place. The specific
              research questions of the project are: (1) For the Adams County residents and
              for the Conservancy, what are the different meanings of the county and what are
              their different interests in its future, taking into account both the human
              community and natural environment (2) How does the Conservancy bring its
              definition of the county into alignment with the county residents? What are the
              strategies employed by the Conservancy and how are these resisted? To answer
              these questions, the project consists of three elements: (a) ethnographic
              observation in the county as the Conservancy attempts to institute a process of
              county-wide assessment and planning; (b) tape-recording and analysis of
              interviews and oral histories with approximately 30 Conservancy staff and
              county residents; (c) the collection and analysis of documents and data from
              the Conservancy, from collections relevant to the county (from libraries,
              newspapers, county and village records, and organizations).  This
              interdisciplinary study is significant first because it brings science and
              technology studies and community studies together for the first time. For
              science and technology studies, the project aims to enlarge upon theories of
              science in public controversies, while in sociology this investigation will add
              as well to the theoretical understanding of small towns, organizations, and
              place. This investigation has practical significance as well. The changes
              taking place in this rural county are being duplicated nationwide, and this
              study can help communities and conservation groups decide on the best course of
              action to take in grappling with this change and its consequences. In addition,
              the growth of the Conservancy and in particular its new participatory
              conservation approach has been overlooked. These findings can help the
              Conservancy, its supporters, other conservation groups, the involved
              communities, and interested others to better understand the new approach,
              assess it, and take action in accord with their goals. Finally, this research
              can be applied to the larger problem of balancing the knowledge and interests
              of local residents with the need for expert science from an organization like
              the Conservancy. This study can help in evaluating how scientific knowledge can
              best be part of democratic decision-making.
