Title       : Collaborative Research: Recharge, Discharge and Routes of Fluid Flow within
               Young Oceanic Crust at the Juan de Fuca Ridge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  2000   
File        : a9819242

Award Number: 9819242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David E. Epp                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198346             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew T. Fisher afisher@es.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thermally-driven circulation of seawater through flanks of mid-ocean ridges, in
              seafloor older than one million years, cools and alters the crust, and
              dominates thermal and chemical mass transport between the oceans and the
              seafloor. Despite the significance of these processes, little is known about
              the mechanics of ridge-flank circulation, including the physical and chemical
              nature of discharge and recharge sites, the pathways and lateral length scales
              of flow, and the depth extent of penetration into the oceanic crust. Global
              fluxes of major and trace elements through ridge flanks are also uncertain. We
              propose to investigate patterns of vigorous fluid circulation and associated
              fluxes on the eastern flank of Juan de Fuca Ridge. Results from a recent
              drilling transect in this area produced evidence for two important and
              unexpected ridge-flank hydrothermal processes: (1) upwelling of deeply-sourced
              hydrothermal fluids that penetrate an area also hosting shallow circulation,
              and (2) significant axis-parallel recharge in shallow basement, allowing
              recharging seawater to flow along strike over several to tens of kilometers. We
              will investigate the extent and efficiency of fluid, heat, and solute transport
              (a) across the strike of the basement relief (i.e., along a crustal aging
              profile, perpendicular to the spreading axis), (b) along the strike of the
              buried and partially buried basement ridges, including along deep axis-parallel
              faults, and (c) within the vicinity of conical basement edifices, probably
              small, long-extinct volcanoes, that penetrate through the nearly continuous
              sediment on the ridge flank. This work will document and evaluate these
              interpretations, to test competing hypotheses regarding the geometry of
              ridge-flank circulation, to constrain ridge-flank flux estimates, and to help
              select sites for a return of the drill ship for additional sampling and
              downhole experiments.
