Title       : Soils, Geomorphology, GIS and Paleolakes in Northern Michigan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a9819148

Award Number: 9819148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118423             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall J. Schaetzl schaetzl@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project will address the relationships among soils, surficial sediments,
              landforms, and the glacial history of three Michigan landscapes.  The research
              will utilize county-level soils data and combine it with fieldwork and a
              knowledge of the sedimentary environments of the soil parent materials, to
              interpret the glacial history of the three regions.  Geomorphologists now
              hypothesize that large lakes may have covered many of Michigan's landscapes
              immediately after the glaciers retreated.  This work will discern the spatial
              and temporal details about some of these lakes.  What makes this research
              intriguing is the fact that these landscapes are on uplands.  The research will
              also develop and refine a mapping methodology that, until recently, has not
              been possible due to lack of digital soils data.
	Fieldwork will relate soils
              to the sediments they have formed in (e.g., glacial outwash, lacustrine sands,
              glacial till).  In a GIS, detailed surficial sediment maps will be created for
              each region.  Follow-up fieldwork will be used to (1) check the accuracy of
              these maps by examining shoreline areas and possible lake outlets, and (2)
              establish the spatial variation in sediments from deep water, shallow water,
              and lake-marginal settings.  These data will add to a growing picture of
              deglaciation and landscape evolution in the Great Lakes region during the
              Latest Pleistocene, a time when climatic and landscape change were occurring
              faster than at any time in the past 135,000 years, and one in which water and
              ice each played a great role in shaping the landscape.  Results will provide
              important baseline data for soil scientists, thereby facilitating more accurate
              (re)mapping of the soil and sedimentological resources of the Great Lakes
              region.

