Title       : Empirical Investigation of a Risk-Value Theory for Decision Making and Risk
               Judgment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9819354

Award Number: 9819354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210358             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Dyer j.dyer@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9819354
Dyer

The objective of this proposed research is to contribute to the
              development of a new risky choice theory based on the intuitive idea of
              mean-risk or risk-value tradeoffs.  In this research effort, we will focus on
              empirical studies of the measure of perceived risk and risk-value theory that
              we have developed recently.  

	Intuitively, individuals may consider their
              choices over risky alternatives based on the idea of a tradeoff between risk
              and return, where return is typically measured  by the mean (or expected
              return) and risk is measured by some indicator of dispersion or possible
              losses.  This notion is prevalent in the literatures in finance, marketing and
              other areas.  Our risk-value framework provides a new methodology that is
              totally compatible with this choice behavior.  In particular, our approach
              unifies two streams of research: one in developing preference models and the
              other in modeling risk judgments.  This synthesis makes our risk-value theory
              more descriptively powerful than other preference models and risk models that
              have been processed separately for many years.

	In this proposed project, we
              will conduct experimental studies to explore the assumptions and predictions of
              the measure of perceived risk and of the risk-value models, and evaluate the
              performance of our models compared with others.  These studies will be
              conducted using different decision problems under different controlled
              conditions regarding information representation.  In order to make our
              experimental tasks more representative of real choice problems, we will use
              risky alternatives with a wide range of distributions of multiple outcomes in
              our studies.  Some of our experimental studies will be based on computer
              programmed decision problems.  This will allow subjects to handle experimental
              tasks and to process information easily, and also let us control experimental
              conditions and collect data more effectively. 

	These planned empirical
              studies should offer significant insights and contribute to our understanding
              of risk and its role in decision making and risk management. Considering the
              fact that our models are consistent with a large body of existing empirical
              evidence regarding both risk and decision making, we expect to receive positive
              support from our new designed experiments.



