Title       : Hawaii Ocean Mixing Experiment: Nearfield Program: Moorings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a9819532

Award Number: 9819532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $620674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray D. Levine levine@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Boyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9819532 Levine

Funding is provided to conduct a large coordinated experiment
              (HOME: Hawaiian Ocean Mixing Experiment) near the Hawaiian Ridge to determine
              whether sites with rough topography are responsible for the mixing of the
              global ocean. The goals are to identify the major energy pathways for ocean
              mixing and achieve an approximate energy budget for the region. The Near-field
              experiment of the HOME project focuses on the investigation of the dynamical
              processes in the immediate vicinity of the Hawaiian Ridge, and especially the
              response to barotropic tidal forcing including generation  of low- and
              high-mode internal waves, propagation and turbulent dissipation and mixing.
              This sub-project will focus on (i)  defining the vertical structure of the
              individual tidal constituents at several distances from the source and
              determine the portion that is phase-locked with the barotropic tide; (ii) 
              measuring the tidal contribution to shear, strain, Richardson number, and other
              mixing indicators such as Thorpe scale; (iii) determining the contribution of
              other energy sources for mixing, such as mesoscale currents and high-frequency
              internal waves; (iv)  describing the modification of the background internal
              wave spectrum as the Hawaiian Ridge is approached; and (v)  studying the
              relationship between observations of shear, strain, Thorpe scale, etc., and the
              direct observations of turbulent mixing obtained by other Nearfield
              investigators. Three moorings will be deployed starting at the top of the Ridge
              in the Kauai Channel and extending to the south: a short mooring at the top of
              the Ridge, a mid-depth mooring deployed at about 1500m, and a deep mooring at
              4000m.  The three moorings will be deployed in August, 2002, just before the
              intensive profiling of the Nearfield experiment begins, and will be recovered
              three months later.  The instrumentation will include: Doppler current
              profilers, temperature recorders, and temperature-conductivity recorders.  

