Title       : The Content and Timing of Media Coverage of Message Events: Cycles and
               Comparisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9819884

Award Number: 9819884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela E. Oliver oliver@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In a democratic state, citizens may express concerns about public issues through
              staging social protest events, and communicate their message to a broader
              public by attracting media attention for their events. But the media do not
              cover all such events, and the content of the media coverage may be favorable
              or unfavorable to the message that those staging the event are attempting to
              convey. Because the media are so important in the process of communicating with
              the public, and because most research on public events necessarily relies on
              newspaper archives, it is important to understand the factors that determine
              whether an event is covered in the mass media and, if covered, what the nature
              of the coverage is. The present project analyzes data from four years
              (1993-1996) in Madison, Wisconsin to determine the interplay between
              claims-making events and the content and timing of media coverage. Data include
              records of claim-making events from five sets of police archives, and text
              files of local newspaper stories. Stories are coded for the prominence and
              content of their coverage of public events. These are supplemented by searches
              of electronic newspaper archives for other coverage of the issues and
              organizations involved in the events. Statistical analyses demonstrate
              different patterns for the timing and content of event coverage depending on
              the form and sponsor of the event, and show the interplay between events and
              news coverage in the unfolding of protest campaigns. Comparisons with similar
              data collected in a small German city provide an initial basis for assessing
              the extent to which these results transcend differing political contexts.
