Title       : The Social, Political, and Cultural Impact of New Technologies: Insights from
               Surveys of Internet Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9819907

Award Number: 9819907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289482             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Robinson robinson@socy.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this research project is to explore the implications of the Internet
              for I ) social inequality; 2) deliberative democracy, and 3) cultural choice. A
              survey will gather high-quality data on current practices relevant to each of
              these three areas of potential impact. In each case, data will make it possible
              to evaluate the extent to which two or more alternative perspectives are
              consistent with patterns of Internet use as they have developed to date. 
              Questions addressing social inequality and democracy are: Will the Internet
              increase equality by making knowledge cheaper and more widely available? Or
              will it exacerbate it, as high-status persons gain privileged access to
              consequential knowledge about how to use these new technologies? To what extent
              are people using the Internet for political purposes at all?  Regarding
              cultural choice, the survey will explore the diversity of the sites that
              current users visit, and gather data on the extent to which Internet users
              currently employ search strategies and tools that permit access to much of the
              Internet or instead restrict choice to a relatively few pre-selected sites. 
              The study proposes to develop several indicators of these aspects of Internet
              use with the help of a Scientific Advisory Board of both social scientists and
              physical scientists highly familiar with the potential social impacts of these
              technologies. Data will then be collected on these indicators using the rich
              and nationally generalizable data base of the General Social Survey of the
              University of Chicago in its Year 2000 sample.  Considerable effort will be
              expended in collecting data on respondents' use of the Internet that will allow
              respondents to describe the impact of the Internet in their own words, and in
              developing codings that will capture the richness of their responses. Like
              other GSS data, those collected here will be rapidly and readily made available
              to scholars in a variety of disciplines and research settings. It is expected
              that most of the questions would be applicable in future GSS surveys in order
              to track the potential long-tern impacts of these technologies.
