Title       : Summer Program on Game Theory and Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9819348

Award Number: 9819348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74075              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yair Tauman yair.tauman@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pradeep Dubey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Aumann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abraham Neyman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the 1999 summer program at the Center for Game Theory in
              Economics, at the State University of New York at Stony Brook (USB), a
              continuation of a series of annual summer programs emphasizing game theory and
              its applications to economics, as well as other fields.  Game theory plays a
              significant role in much of the contemporary research in economic theory and is
              accordingly a frequent theme in organized activities at outstanding research
              centers throughout the world.  USB's summer program is unique, however, in its
              explicit focus on game theory, both theoretical and applied. The strength of
              this focus is apparent in the membership of the organizing committee which
              consists of the members of the center plus experts from other institutions in
              the United States and abroad. The value of the approach and of the proposed
              summer programs is evidenced by their success from 1990 to 1998, with over 1300
              participants. The basic program format includes research-oriented conferences
              and workshops and, also instruction on selected topics in game theory. Thus,
              while the primary objective is to stimulate and disseminate new advances in
              both theory and applications, this summer program serves to make conceptual and
              methodological developments in game theory available to an expanding group of
              scholars in economics and other disciplines. At the same time the summer
              program provides a venue for these scholars to present their ideas and concerns
              to game-theorists, enabling both to explore fruitful new areas of
              collaboration..

More specifically, the summer program consists of: 1) an
              international conference; 2) workshops on selected themes; 3) an intensive
              course.  The international conference lasts for five days. It is organized
              along the same lines as those held at USB, in the past years, with plenary and
              parallel sessions, and invited and contributed papers. The workshops normally
              cover a two-week period. Each workshop lasts from two to five days, and the
              number of workshops in a given year vary accordingly. The week-long intensive
              course consists of lectures and discussion on selected topics of general
              importance for both theory and applications. 

