Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Endocrine Regulation of Seasonal Polymorphisms in Japanese
               Butterflies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9819949

Award Number: 9819949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy B. Rountree   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9819949
Rountree

This award provides funds to support two three-month
              research visits by Dr. Dorothy B. Rountree, Department of Biology, University
              of Louisville, for collaboration with Dr. Shin-Ichiro Takahashi, Department of
              Applied Biological Chemistry, University of Tokyo, and Dr. Katsuhiko Endo,
              Biological Institute, Yamaguchi University, Japan, on seasonal polymorphism in
              butterfly species.  A goal of their research is developing a new, integrative
              model for endocrine regulation of seasonal polymorphism in these butterfly
              species.

Many butterfly species show different wing coloration or morphology
              depending on the season.  The control of alternative seasonal phenotypes is
              interesting to developmental biologists, because external environmental cues,
              especially photoperiod, are changed by the insect into hormonal signals that
              alter internal developmental pathways.  Two different kinds of hormones
              regulate butterfly seasonal polymorphisms: the neuropeptide Summer Morph
              Producing Hormone (SMPH) and the steroid molting hormones (ecdysteroids). 
              Until recently, butterflies were thought to use either one hormone or the other
              to determine which phenotype to develop, but SMPH has been found in
              ecdysteroid-regulated butterflies and ecdysteroids can change phenotype in
              SMPH-regulated butterflies.  Thus, the need for creating a new, integrative
              model for endocrine regulation of seasonal polymorphisms.  In this project, the
              hypothesis that SMPH influences ecdysteroid receptor complex proteins will be
              tested in an SMPH-regulated Japanese butterfly, Polygonia c-aureum (the Asian
              comma).  Part of the proposed research will take place at Yamaguchi University,
              Japan, in collaboration with Dr. Endo, who discovered SMPH, while another part
              will be conducted at Tokyo University, in the laboratory of Dr. Takahashi,
              whose techniques developed on vertebrate cells will be used on an insect
              peptide signaling system.  This research will be mutually beneficial because of
              the principal investigator's expertise in the study of the different molecular
              forms of proteins in the ecdysteroid nuclear receptor complex.  This project is
              supported under the Science Fellowship Program between the National Science
              Foundation and the Japan Foundation Center for Global Partnership.
***

