Title       : RUI: A Detailed Study of the Circumstellar Environment Around Neaby A-Type
               Stars: Possible Planet Construction Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9819737

Award Number: 9819737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199693             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwang-Ping Cheng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract   K. P. Chang   AST 98-19737

The objectives of this research project
              are to assess the frequency of the "Beta Pictoris phenomenon" in our solar
              neighborhood, and to gain more insight into the "planetary system formation
              process" through detailed spectroscopic studies of Beta Pictoris-like
              systems.

For years, astronomers have been searching for other planets
              outside our Solar System. They especially want to study systems that are
              undergoing the process of planet formation so that they can gain insight into
              the origin of our own Solar System. The best candidate is Beta Pictoris, a
              nearby A type star surrounded by a huge dust disk and a very dynamic
              circumstellar gas environment. It has been suggested that the short-term
              variations of circumstellar gas absorption components in the Beta Pictoris
              system could be due to the evaporation of comet-size bodies.  It also has been
              suggested that the huge dust disk around Beta Pictoris could be an analog of
              our Kuiper Belt, a region past the orbit of the planet Neptune that is now
              considered to be the source of short-period comets.

A detailed,
              spectroscopic study of the circumstellar environments of nearby A-type stars
              has been carried out. The program stars are young A-type stars that could serve
              as laboratories for the study of gas accretion during the clearing phase of
              planetary disks.  The goal has been to characterize the debris disks around
              these stars. A sky volume-limited search for Beta Pictoris-like systems among
              the 62 A-stars within 25 parsecs of the Sun has been completed. The preliminary
              search consisted of two independent studies: one to obtain data on
              circumstellar dust using the IRAS satellite data and the second one for data on
              the circumstellar gas using high-resolution visual and ultraviolet spectra.  It
              was found that more than 18% of the stars have circumstellar dust, and more
              than a dozen stars with circumstellar gas have been identified.  Further
              monitoring of the stars has revealed that at least four of these have Beta
              Pictoris-like variable spectral signatures indicating gaseous infall. One of
              the four stars is identified to have variable circumstellar gas features and
              has no dust signature at the IRAS Faint Source Survey detection limit. More
              studies of Beta Pictoris-like systems will be carried out to provide important
              constraints for our understanding of planetary system formation.

Analyzing
              high signal-to-noise and high-resolution visual and ultraviolet wavelength
              spectra will identify more nearby A-stars that have circumstellar gas similar
              to Beta Pictoris. A study of the dynamics in all the Beta Pictoris-like systems
              will be carried out by monitoring the temporal and variable circumstellar
              absorption line components observable in high-resolution Calcium II K and
              Sodium I D wavelength spectra. This study will lead to a better understanding
              of the inter-relationship between the circumstellar gas and dust. Ultimately,
              an atlas will be compiled of the circumstellar dust and gas properties; namely
              mass, density, temperature distributions, velocity fields, and chemical
              gradients for all the nearby A-type stars. These physical conditions,
              especially those in the Beta Pictoris-like systems, will provide valuable
              constraints for models of accretion and planetary system formation. This atlas
              will be the first thorough compilation of the properties of circumstellar dust
              and gas around all the nearby A-type stars using data from the IRAS, HST, IUE
              satellite data, in addition to ground-based data.  The atlas will be available
              to the general astronomical community through journal publications, and the
              ground-based data (150 plus nights of observations obtained at Kitt Peak
              National Astronomy Observatory, Cerro Tololo International Observatory,
              McDonald Observatory, and Mt. Stromlo Observatory) will be made available via
              the Internet.


