Title       : Rethinking Economy: Envisioning Alternative Regional Futures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9819138

Award Number: 9819138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168614             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Graham graham@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research produces alternative understandings of regional economies in order
              to facilitate innovative forms of economic development, policy, and activism.
              Specific aims are: (1) to document the conventional notions of economy that
              drive economic and social policy in regions, and (2) to unearth alternative
              possibilities emerging from ordinary economic actors who are involved in a
              variety of "nontraditional" or undervalued economic activities. The project
              will use popular economic experience to call into question dominant ideas of
              economic development and to suggest alternative and more diverse development
              paths that government and communities might pursue. 
	Two well-recognized
              regions have been selected for study: "the Valley," or Hampshire and Franklin
              Counties in Massachusetts, and the Holyoke/Springfield region in Hampden
              County, Massachusetts. For these regions, the project will produce a genealogy
              of regional economic identity showing the ways that conventional concepts of
              economy and development have shaped and constrained regional development
              initiatives over the past 20 years.  In addition, a community economic audit
              will be undertaken that takes into account unpaid labor, nonmarket transactions
              and noncapitalist enterprises (such as self-employment and worker collectives)
              in order to yield a fuller but less conventional representation of the regional
              economy.  Case studies of alternative economic practices and organizations will
              be conducted in order to document their linkages and contributions to the
              economy of the region, and finally, focus groups and community conferencing
              will be utilized to highlight the contributions of marginalized economic actors
              to the regional economy. The overarching goal is to produce new development
              discourses and a range of policy options to inform the efforts of regional
              governance bodies and activists. 

