Title       : Fast IR Imaging with Sub-wavelength Resolution Using a Transient Near-field
               Probe (Tipless Near-field Microscopy)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9819778

Award Number: 9819778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd I. Smith tismith@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9819778


Abstract


Fast Infrared Imaging with Sub-Wavelength Resolution
              Using a
Transient Near-Field Probe (Tipless Near-Field
              Microscopy)

Sub-micron resolution "chemical" images of biological systems
              obtained through use of the intrinsic contrast parameters of molecules - their
              mid-infrared vibrational modes -are beginning to play an important role in
              research. Because the wavelengths in the region of interest are typically
              several microns, such high resolution images can only be obtained through the
              use of near-field techniques. To date, such techniques have relied upon some
              form of mechanical probe or tip made with sub-micron dimensions and
              mechanically scanned across the surface to be imaged while being maintained at
              a fixed sub-micron distance from the surface.
We propose the development of a
              new approach to near-field microscopy in which imaging is based on a remote,
              optically generated transient near-field probe. Picosecond pulses of visible
              light incident on the surface of a semiconductor substrate will produce,
              through the phenomenon of photo-induced reflectivity, transient mirrors with
              dimensions determined by the size of the visible beam spot on the substrate.
              Infrared light scattered by such a sub-wavelength sized mirror will be
              collected afier propagating through the sample located on the substrate. Since
              the sample is located on the substrate, no near-field distance control will be
              required, and images will be available at the rate of conventional laser
              scanned microscopes. Further, since the near-field probe is generated remotely
              -using light - the sample to be imaged can be covered by, or encased in, a
              transparent liquid or solid.
The microscope will combine a conventional
              inverted microscope with an infrared imaging system providing rapid sub-micron
              imaging simultaneously in the visible and infrared parts of the spectrum. In
              addition to conventional histologic sections, biological systems, including
              living cells, will be able to be imaged in liquid
              media.

























