Title       : JASMINE: The Joint Air-See Monsoon Interaction Experiment: A Pilot Study of
               Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction During Active and Break Phases of the Summer
               Moonsoon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9819618

Award Number: 9819618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anjuli S. Bamzai                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Webster pjw@willywilly.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed experiment is a collaborative two-year study of the air-sea fluxes,
              air-sea interaction, convection and the upper ocean response to the variations
              of the summer monsoon as it oscillates between active and the lulls in between
              (break periods). A pilot study, the joint air-sea monsoon interaction
              experiment (JASMINE) will conduct an oceanographic and meteorological survey of
              the Bay of Bengal region. Air-sea fluxes, the state of the atmosphere and
              convection within the atmosphere will be determined in a region that has been
              observed to be a centroid of intraseasonal variability in the summer monsoon.
              JASMINE is a collaborative project of the University of Washington, University
              of Hawaii, and the University of Colorado.

This  component of the
              collaboration will examine the surface energy balance and the upper ocean heat
              budget. The warm pool of the Indian Ocean appears different from the tropical
              western Pacific Ocean in that meridional heat transports are an important part
              of the heat balance. Scientific questions regarding the nature of heat
              partitioning, net heat flux into the Indian Ocean and its annual cycle, and
              heat balance and surface energy budget variation over intraseasonal cycles,
              will be addressed. 

The study is important since gathering and subsequent
              analysis of a comprehensive set of data, will yield insights into the air-sea
              interactions during break and active periods of  the  monsoon. The accurate
              prediction of monsoon onset and monsoon rainfall is a scientific challenge that
              also has enormous economic consequences.


