Title       : An Integrated Program of Training in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a9819728

Award Number: 9819728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2593689            (Estimated)
Investigator: Calvin C. Moore ccmoore@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ole H. Hald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Steel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hung-Hsi Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Ribet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tsit-Yuen Lam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan D. Weinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Sarason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vera Serganova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandre J. Chorin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beresford N. Parlett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              F. Alberto Grunbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zvezdelina Stankova-Frankel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9177,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819728

The University of California Berkeley Mathematics Department VIGRE
              program is designed to improve the Department's training programs for
              mathematics scholars and educators at all levels. The program will try to
              create a community of scholars who all feel that they and their work are an
              integral part of a connected whole.
During the last few years the Department
              has been engaged intensively in review and revision of the entire curriculum.
              The most extensive revision effort to date has been in the lower-division where
              teams of faculty and graduate students from the Mathematics Department, often
              joined by faculty and graduate students from other departments, have been
              designing worksheets and computer modules  to be used in the discussion
              sections of our calculus courses.  Students in these courses will experience a
              more active learning environment. At the upper-division level, we plan to
              introduce new courses to enrich the curriculum and that will introduce our
              majors to applications of mathematics. One such course already successfully in
              place is a course on Wavelets and Signal Processing. Others will follow.
              Professors Moore and Wu have been awarded a grant by the Stuart Foundation to
              develop materials for a new course for math majors going into secondary school
              teaching and as a course open to current secondary school teachers for
              professional development. The concept of the course would be "High School
              Mathematics from an Advanced (i.e. College) Point of View". The underlying idea
              flows from Felix Klein's famous little book "Elementary Mathematics from an
              Advanced Standpoint". The VIGRE grant will help us to employ this course for
              professional development of current high school teachers. The Department has
              also initiated a new program TeachMath to prepare secondary school mathematics
              teacher leaders. Mathematics majors can enroll in this program in their senior
              year and simultaneously complete the major and begin education courses and
              practice teaching. In a fifth year they complete their teacher training and
              take two additional mathematics course. We provide a stipend to students who
              are enrolled in the program. Graduate curriculum revision is underway but is
              only in its initial phase.
The Department has started on an experimental basis
              a program of undergraduate research seminars. A senior faculty member will lead
              the seminar in which an average of about 7 or 8 of our most talented
              undergraduate majors will participate as an Undergraduate Research Experience
              and will receive a stipend. After a few initial lectures by the faculty member
              to set the stage, students will read journal articles and present, under the
              guidance of the faculty member, the results in the paper or papers, and in the
              process filling in some details. This  experience will help students learn how
              to access and use the mathematics literature, and will enhance their
              communications skills. A graduate student, usually a student working on a
              dissertation with the faculty member, will assist in the seminar, thus leading
              to a vertical integration from research to graduate education to undergraduate
              education. VIGRE funding is needed to continue and increase this program by
              providing research stipends. We will also initiate a program of summer research
              projects that will in many cases flow out of these research seminars so
              students can deepen and extend their research experience and receive a stipend
              for work in the summer.

At the graduate level, our goal in the VIGRE program
              is first to decrease average time to degree, to build on the strengths of our
              applied mathematics program and our connections with the Lawrence Berkeley
              National Laboratory (LBNL) in order to encourage more of our students to take
              advantage of the opportunities in applied areas that are available.  We will
              strongly encourage all graduate students to take a summer internship in
              industry or a National Laboratory. The eleven VIGRE traineeships will be
              dedicated to support first year students with the goal of providing every first
              year student with fellowship or traineeship support. We believe that ensuring
              that no first year student serves as a Graduate Student Instructor (GSI) is the
              best use of the VIGRE funds to reduce average time to degree for our graduate
              students. During subsequent years the VIGRE trainees will serve as GSIs, will
              receive training and mentoring for their teaching, and will have a substantial
              teaching experience of having independent responsibility for a course in Summer
              Session, with appropriate mentoring by a senior faculty member.

The five
              half-time VIGRE postdoctoral fellowships will be coupled with teaching
              appointments funded by the University. All postdoctoral fellows will be
              assigned a mentor who will be a senior member of the faculty whose duties will
              include not only mentoring the research program of the fellow, but also their
              teaching. Teaching assignments will consist of upper division and graduate
              courses. Postdoctoral fellows will be encouraged to broaden their experience
              through contacts with other Departments on campus and through contacts at
              LBNL.

The Department will systematically collect quantitative and
              qualitative data concerning performance on a number of key indicators of the
              VIGRE program, and we will appoint a Visiting Committee which will visit the
              Department yearly and provide us with an external evaluation of our progress
              toward our goals.

Funding for this award is provided by the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities and Elementary, Secondary and Informal Education (ESIE).

