Title       : Nonlinear Optical Studies of Condensed Phase Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a9819692

Award Number: 9819692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham R. Fleming fleming@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Graham Fleming at the University of California is supported by the Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program to continue his experimental studies of dynamics in
              complex condensed phase systems.  Ultrafast resonant and non-resonant
              spectroscopy will be used to achieve an improved understanding of electronic
              interactions and electronic-phonon interactions in multichromophore systems, in
              particular the development of experimental methods that probe orbital mixing
              and electronic coherence.  Specific plans include the extension of resonant
              photon echo spectroscopy to more complex systems such as reacting systems,
              proteins, and optically active polymers such as dendrimeric light harvesting
              complexes and conducting polymers.  As well, the mechanisms of nonpolar
              solvation will be explored.  In another project, two-dimensional Raman
              spectroscopy will be used to clarify coupling mechanisms between different
              nuclear motions. Enhancements to this technique, including the use of
              polarization to enhance relative contributions to the signal, will be sought to
              achieve the capability to retrieve structural information from the
              two-dimensional data.  

Many important chemical and biological processes
              occur in solution, where the species of interest are surrounded completely by
              large numbers of solvent molecules.  The rapid time scales of molecular motion
              in solution make these processes amenable to exploration by ultrafast laser
              techniques.  Theory and experiment have evolved to the extent that useful
              complex systems can now be studied effectively. Outcomes from these studies are
              expected to impact the understanding of solution phenomena in biological
              systems, including folding and unfolding transitions in proteins. 

