Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Use of Aluminum Slag in Aerated Building Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9819858

Award Number: 9819858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R I. Malek RQM@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9819858
Malek

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. R.I. Malek, Materials Research Laboratory at Pennsylvania State
              University, University Park, PA and Dr. Mohammed A. El Gamal, Institute of
              Graduate Studies and Research, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt.  The
              two investigators plan to conduct research to 1) explore and provide sound
              scientific knowledge on the use of ground aluminum slag, a waste product in the
              aluminum industry, in aerated building products, and 2) investigate the
              fundamental reaction process, microstructural evolution and properties of the
              new products.  The autoclaved aerated cementitious materials (AAC) are made of
              cementitious mixture into which gas is produced or air is introduced so that
              when the mixture sets, a uniform cellular structure results.  Aluminum powder
              is the most commonly used gas generating material.  It reacts with lime
              produced during cement hydration to produce hydrogen gas. The aluminum slag
              will provide the aluminum needed for aeration, and other constituents (alumina
              and aluminum nitride) will increase the thermal inertia of the final products. 
              The AAC has unique properties, as its density is less than or equal to that of
              water and can provide a better thermal insulation.  

Scope:  This award will
              allow collaboration between Egyptian and US scientists who have complementary
              capabilities and experience.  The planned research will support the Penn State
              research initiative, including the PI's current research, to expand scientific
              knowledge on the reaction mechanisms involved in the formation of AAC as well
              as maximizing the use of industrial by-products and waste.  The AAC building
              products are of particular interest to the hot-arid zone of the tropical
              climate belt such as Egypt as well as seismic areas such as the southwest of
              the United States.   One graduate student each from Egypt and from the United
              States will participate in this research.  This proposal meets the INT
              objective of increasing US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.

