Title       : Appellate Advocacy and Judicial Decision Making in the U.S. Courts of Appeals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9819268

Award Number: 9819268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49655              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan B. Haire   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study of decision making in the U.S. Courts of Appeals seeks to explore the
              extent to which individual attorneys are able to influence judicial opinions
              and case outcomes through skillful advocacy and issue framing as exhibited in
              their appellate briefs.  In addition, this study will examine attorneys'
              influence on the transformation of issues from the trial to the appellate
              levels, and on courts' receptivity to certain arguments on appeal.   By
              focusing on the informational inputs in the appeals process, this research will
              advance our understanding of the dynamic interaction between bench and
              bar.

This pilot study will focus on cases decided with published opinion by
              judges of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit in Atlanta,
              Georgia from 1996-1998.  It will explore the manner in which attorneys, through
              their briefs, are able to frame issues and arguments so as to influence the
              content of appellate court opinions, as well as case outcomes.  Particularly,
              it will examine ways in which litigants' counsel strategically emphasize, or
              ignore issues, claims, precedent, and/or facts in order to shape the
              development of the appeal.  The data will be derived directly from the trial
              court opinion, the attorneys' briefs, and the appellate court decision.  These
              data will be augmented by a survey of the attorneys involved in the appeals. 
              In addition, the data will permit an evaluation of the extent to which issue
              creation or suppression takes place in the appellate process, and if attorneys
              are able to influence such issue transformation.  To control for variation in
              case content, this study will examine (2) decisions identified through a
              sampling procedure and (2) the universe of cases that raise claims in two
              narrowly defined issue areas over the time period.  Combined, these data sets
              will provide an opportunity to examine informational inputs in the appeal
              process for 250 cases decided by the U.S. Courts of Appeals for the Eleventh
              Circuit.

