Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Optimization of Groundwater Use Subject to
               Salt-Water Intrusion Along the Mediterranean Coast of Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1999   
File        : a9819824

Award Number: 9819824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis H. Motz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 5940,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9819824
Motz

Description: This award is to support a US-Turkey research
              project to study the optimization of the use of groundwater as a supplement for
              water supply and irrigation in coastal areas where salinity is a factor.  The
              Principal Investigator is Dr. Louis Motz, Associate Professor of Civil
              Engineering, at the University of Florida, in Gainesville, Florida.  The
              Turkish collaborator is Dr. Recep Yurtal, Assistant Professor of Civil
              Engineering at Cukurova University in Adana, Turkey.  They plan to develop a
              simulation-optimization model for conjunctive use of surfacewater and
              groundwater in a coastal plain in Turkey.  A groundwater simulation model for
              the area of Silifike Plain on the southern coast of Turkey on the Mediterranean
              Sea will be developed under the direction of Dr. Motz.  He plans to use a US
              Geological Survey developed sharp interface model (SHARP) to simulate the
              movement of saltwater-freshwater interface.  An optimization model will be
              developed for the same area under the direction of Dr. Yurtal.   

Scope: 
              This project deals with an area of importance to Turkey and the United States
              where groundwater is increasingly being utilized in coastal areas.  Dr. Motz is
              a well-known and experienced researcher in the field, who is currently
              directing two projects in the area of hydrology and groundwater in Florida.  It
              is expected that this collaborative project will complement, and benefit from,
              his current research.  Dr. Yurtal's expertise is in operations research and
              optimization.  He also has the support of the Government of Turkey's State
              Hydraulic Works, which will provide the required available data and will help
              collect additional data as needed.  This proposal meets the INT objective of
              supporting joint research in areas of mutual interest.  This project is
              co-funded by INT and the Division of Earth Sciences.   

