Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Economic Interdependence
               and Interstate Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2001   
File        : a9819499

Award Number: 9819499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5575               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Stoll stoll@ruf.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Does economic interdependence based on international trade and finance have
              pacifying or exacerbating effects on states' conflict behavior - or no effects
              at all?  Recent research yields contradictory inferences; findings seem to
              depend on the countries and years studied, and the techniques of analysis used.
               Increasingly, policy makers assert that economic interdependence promotes
              interstate peace and cooperation.  But rarely is a theoretical and empirical
              justification provided by either policy makers or scholars.
	This dissertation
              research provides insight into the domestic and international conditions under
              which trade and finance affect conflict.  The primary mechanism to be studied
              is the linkage from the economic costs and benefits to particular groups in
              society to their foreign  policy preferences, and their ability to affect
              states' foreign policy choices.
	This dissertation research will:  (1) provide
              a more complete conceptualization and operationalization of economic
              interdependence; (2) construct a theory connecting economic interdependence to
              interstate conflict (wars, militarized interstate disputes, lower-level forms
              of conflictual behavior) via a testable, causal process; (3) investigate the
              domestic economic and political conditions linking international trade and
              finance to interstate conflict; (4) collect and compile the data necessary to
              conduct cross-national and longitudinal tests of hypotheses derived from the
              theory; and (5) statistically analyze and substantively evaluate the
              performance of the theory while controlling for plausible alternative
              explanations.  

