Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: An Event-Driven Approach to Autonomous Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a9819890

Award Number: 9819890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35396              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Koditschek kod@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 5940,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9819890
Koditsheck

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              research by Professor Daniel Koditschek, Department of Electrical Engineering
              and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, and
              Professor H. Isil Bozma, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
              Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey.  They plan to conduct research  for the
              conceptual design of assembler robots with specific parameters and
              capabilities, to enable these robots to work with very loose restrictions on
              the exact initial positioning of the parts to be assembled.  The proposed work
              will investigate the design of the assembler robots, both formally and
              experimentally.  The central technical idea is to use carefully designed
              "objective functions" for each part to encode the desired assembly goal.  A
              robot controller is designed that essentially solves the partially competitive
              multi-layer game presented by these multiple objectives and, in so doing, moves
              parts to their designed final locations with no collisions along the way.   The
              scientists will first formalize the intrinsic properties of the two-dimensional
              exogenous assembly and construct a class of provably correct feedback
              controllers for the exogenous two degrees of freedom assemblies.  They then
              will start the study of the two dimensional endogenous assemblies and propose a
              class of controllers that are ensured of accomplishing a given assembly task. 
              They will then implement the developed control algorithm on the assembler EDAR
              robot and conduct a systematic experimentation for its assessment. 

Scope: 
              This project will deal with a problem of great importance.  The topic of
              autonomous assembly of multiple objects is important in the planning for agile
              manufacturing in the future.  The proposed research is innovative in creating
              directly a machine dedicated to the performance of assembly tasks.  The P.I.s
              propose to apply and combine game theory with control and dynamical systems
              analysis.  The US and Turkish P.I.s are considered exceptionally well qualified
              for this innovative research.  The collaboration will bring complimentary
              capabilities to this effort and will enhance the benefit of the research. 
              Bogazici University is one of Turkey's top universities and it has a strong
              program in mechatronics.  The proposal meets INT objectives for supporting
              mutually beneficial international collaboration.  This project is co-funded by
              the International Programs and the Division of Design, Manufacture, &
              Industrial Innovation.  

