Title       : Raman Spectroscopy and Electrochemical Reactivity of Carbon Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9819978

Award Number: 9819978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. McCreery   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
              focuses on the study of the fundamental of heterogeneous electron transfer
              reactions at carbon surfaces.  Professor McCreery and his students at The Ohio
              State University will use carbon surfaces that have been highly characterized
              by surface spectroscopic methods, especially Raman spectroscopy, to prepare
              chemically modified surfaces with known structural properties.  The aim is to
              then be able to control rates of electron transfer that occur at these surfaces
              to either enhance or suppress specific reactions.  This work has relevance to a
              broad range of technologies including electrochemical energy conversion,
              electrosynthesis, and applications using surface-active carbon.

Carbon
              electrodes are used in diverse processes including energy conversion in
              batteries and fuel cells, materials production, and corrosion.  Despite the
              economic importance of carbon electrodes their electron transfer properties are
              not easily controlled.  This is in part due to a lack of a molecular level
              understanding of the surface structure and chemistry of carbon.  Dr. McCreery
              and his students at Ohio State University use carbon electrodes that have been
              extensively characterized for studies of electron transfer reactions.  By
              changing the chemical nature of the surface of carbon,  electron transfer
              reactions can be altered.  This work aims to establish a fundamental
              understanding of the relationship between surface structure and electron
              transfer reactivity.  These results will be useful in numerous energy
              conversion technologies, electrosynthesis, and applications using
              surface-active carbon.

