Title       : Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) Analyses of Trace Elements in Seafloor
               Massive Sulfides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a9819152

Award Number: 9819152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David E. Epp                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret K. Tivey mktivey@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Graham D. Layne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Humphris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nobumichi Shimizu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves development of Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) as a
              valid and useful technique for quantifying concentrations of trace elements in
              specific sulfide mineral phases.  We plan to use this technique to investigate
              the processes of formation and early evolution of modern seafloor sulfide
              deposits through examination of trace elements at the ppm to sub-ppm level on a
              scale of 10s of microns.  Sulfide-rich deposits form on the seafloor from
              mixtures of hydrothermal fluid and seawater, and record a history of reactions
              and changes in hydrothermal activity through space and time.  Trace elements
              (Co, Se, Mo, As, Sb, Pb, Cd, Mn, Ag, Au) reside in sulfide minerals and can
              provide valuable information about depositional conditions (e.g., temperature),
              aspects of source fluid compositions, and the processes of metal remobilization
              and chemical zoning in ore deposits and in sea-floor hydrothermal vent
              deposits.  The three steps in achieving our objectives are:  1) To create
              standards and establish methods using SIMS to measure the concentrations of the
              trace elements Co, Se, Mo, As, Sb, Cd, Pb, Ag, Ni, Bi, and U in sulfide grains
              (pyrite, chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite, marcasite, and bornite). 2) To examine the
              distribution of trace elements on a scale of 10s of microns in primary
              precipitates in seafloor chimneys where the conditions during mineral
              precipitation are well characterized.  3) To examine trace element distribution
              associated with replacement and recrystallization within black smoker chimneys,
              and within Fe-rich massive sulfides.  Development of SIMS as a technique to
              measure trace elements in sulfide minerals will not only benefit studies of
              seafloor sulfide deposits, but will have wider application for studies of
              sulfides from a variety of environments.  



