Title       : From Data to Instructional Improvement: An Algebraic-Thinking Data Toolkit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a9819441

Award Number: 9819441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen D. King                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1080175            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Driscoll Mdriscoll@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/618-2227

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819441
DRISCOLL

This twenty-eight month project adapts, pilots, and
              publishes a set of professional-development materials that middle-grade schools
              can use to improve pre-algebra and algebra instruction.  The Algebraic-Thinking
              Data Toolkit, a set of modular tools for teacher learning, guides teachers as
              they gather and interpret a variety of data relevant to the development of
              algebraic-thinking habits of mind in their students, and as they implement
              decisions to improve the school's instructional program.  The materials adapt
              the processes used in the Linked Learning in Mathematics project, an existing
              NSF-supported Teacher Enhancement project in the Milwaukee Public Schools, in
              which teachers use artifacts of their practice to help them recognize and
              understand algebraic thinking in student work and reflect on implications for
              their classroom practice.  Drawing from those experiences and building on them,
              the Toolkit is comprised of four components, which will be piloted and
              field-tested in a dozen different sites:

1. Analyzing Written Student Work. 
              Focus:  looking for threads of algebraic thinking in students' written work on
              mathematics activities and identifying areas of difficulty in understanding, as
              well as ways to improve instruction.  

2. Reflecting on Classroom
              Observation Data.  Focus:  observing classes to identify types and frequencies
              of questions and other moves intended to elicit algebraic thinking; also,
              providing debriefing opportunities for teacher reflection on their use of
              questions.

3. Analyzing Student Interview Data.  Focus:  analyzing algebraic
              thinking, based on questioning and listening to students as they work on
              mathematics activities.

4. Using Test Data.  Focus:  establishing alignment
              issues between the school's intended mathematics curriculum and district
              testing, and supplementing district-level information.

Cost sharing, which
              approximates 6% of the NSF request, is derived from participating school
              districts.

