Title       : Spectroscopy of Single Molecules at Specific Sites on Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9819318

Award Number: 9819318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry W. Hipps hipps@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This  project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, is
              directed towards the development and implementation of a new surface analysis
              method that combines scanning tunneling microscopy with orbital mediated
              tunneling spectroscopy.  Professor Hipps and his students in the Department of
              Chemistry at Washington State University will work to extend the capabilities
              of this technique.  This method allows the chemical characterization of
              nanometer sized features on conducting substrates.  Applications of this
              methodology in the fields of electronic device fabrication, catalysis,
              molecular electronics, and surface science are likely.  Following completion of
              the instrument development, investigation of the interaction of phthalocyanine
              molecules with graphite substrates will be carried out to fully test the ideas
              underlying the method developed here.

The ability to chemically identify
              nanometer sized features on surfaces is crucial to developing an understanding
              of a number of technologically important processes such as heterogeneous
              catalysis and electronic device fabrication.  This research project combines
              the well tested method of scanning tunneling microscopy with a newly developed
              method known as orbital mediated tunneling spectroscopy to make an instrument
              that can provide this sort of information.  The availability of such a method
              should have widespread impact in a range of surface related technologies.



