Title       : Is Covenant Marriage A Solution to the American Divorce Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a9819156

Award Number: 9819156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Nock sln@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura Sanchez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will evaluate covenant marriage in Louisiana. Since August 1997,
              couples in Louisiana have had a choice of two forms of marriage: the
              conventional form with no-fault divorce provisions, and the newer Covenant
              marriage which is harder to enter and to exit. The latter requires premarital 
              counseling, additional counseling if problems arise, and proof of counseling
              and other restrictive grounds for divorce or legal separation. Covenant
              marriage legislation was introduced in 18 other states in 1997-98. This, and
              similar legislation, was born of a larger debate in our country about the
              meanings of marriage and what, if anything, should be done to deal with high
              rates of divorce, cohabitation, diversity in living arrangements, and
              out-of-wedlock births. Social scientists, legislators and citizens debate
              whether the state can significantly alter the terms or consequences of actual
              marriages and divorces. Countered against the hopes that these changes will
              foster stronger marriages are concerns that restrictive divorce may exacerbate
              the economic problems of women and children, and that the existence of two
              marriage systems weakens the status of marriage by introducing contractual
              elements. The project will build on the investigators' prior year of
              preliminary NSF-supported research. First, a five-year longitudinal panel study
              will follow representative samples of individuals who select each type of
              marriage. It will focus on the reasons for selecting one versus the other type
              of marriage, differences in the ongoing marriages of the two types, and
              differences in divorce rates. Second, a qualitative study will investigate
              issues of gender roles and gender ideology in the two types of marriages.
              Through these methods, it will be possible to address central questions in most
              theories of divorce. In particular, the research will attempt to determine the
              factors that make more restrictive marriage attractive to individuals, the
              importance of human capital in mate-selection, and whether the state can affect
              divorce rates.
