Title       : U.S.-Costa Rica Dissertation Enhancement: The Origin of Silicic Magmas in an
               Island Arc; A Study of the Valle Central Chemical Zoned Ash-Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9819236

Award Number: 9819236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Vogel vogel@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lina C. Patino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9819236
Vogel



This Americas Program award will fund a dissertation
              enhancement grant for Ms. Rachel Hannah, under the supervision of Dr. Thomas
              Vogel, Michigan State University, for a study of the origin of silicic magmas,
              an unusual occurrence  in an island arc where there is no continental crust. 
              The research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Guillermo Alvarado,
              School of Geology, University of Costa Rica.  

With the long-range goal of 
              determining  the origin of the high-silica-magmas that occur in  Costa Rica,
              the researcher will conduct a specific, detailed study of the highly zoned
              ash-flow deposits of the Central volcanic range and a  preliminary comparison
              with the volume ash-flow sheets in the Guanacaste volcanic range in
              northwestern Costa Rica.  She will work on the chemical variation of the Valle
              Central ash-flow sheet, combining the chemical stratigraphy and the physical
              stratigraphy into one model for emplacement and interpreting the results.  The
              data obtained will lead to a better understanding of the origin and evolution
              of continental crust, and may be able to address the fundamental question of
              why are silicic magmas produced in some island arc systems and not in others.  
               

The University of Costa Rica (UCR) and Michigan State University (MSU) 
              complement each other in their research capabilities.  CRU can provide valuable
              knowledge of the local geology and an understanding of the physical volcanology
              in the area, and the MSU researchers bring the expertise in chemical petrology
              and the analytical equipment necessary for in-depth geochemical research.  
              
***

