Title       : Training Problem Solvers - A Research Centered Learning Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9819895

Award Number: 9819895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2746310            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Gerig gerig@stat.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce S. Weir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jye-Chyi Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sastry G. Pantula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anastasios Tsiatis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Gerig

The VIGRE program of the Department of Statistics at North Carolina
              State University is a comprehensive educational program for statisticians that,
              by enlisting the participation of undergraduates, graduate students,
              postdoctoral fellows, junior and senior faculty in interdisciplinary research
              teams, makes research and problem-solving activities central to the learning
              process.  The program takes advantage of the department's existing
              interdisciplinary research groups in biomedical statistics, industrial and
              technology statistics, environmental statistics, and statistical genetics and
              bioinformatics.  Early in their programs, trainees affiliate with one of the
              four groups as members of a vertically integrated team.  As team members,
              trainees receive and provide mentorship, take part in interdisciplinary
              research projects, participate in team affairs, and develop a sense of
              belonging.

A goal for the undergraduate trainees is early in their education
              to expose them to and excite them about the research culture and relevant
              practical problems.  For graduate trainees, the goals are to prepare them to be
              adaptable to the demands of a changing job market by providing a broad-based
              education, teaching experience, industrial training, and interdisciplinary
              research experience, and to shorten their time to degree.  The goal for
              postdoctoral trainees is to assist them in establishing an independent research
              program and acquiring the skills necessary to succeed in an academic
              position.

All trainees participate in the VIGRE Contents Workshop  designed
              to tie the research groups back together and provide communication between
              members of different groups.  The Contents Workshop brings together researchers
              from different disciplinary areas and actively involves participants with
              diverse levels of training.  Workshops strive to be engaging, supportive of
              both research and education, and to support the development of critical
              thinking and problem solving skills.  Trainees also attend the VIGRE Skills
              Workshop that focuses on such areas as professional and career development,
              oral and written communication, good mentoring practices, professional ethics,
              and entrepreneurship.  Trainees receive a mentored teaching experience through
              their participation in the NCSU Preparing the Professoriate
              program.

Trainees have the opportunity to serve as interns with an on or off
              campus partner organization.  In this capacity, trainees gain practical
              experience working closely with professionals from other fields to enhance
              their consulting, collaboration and communication skills, and to acquire
              understanding of the role of the statistician in the industrial or government
              setting.  They may serve in live work environments on problems of substantial
              financial, practical or social significance.  Trainees experience first hand
              the realities of the private sector and government.

Postdoctoral fellows are
              recruited for three years as participants in specific interdisciplinary
              research groups.  In addition to their other activities, they receive training
              in grant writing and submit a grant during their third year.

Funding for
              this award is provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS
              Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.
