Title       : Stochastic and Nonlinear Phenomena in Physics and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9819646

Award Number: 9819646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald F. Fox ron.fox@physics.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research proposal is the interplay of stochasticity and
              nonlinearity in physics and biology.  Two projects are in physics and have
              their origin in earlier studies by the Principal Investigator on the
              amplification of intrinsic noise by chaos.  Two projects are in biology and
              concern the fundamental constructive role of noise in molecular and cellular
              mechanisms. Each project involves a combination of methods.  Analytic and
              numerical methods will be used, and contact with experiments will be made
              wherever possible. One project of each type is described below.
1) The
              classical Lyapunov exponent has been shown by the Principal Investigator to be
              a quantum signature of classical chaos.  This realization depends on the use of
              Husimi-Wigner distributions that have direct classical analogues as
              non-negative ensemble densities.  Husimi-Wigner wave packets are most easily
              constructed using generalized coherent states.  In this proposal, a new class
              of coherent states called Klauder states will be studied. Especially
              interesting are the Klauder states for the Coulomb problem. This work will
              impact research on quantum-classical correspondence and on experiments with
              Rydberg atom traps. 2) Rectified Brownian movement is a mechanism by which
              metabolic Gibbs free energy is converted into useful mechanical work inside
              cells.  Rather than a direct chemo-mechanical conversion in which chemical
              energy is transduced into work, an indirect mechanism is proposed.  In this
              alternative mechanism, work is done by heat, but not in violation of the second
              law of thermodynamics. Instead, a diffusion regime is applicable in which the
              boundary conditions are asymmetric.  The asymmetry is paid for with metabolic
              free energy. The impact of this work will be to potentially provide a unified
              mechanism for a great many basic cellular processes.

