Title       : Fuzzy-Neural Sliding Mode Control of Uncertain Systems: A Lyapunov Theory
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a9819310

Award Number: 9819310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197607             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanislaw H. Zak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed research is to incorporate neural networks, fuzzy
              systems and genetic algorithms into the design of sliding mode controllers,
              sliding mode state estimators and sliding mode identifiers of uncertain or
              nonlinear dynamical systems.  A paradigm for fuzzy modeling will be provided
              that allows for systematic construction of fuzzy models for the purpose of the
              controllers and state estimators' design.  The controllers and state
              estimators' stability and their guaranteed performance will be analyzed and
              then tested on a simulation model of a ground vehicle.  Optimization of the
              controllers and estimators' parameters will be achieved using genetic
              algorithms.  In practice, the controller as well as the plant are subject to
              various nonlinear constraints like hard bounds on gains, limited energy, or
              finite switching speeds that must be taken into account in a realistic
              controller design.  In addition, due to lack of knowledge of parameter values
              or inaccuracies in the modeling process, the designer must cope with
              uncertainties in the plant model.  In this project, a deterministic approach to
              the control, identification and state estimation of uncertain dynamical systems
              is taken.  Adaptation algorithms for continuous-time sliding mode neural
              identifiers will be studied and novel variable structure sliding mode fuzzy
              controllers and state estimators will be developed.  Then, the proposed
              structures will be integrated into self-organizing fuzzy-neural sliding mode
              tracking controllers.  Neural network and fuzzy logic controllers have been
              used with considerable success in closed-loop applications.  However, these
              applications, though very successful, have no proofs of guaranteed stability
              for uncertain systems with control variables limited in amplitude.  In the
              proposed research, the direct method of Lyapunov, Hahn's extensions of the
              Lyapunov method and LaSalle's Invariance Principle will be used in the
              stability and guaranteed performance analyses of fuzzy-neural sliding mode
              control and identification structures.  The proposed controllers, estimators
              and identifiers will be tested on the recently developed ground vehicle model
              that includes lateral weight transfer and tires' models.  This model is
              suitable for the evaluation of the vehicle dynamical behavior in real-time. 
              The results of the proposed research will contribute to the basic control
              theory as well as to the intelligent vehicle control systems.


