Title       : Structural Properties of Weakly-Adsorbed Overlayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9819977

Award Number: 9819977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Renee D. Diehl rdiehl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9819977
Diehl

Low-energy electron diffraction and He-atom scattering
              experiments will be carried out to study the adsorption geometries of adsorbed
              atoms on nominally flat and vicinal crystalline surfaces, and to characterize
              the adsorption of weakly-adsorbed atoms on quasicrystalline surfaces. This
              research program centers on increasing our understanding of the fundamental
              interactions and properties which give rise to the equilibrium structures of
              simple adsorbates, and the phase transitions which are peculiar to
              low-dimensional systems. It also aims to increase our understanding of the
              properties of the quasicrystalline structure which give rise to the unusual
              properties of quasicrystals, such as low friction coefficients and high
              hardness, properties which are important to the development of wear-resistant
              coatings in machines and tools. This research program includes the
              participation of postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate
              researchers, as well as two faculty from primarily-undergraduate institutions.
              It includes a significant component of collaborative research  with researchers
              in the UK and Finland. 
%%%
Experiments will be carried out to study the
              structures and other physical properties of layers of atoms on crystalline and
              quasicrystalline surfaces. Quasicrystals are a relatively new type of solid
              which appear to have particularly hard, slippery surfaces. The origin of these
              unusual physical properties is not well understood. Part of this research
              involves the study of clean quasicrystal surfaces and the growth of
              two-dimensional quasicrystalline layers in order to identify the properties of
              the quasicrystalline sold which give rise to these unusual physical properties.
               Understanding these properties will facilitate the development of new
              materials such as wear-resistant coatings in machines and tools. This research
              program includes the participation of postdoctoral researchers, graduate and
              undergraduate researchers, as well as two faculty from primarily-undergraduate
              institutions. It includes a significant component of collaborative research 
              with researchers in the UK and Finland.
*** 

