Title       : US-Senegal Workshop: West African Monsoon Variability and Predictability, Dakar,
               Senegal, May 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1999   
File        : a9819601

Award Number: 9819601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wassila M. Thiaw wd53wt@sgi43.wwb.noaa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry H. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Meteorological Soc
	      45 Beacon Street
	      Boston, MA  021083631    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              0510101   Climate Models                          
Program Ref : 1303,5928,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9819601
Thiaw

This award supports 20 participants (10 US and 10 African) in
              the US-Senegal Workshop on West African Monsoon Variability and Predictability,
              to be held in Dakar, Senegal, May 1999.  Additional participants include 10
              from the United States, nine from Africa, and two from Europe.  The National
              Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is providing support for six of these US
              participants and four of the African participants.  The co-organizers are Drs.
              Wassila Thiaw, of the American Meteorological Society, and Kerry Cook, with the
              Atmospheric Science Program at Cornell University, and Professor Simeon
              Fongang, of the Laboratoire de Physique de l'Atmosphere at the Ecole Superieure
              Polytechnique of the University Cheikh Anta Diop in Dakar.  This
              multidisciplinary workshop will include research scientists, meteorologists,
              and modelers.

In West Africa, as elsewhere in the world, the regional
              monsoon system has a major impact on human activities, farming practices, and
              economies.  An extremely heavy rainfall can cause devastating floods, while too
              little rain can reinforce the desertification process.  West Africa has been
              under a drought condition since the 1960's, but little is known about the its
              monsoon system's characteristics, its interactions between the easterly waves,
              or its associated cloud systems.  Through a re-analysis of data sets from the
              National Centers for Environmental Prediction and the National Center for
              Atmospheric Research (NCEP-NCAR), as well as data derived from satellites, the
              current information on how West Africa's climate operates will be benchmarked,
              expanded to include large-scale influences, and assessed to determine its
              current and future predictive capabilities. The workshop will foster
              interactions among and between US and African scientists and modelers, and the
              resultant projects will help increase the current knowledge about and
              predictive capabilities for West African precipitation variability.  This grant
              will support the participation of three graduate students and one young
              researcher from the United States, and one African graduate student.  The
              Division of International Programs and the Division of Atmospheric Sciences are
              jointly supporting this workshop. 

