Title       : Collaborative Research: Social Signals and Reputation in Games with Facial
               Schematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9819943

Award Number: 9819943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138043             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick K. Wilson rkw@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   One of the successes in contemporary social science has been the
              development and proliferation of game theory. For a wide range of phenomena,
              game theory produces enormous insight into the strategic interaction of
              individuals. It shows its greatest power in predicting the behavior of large
              groups of people -- whether this is in the context of markets, political
              elections, information aggregation or when confronting large-scale social
              dilemmas. However, game theory also generates predictions for small group
              behavior that are not corroborated in carefully controlled (and replicated)
              laboratory experiments.
     This study investigates how social signaling may
              help to explain small group behavior.  Social signaling involves agents looking
              for cues about others' intentions and sending cues about their own intentions;
              these cues in turn build expectations for the behavior of others.  This
              research focuses on a specific set of cues: nonverbal facial expressions. Much
              of game theory assumes actors are anonymous with no clues about the identity of
              their partner. On the other hand, much of social exchange involves face-to-face
              interaction, and laboratory experiments demonstrate that such settings are very
              different from anonymous interaction.  The investigators eliminate verbal
              communication and focus on a relatively simple device - stylized facial
              expressions - using it to explain how initial priors are formed about an
              unfamiliar exchange partner.
     The research uses standard game theoretic
              models and borrows from new concepts in evolutionary psychology to explain
              behavioral patterns that lead to consistent and predictable outcomes that
              deviate from those predicted by theory.  Laboratory experiments are used to
              test a number of conjectures about social signaling, the importance of
              reputational priors and the development of reputations.  This is collaborative
              research with Catherine C. Eckel of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
              University.


