Title       : Congestion-Sensitive Pricing for the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a9819112

Award Number: 9819112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455984             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shivkumar Kalyanaraman kalyas@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thiagarajan Ravichandran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4095,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will study the design and implementation of congestion-sensitive
              pricing schemes for the Internet.  Pricing is >viewed as a tool to achieve
              economic objectives as well as a complementary instrument to existing traffic
              management techniques to achieve provisioning and congestion control
              objectives.  The work is based upon Internet pricing concepts such as expected
              capacity and smart markets, and will focus on the differentiated-services
              framework (a new Internet standard) for its implementation.

The schemes
              designed will be broadly based upon the economic concept of contracting. The
              central hypothesis in our framework is that a network could, based upon
              congestion monitoring mechanisms, raise prices and vary contract terms
              dynamically.  The project will investigate a range of mechanisms including soft
              (short-term) contracts, bidding models for receiver-initiated services,
              usage-based or flat prices for excess traffic, and congestion-sensitive update
              of prices.   An important objective of the project is to develop schemes that 
              can be readily implemented in the differentiated services architecture, without
              need for additional standardization.

The PIs will collaborate to investigate
              specific issues arising in their areas of expertise: a) traffic management
              mechanisms in the  Internet, and b) information systems (IS) and economic
              underpinnings
of pricing mechanisms. The pricing schemes and demand models
              derived in this framework will be integrated into detailed packet-level network
              simulations to study the combined impact of these technical and economic
              control techniques.

