Title       : An Analysis of the New Institutionalism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9819061

Award Number: 9819061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59014              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Munger munger@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The "new institutionalism" claims institutions are not simple reflections of the
              social order, but independently influence that order. Institutions may survive
              and give shape to society long after the issues that led to their creation are
              irrelevant.  This investigation examines legislation and court decisions in the
              slave-holding U.S. south from 1800-1960, to investigate claims derived from the
              new institutionalism regarding the courts and their relationship to the
              legislature.  More than any other period and place in U.S. history,
              justifications of slavery in the antebellum South highlight the importance of
              institutions in giving shape to society, and the path of evolution of those
              institutions.  The tension between the courts and the legislature defines, in
              an important sense, the struggle to maintain the social order.

The long-term
              goal of the project is to address three questions:  1) how could slavery be
              justified in the public mind of a Christian society, with ideals of both
              liberty and equality?  2)  did the way that slavery was justified and given
              political legitimacy by the courts shape the ideology of the antebellum South? 
              3)  what was the impact of that ideology on the political systems of southern
              states?  Three tests of hypotheses are offered that correspond to the questions
              posed above:  first, the content of court decisions evolved with changing
              pressures on the slave regime; second, the development of a pro-slavery
              ideology emerged in the state legislatures of the South that cross-cut other
              interests within the region; and third, a temporal relationship between changes
              in the content of court opinions and changes in the cleavage structure in the
              legislature existed and was consistent with the predictions of the theory of
              ideology and the new institutionalism.

To test these hypotheses, two new
              data sets are collected and analyzed.  The first is based on Helen Catterall's
              compendium of cases concerning slavery.  The investigator develops a computer
              database of cases that involve the actual law of slavery.  This work involves
              an intensive data collection and coding effort focused on the five-volume,
              3,000 page Catterall reference.  The second data set is developed from the
              "journals" of the North Carolina and South Carolina legislatures.  This
              involves extensive archival work in Raleigh, North Carolina and Columbia, South
              Carolina.  The comparison of these sources allows the Principal Investigator to
              investigate the "chicken and egg" question that has plagued those who study
              institutions:  does the thinking of legislative leaders lead, or follow, the
              decisions written by the courts.  The answer appears to be that there is a
              recursive process of mutual interaction, the essence of path dependence in the
              new institutionalism.

The information made available from a database of
              state Supreme Court cases and legislation in antebellum North and South
              Carolina represents a rich resource for future investigators.

