Title       : Energetics, Homeostasis, and Life History in an Arctic Hibernator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a9819540

Award Number: 9819540
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $437475             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Barnes ffbmb@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9819540
Barnes

This project assesses the costs and consequences for small
              hibernating mammals overwintering in an arctic environment. It investigates
              patterns of body temperature change and the phenology of hibernation in a
              natural population of arctic ground squirrels in Northern Alaska and tests
              hypotheses about the effect of diet and burrow choice for individual
              survivorship and reproduction. This project will test the diet hypotheses, in
              collaboration with Dr. C. L. Frank, which revolves around the role of
              plant-derived essential fatty acids in constraining hibernation physiology.
              Laboratory-based experiments will be conducted that quantify the metabolic
              costs of hibernating under arctic temperature conditions and investigate the
              fundamental basis for what limits how long mammals can stay hypothermic and
              hypometabolic during hibernation. The fieldwork continues a long-term
              physiological monitoring program of this arctic mammal population. 

The
              project will focus on the following specific goals:  (1a) Using automated
              sensing, describe the timing of immergence into and emergence from hibernation,
              natural limits to supercooling during torpor, pattern and duration of periodic
              arousals, and how sex, reproductive, and age cohorts of arctic ground squirrels
              differ in hibernation patterns and phenology. (1b) Measure annual soil
              temperature profiles at each individual's hibernaculum. Pilot data show that
              minimum hibernacula temperatures vary from -7 to - 25 0C determine the sources
              of this variation (surface and soil physical and climatological features) and
              the extent of spatial (among-burrow) and temporal (among-year) variation.
              Manipulate physical factors such as vegetation and snow cover over burrows by
              altering snowdrift and determine the thermal consequences for the hibernaculum
              and its occupant. (2) Correlate variation in overwinter survivorship or change
              in body condition in surviving individuals with thermal features of their
              hibernacula. Because they expend more energy maintaining larger thermal
              gradients between body and soil, ground squirrels occupying colder burrows
              should suffer more mortality or lose more body stores during hibernation than
              do animals occupying warmer burrows. These experiments investigate the effect
              of the winter physical environment and its spatial and temporal variation on
              fat and lean loss and survivorship and, since spring fecundity is affected by
              overwinter body mass loss, reproductive fitness of a key arctic mammalian
              species. (3) Test the effect of dietary lipids and polyunsaturated level of
              adipose tissue on the pattern and depth of hibernation and overwinter
              survivorship of individuals. The concentration of essential fatty acids
              obtained from arctic plants during fattening in arctic ground squirrels will be
              determined from a biopsy of depot fat taken when data loggers are implanted,
              and dietary lipids will be manipulated in captive animals. (4) Results from
              sampling
animals as they enter and emerge from hibernation in successive years
              will add to our long-term data set on the physiological ecology, chronology,
              endocrinology, and life-history characteristics of this arctic population of
              ground squirrels. Set in the context of the other long-term ecological and
              physiological research done at the Toolik Field Station, these experiments can
              integrate the role of a key mammalian herbivore into the systems approach of
              study of this arctic community. The following laboratory experiments quantify
              the energetic costs of hibernation in arctic conditions and investigate the
              nature of limits to how long a mammal can stay in hibernation.  (5) Determine
              steady-state metabolic rate, metabolic fuel use, and sources of thermogenesis
              in arctic ground squirrels hibernating at ambient temperatures of -20 to +20
              0C. (6) Measure maximum torpor bout length (TBL) of animals hibernating in
              conditions of -20 to +20 0C and monitored for body and brain temperature.
              Maximum TBL should inversely reflect the rate by which an unknown process(es)
              deviates from homeostatic levels during hibernation.  Since body temperature
              and metabolic rate become uncoupled in arctic ground squirrels hibernating over
              this temperature range, we can investigate the nature of this process, which
              may represent a fundamental constraint to continued homeostasis during
              hypothermia and hypometabolism in mammals. 
***


