Title       : Real-Time Non-Destructive Evaluation of Fatigue Crack Damage for Health
               Monitoring of Mechanical Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9819074

Award Number: 9819074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Asok Ray axr2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shashi Phoha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1939      CHEM, U.S./U.S.S.R. ACTIV
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
The goal of the proposed research is to develop real-time non-destructive
              evaluation (NDE) methods for health monitoring and residual life prediction of
              mechanical structures and aging machinery.  The specific objectives are:
              quantification & estimation of fatigue crack damage; and assessment of the time
              to onset of widespread fatigue damage.  
	The technical approach relies on
              fusion of heterogeneous information derived from physics-based analytical
              models and real-time sensor data.  The analytical part of the research will be
              supported by laboratory experimentation on a special-purpose fatigue test
              apparatus that is equipped with multiple sensing devices - optical,
              electromagnetic, and ultrasonic.  Fusion of multiple sensor data with a
              stochastic state-space model of fatigue crack growth will allow non-destructive
              evaluation of the current state of damage and prediction of the residual life
              in real time.  This hardware-software combination constitutes a novel NDE
              system that can be executed on inexpensive platforms such as a Pentium
              processor and is ideally suited for adaptation to operating machinery.  As such
              the NDE system will also serve as a real-time analytical sensor of fatigue
              crack damage for control applications.  
The proposed NDE system will enhance
              safety and productivity in a wide range of industries and thereby reduce life
              cycle costs.  Specifically, the NDE system will be applicable to real-time
              health monitoring and residual life prediction in active (e.g., turbines and
              pumps), semi-active (e.g., heat exchanger tubes), and passive (e.g., pressure
              vessels) structures that are subjected to both low-cycle and high-cycle fatigue
              damage.  Furthermore, it will allow generation of early warnings to avert
              impending failures of critical plant components, which will reduce the
              probability of emergency shutdowns and catastrophic accidents.

