Title       : Colorado Mathematics Middle School Teacher Enhancement Project (COMMSTEP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a9819288

Award Number: 9819288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen D. King                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1484816            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mildred F. Berry fberry@estreet.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Loats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Klanica  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dominic D. Peressini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mattye Pollard-Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky MT Sch for Exped Lea
	      1700S.HollyStreet
	      Denver, CO  80222    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819288
BERRY

This four-and-one-half year Colorado Mathematics Middle School
              Teacher Enhancement Project (COMMSTEP) will support 330 teachers in 40 Colorado
              schools for professional development and implementation of standards-based
              instruction and assessment through the use of exemplary NSF-funded middle
              school instructional materials in mathematics.  This Local Systemic Change
              through Teacher Enhancement in Mathematics, Grades 7-12, project builds upon
              the successful work of the Colorado State Systemic Initiative and TEAM 2000, a
              high school Teacher Enhancement project.  

Middle schools whose students
              attend high schools implementing the Interactive Mathematics Program as part of
              Colorado's TEAM 2000 project serve as COMMSTEP primary target schools.  Major
              components of the project include (1) examination and selection of materials,
              choosing from among Connected Mathematics, Mathscape:  Seeing and Thinking
              Mathematically, and Mathematics in Context; (2) annual summer institutes; (3)
              monthly or quarterly workshops during the school year; and (4) monthly meetings
              with COMMSTEP teacher mentors and on-line telecommunications support.  

Over
              the life of the project, the entire mathematics faculties in partnering middle
              schools participate in COMMSTEP.  Sixth-grade teachers attend a two-week summer
              institute followed by nine monthly workshops, and fully implement their
              school's chosen instructional materials during their first year of
              participation.  Seventh- and eighth-grade teachers phase-in their school's
              materials over a two-year period.  These teachers attend one-week summer
              institutes followed by four quarterly workshops for two years.  All middle
              grades teachers receive two years of workshop and mentor support.    

In
              addition to the required LSC core evaluation, the project collects two other
              important kinds of data:  (1) student achievement data and (2) data that
              describe the district's capacity to support high quality mathematics curriculum
              and teaching (e.g., the district's capacity to support reform-oriented
              classroom practices), comparing COMMSTEP schools/districts with other school
              districts.

Cost sharing, which approximates 83% of the NSF request, is
              derived primarily from state and local district funds.  Total commitments from
              partner schools are expected to exceed 92% of the NSF request.  

