Title       : Realizing Achievement in Mathematics Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a9819542

Award Number: 9819542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen D. King                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3209554            (Estimated)
Investigator: Everly Broadway broadwee@dpsnc.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bert L'Homme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Holdzkom  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Durham Public Schools
	      P.O. Box 3823
	      Durham, NC  277023823    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819542
BROADWAY

Funded under the guidelines for Local Systemic Change (LSC)
              through Teacher Enhancement in Mathematics, the four-year Realizing Achievement
              in Mathematics Performance (RAMP) project supports all 980 teachers of
              mathematics, grades K-12, in the Durham Public Schools for professional
              development, implementation of standards-based instructional materials in
              mathematics, and the systemic support to sustain the implementation.  Durham
              Public Schools (DPS) is the sixth largest public school district in North
              Carolina, with approximately 29,000 students in grades K-12.

Through
              participation in the NSF-funded Leadership for Urban Mathematics Reform project
              with the Education Development Center (EDC) from 1994-97 and with further
              district support for leadership development since that project ended, DPS has
              developed a corps of 34 teacher leaders in mathematics, who now constitute the
              project's Mathematics Professional Growth and Development (MPGD) Team.  EDC
              continues in Project RAMP as a provider of K-12 mathematics education
              leadership development for the school-based MPGD team members.  Various types
              of professional development in RAMP (e.g., courses on mathematical content and
              pedagogy, curricular implementation workshops, school-based study groups,
              demonstration teaching and individual coaching) are led by mathematicians and
              mathematics educators from the Durham area, consultants from the publishers of
              the DPS-adopted mathematics instructional materials, the school-based teacher
              leaders, and nine, full-time, district-wide resource teachers.   

Elementary
              schools choose instructional materials from among Everyday Mathematics;
              Investigations in Number, Data, and Space; or Trailblazers.  At the middle
              school level, Mathscape is implemented in district classrooms.  The high
              schools will offer a new integrated mathematics course sequence alongside a
              traditional sequence, with NSF-supported instructional materials in the
              integrated courses.  

In addition to the required LSC core evaluation, RAMP
              plans an extensive evaluation component around student achievement.  Because
              the district already has an extensive database of achievement test results,
              Project RAMP will be able to conduct trend analyses, using the implementation
              date of the new materials as a "break-point."  

Cost sharing and commitments
              on behalf of the purchase of new instructional materials approximate 75% of the
              NSF request.  Cost sharing is derived from DPS local and state monies.   

