Title       : Racial Differences in Declining Labor Force Participation of Older Men: 1968 to
               1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a9819214

Award Number: 9819214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41645              (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Rodgers wmrodg@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Much of the current labor market research on black-white inequality focuses on
              explaining differences between young African Americans and whites. However,
              since 1970 a major decline in the labor force attachment of older men occurred,
              with the participation rates of older African American men falling fastest. A
              variety of hypotheses have been offered to explain the general decline. One
              hypothesis is that the increase in social security and pension coverage rates
              and their benefit levels raised the incentive to leave the labor force at
              earlier ages. Another hypothesis is that the real wages of older men fell,
              lessening the incentive to remain in the labor force. Current research supports
              the social security and pension hypothesis.
To my knowledge little work has
              been done to explain why the African American participation rate fell faster.
              This project proposes to answer the following questions: 1) How much faster did
              the labor force participation rate of older African American men fall? 2) Do
              changes in racial differences in social security and pension benefit levels and
              coverage rates explain the faster decline? Was the faster decline due to a
              change in the relative sensitivity towards benefit levels and coverage rates?
              3) Did the real wages of older African American men fall faster than the real
              wages of older white men? If so, does this change in relative wages explain the
              faster decline? 4) What role do other factors such as changes in disability
              status, and the economy's shift away from manufacturing jobs toward service
              jobs play in explaining the faster departure of older African American men from
              the labor force?

The project first provides a detailed comparison of older
              African American and white men's labor force participation. The project then
              uses endogenous breakpoint methods to identify the rates at which the
              participation of African American and white men declined. Finally, the project
              uses decomposition methods to examine a variety of potential explanations. The
              analysis uses the Current Population Survey (CPS) March Annual Demographic
              files (1964 to 1997) to construct labor force participation rate time series.
              The files contain information about wages, educational attainment, industry and
              occupation of employment, and a variety of geographic data. The files also
              contain information on social security and pension coverage, social security
              and pension income, and disability status. Each yearly sample contains on
              average 20,000 men that are at least 45 years of age. Approximately, 8 percent
              are African American men.  The CPS files have several drawbacks. They do not
              contain earnings histories, which are needed to construct social security
              coverage and benefit levels. Nor do they contain wages for respondents that are
              out of the labor force. To partially circumvent these limitations, the project
              uses two longitudinal data files that focus exclusively on the elderly: the
              Retirement Health Survey (1969-1979), and the Health Retirement Survey (1992,
              1994, and 1996). These data contain a richer set of information on wages,
              employment' retirement decisions, and income. The RHS starts with 8,131 men in
              1969. The HRS starts with 5,866 men in 1992. African American men comprise
              approximately 16 percent of the sample.




