Title       : Social Dynamics of Early Formative Honduras: Excavations at Puerto Escondido
               (CR-372), Lower Ulua River Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9819550

Award Number: 9819550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Joyce rajoyce@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award permits Dr. Rosemary Joyce to conduct archaeological excavations at
              the site of Puerto Escondido, located in the Ulua River Valley in Honduras.
              During the construction of a housing project, bulldozers exposed an
              archaeological sequence which extended from Archaic through Classic periods.
              Although, unfortunately, the later part of the sequence was removed, the lowest
              Formative and Archaic levels were preserved intact and are easily accessible
              for excavation. Such occurrences are extremely uncommon in Middle America.
              Preliminary work by Dr. Joyce and her colleagues have demonstrated that the
              deposits are extremely rich and contain worked shell and jade as well as
              abundant ceramics and obsidian (volcanic glass) tools. Botanical remains, which
              provide insight into agricultural practices, were also recovered. Evidence
              indicates the presence of multiple dwellings on the exposed elongated mound
              (one of five) which forms the focus for the current research. Dr. Joyce will
              excavate at four localities identified during prior work. Because of the
              distances between each, it is clear that they are associated with four separate
              household compounds. The materials recovered will be analyzed to reconstruct
              subsistence practices and determine the degree of craft specialization among
              households as well as possible wealth and status differences among
              them.

While archaeologists understand a great deal about how complex Mayan
              societies functioned, much less is known about the processes which led to their
              rise. The Archaic and Formative periods marked the shift from a hunting and
              gathering to a settled village lifestyle and established the base on which
              later complex states arose. To date research on the Formative has focused on
              the Olmec culture located in Southern Mexico. Puerto Escondido is important
              because it provides a chronologically identical yet geographically distinct
              situation and it should be possible to compare the two to determine whether
              trends observed in Olmec Mexico hold in Honduras as well. Through such analysis
              it should be possible to distinguish between general process and historical
              particular.  The data recovered will increase anthropological understanding of
              the origins of social complexity and provide information of interest to many
              archaeologists.

