Title       : Delaware 6-12 Exemplary Mathematics Curriculum Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9819592

Award Number: 9819592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen D. King                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1349701            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon R. Manon jonmanon@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah Caldwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford W. Sloyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Lynn Vincent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen Hollowell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819592
MANON

Funded under the guidelines for "Local Systemic Change through
              Teacher Enhancement in Mathematics, Grades 7-12 (LSCM)," this 38-month project
              is a partnership of fourteen Delaware school districts, the University of
              Delaware, and the Delaware Department of Education.  The Delaware 6-12
              Exemplary Mathematics Curriculum Implementation (DEMCI) project seeks to
              substantially scale up from existing pilot projects to the implementation of
              research-based, standards-driven mathematics curricula in middle- and
              high-school programs throughout the state.  Over the life of the project, 300
              middle- and high-school mathematics teachers -- nearly two-thirds of all
              secondary mathematics teachers in Delaware -- engage in a substantial program
              of professional development that exceeds 150 hours for all teachers, and may
              well approach 200 hours for many.

Schools/districts have selected or will
              select instructional materials from among the middle- and high-school
              NSF-supported, comprehensive instructional materials (primarily Mathematics in
              Context and Connected Mathematics for the middle grades, and Contemporary
              Mathematics in Context and MATH Connections for the high school grades).  
              Professional development is keyed, but not limited, to the chosen instructional
              materials.  Each teacher participates in three summer institutes:  new project
              teachers in a two-week (eight-day) institute, and veteran teachers in one-week
              (four-day) institutes.  Collaborative work at the school sites adds at least
              another 40 hours of professional development per year.  Central to the
              infrastructure of this LSCM are six Secondary Mathematics Specialists who work
              as a team to offer instructional support and mentoring to teachers in
              participating schools.

In addition to the required LSC core evaluation, the
              project's evaluation includes a student outcome component:  (a) learning gains
              using data from the Delaware Student Testing Program at grades 8 and 10, and 
              (b) student attitudes.  Furthermore, there is a project-specific evaluation
              component that monitors gains in teacher content knowledge.

Auditable cost
              sharing is derived from the University of Delaware, the Delaware Department of
              Education, and partnering school districts. 	 	

