Title       : The Representation of Causality for Auditing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9819116

Award Number: 9819116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338114             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn R. Shafer gshafer@andromeda.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter R. Gillett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Scherl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will combine logic and probability theory to develop new
methods
              and decision aids for causal reasoning.  We will use a new
axiomatization of
              the classical idea of a probability tree, which goes well
beyond the current
              paradigm of Bayes nets in allowing modular
representation of probabilistic
              information.  Financial statement auditing
will be used as a test bed for the
              methods, which will ultimately be
applicable to many domains where expert
              systems are used.

The goal of an audit is the expression of an opinion on
              whether a set of
financial statements presents a business's financial position
              and
operations fairly in all material respects, in accordance with
              generally
accepted accounting principles. In reaching this opinion, the
              auditor may
need to consider a variety of subsidiary questions:  whether items
              such as
the value of inventory are materially correct; whether internal
              control is
operating effectively; whether the business can continue as a
              going
concern, etc.  The evidence bearing on these questions evidence is
              usually
persuasive but not conclusive, and its assessment must be based on a
              causal
model of the business, its environment, and the audit.

Prior
              research has focused on representing and aggregating uncertainty
within a
              model.  Although this research has met its own goals reasonably
well, the
              model itself is almost always either overly simplified or else
very
              specialized, and hence the research has not produced decision aids
with the
              flexibility to serve auditors going into new engagements.  Such
aids would
              have to help auditors build causal models, a task they find
challenging. 
              

Constructing adequate models means refining models.  We always begin
              an
audit with a simplified model, but the audit constantly raises new
              issues
that must be incorporated into this model.  The modularity allowed by
              our
approach permits this constant refinement.  We will develop an
              inference
engine that permits such refinement, together with detailed casual
              models
for an illustrative group of audit problems and prototype decision
              aids
that may provide a test-bed for future empirical research on audit
              judgment.

Probabilistic models currently available to auditors are neither
              simple
enough to be used effectively nor complex enough to fit practical
              auditing
realities.  This project will overcome these limitations by
              developing a
clear, rigorous and usable concept of refinement.  When new
              evidence
reveals that factors previously deemed unimportant are, in fact,
              relevant,
they can be taken into account by refining the existing model,
              rather than
replacing it.  This ability to reason simultaneously and
              consistently with
causal analyses at different levels of detail will allow the
              auditor to
avoid models that are hopelessly naive or impossible complex
