Title       : Long-Term Research Visit to Japan: Electronic Properties and Catalytic Activity
               of Supported Metal Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9819369

Award Number: 9819369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136457             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Ted Oyama OYAMA@VT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9819369
Oyama

This award provides funds to support a 12-month research visit
              by Dr. S. Ted Oyama, Department of Chemical Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic
              Institute and State University, for collaboration with Drs. Yasuhiro Iwasawa
              and Kiyotaka Asakura, Department of Chemistry, University of Tokyo, and Dr.
              Kazunori Domen, Research Laboratory of Resources Utilization, Tokyo Institute
              of Technology, Japan.  These collaborators will conduct investigations on the
              reactivity of oxide catalysts.  The project involves examining the relationship
              between electronic structure and catalytic activity of oxide surfaces. 
              Preliminary work indicates that in alcohol oxidation reactions there is a
              strong effect of supporting oxides of the catalysts that results in
              orders-of-magnitude difference in turnover rate, with little effect on the
              activation energy.  This can be explained by a rate-determining step that
              involves electron transfer to the catalytic site.  Thus, an important
              requirement for an effective catalyst is for it to have accessible electronic
              levels to accept electrons.  This is reasonable because oxidation involves loss
              of electrons by the reactants.  The principal objective of this study is to
              investigate the electronic structure of working catalysts to ascertain that the
              availability of electron-accepting levels is related to the catalytic activity.
              This will be done by carrying out in situ XANE~S (x-ray absorption near edge
              spectroscopy), which probes the electronic levels above the Fermi energy. These
              measurements will be supported by EXAFS (extended x-ray absorption fine
              structure) data to provide the structure of the catalysts, an important
              requirement for interpreting the XANES results. In addition, in situ infrared
              measurements will be carried out to check that the structure of the reactive
              intermediates is the same on all supported catalysts.

The systems to be
              studied are two series of molybdenum and manganese catalysts supported on SiO2,
              Al203, TiO2, and ZrO2, and will be employed in the oxidation of ethanol.  These
              catalysts are ideal for the investigation because they are, respectively,
              partial and total oxidation catalysts.  Thus, their use will also allow study
              of the relationship of selectivity to catalytic activity.  This research is
              significant because it will yield fundamental information about the factors
              that control catalytic activity in oxidation systems.  The information can be
              extended to many other reactions in which electron transfer processes are
              important, and also can be applied to catalyst design.  The investigation will
              provide the PI with training in an important scientific technique, the use of
              synchrotron radiation.  It also is expected that the interaction will lead to
              the exchange of students between the U.S. and Japan.  The collaboration will be
              mutually beneficial because of the complementary expertise of the collaborators
              which will contribute to the two-way exchanges of ideas, skills, and
              techniques.
***

