Title       : Mixotrophy in Bloom-Forming Dinoflagellates: Interaction of C, N and P
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a9819670

Award Number: 9819670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290226             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane K. Stoecker stoecker@hpl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Stoecker  9819670

Mixotrophy in Bloom-forming Dinoflagellates: Interactions
              of C, N and P


Mixotrophy, the utilization of alternate modes of
              nutrition, is an important but poorly understood aspect of the physiological
              ecology of bloom-forming, photosynthetic dinoflagellates. Harmful algal blooms
              appear to increasing in frequency world-wide with potential effects on whole
              ecosystems. One common attribute shared by most harmful algal taxa is
              mixotrophic tendencies. Many red-tide dinoflagellates eat. Complex interactions
              between photosynthesis, feeding, and uptake of inorganic and organic nutrients
              may provide the nutritional flexibility that gives dinoflagellates advantages
              over other phytoplankton in eutrophic, but highly variable environments with
              respect to resources.

As part of an ongoing project, phagotrophic mixotrophy
              is being investigated in Prorocentrum minimum and Gyrodinium galatheanum (syn.,
              Gymnodinium galatheanum; also has been called Gyrodinium or Gymnodinium
              estuariale in Chespeake Bay region), two red-tide dinoflagellates. Preliminary
              evidence indicates that feeding is stimulated by inorganic nutrient limitation
              in red-tide dinoflagellates, and that feeding interacts with photosynthetic
              carbon metabolism. These aspects of the physiological ecology of red-tide
              dinoflagellates will be experimentally investigated in the laboratory.


