Title       : Solid State Sciences Committee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1998  
File        : a9819360

Award Number: 9819360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Shapero dshapero@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9819360
Shapero
 This award provides partial support for the Solid State
              Sciences Committee (SSSC) of the National Research Council. The SSSC is charged
              with monitoring the health of the field of materials research in the United
              States and with addressing broad and specific issues that affect that field.
              They have identified a number of areas for consideration and action in the next
              three-year period of performance. The Committee will continue to follow up the
              about-to-be published report, Condensed-Matter and Materials Physics: Basic
              Research for Tomorrow 's Technology through issuing of the proceedings of the
              1999 SSSC Forum, which will feature the report as its centerpiece. The SSSC
              will also pursue technical and policy assessments in the following areas:
              small-scale devices, composite materials, changes in the R&D landscape,
              facilities issues, high-Tc superconductivity and its implications,
              nonequilibrium physics, molecular architecture, performance of materials in
              extreme environments, and the role of computation in understanding materials.
              This project is co-funded with the Department of Energy and the National
              Institute of Standards and Technology.
%%%
The Solid State Sciences Committee
              is a continuing committee of the National Research Council. Its members are
              leading researchers in condensed-matter and materials physics from university,
              industry, and government laboratories. The SSSC identifies issues of importance
              to the materials research community and formulates studies of these issues,
              which are carried out by panels of experts nominated by the Committee. These
              studies have various objectives, including: educating the public regarding new
              scientific developments and technological applications in this field, providing
              advice to federal agencies regarding research priorities, and creating a forum
              for discussion of issues among representatives of the university, industry and
              government research communities.
***

