Title       : VIGRE: Vertical Integration of Research and Education in the Mathematical
               Sciences at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a9819788

Award Number: 9819788
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2499992            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Brualdi brualdi@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marshall Slemrod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819788
Brualdi
The Department of Mathematics of the University of
              Wisconsin-Madison 
has a tradition of excellence in graduate education that
              goes back 
more than 100 years, successfully training more than 900 PhDs in
              
Mathematics who now occupy important positions in universities and
              
industries throughout the USA and indeed the world. For more than 25 
years
              it has had a successful postdoctoral program (the Van Vleck 
program), with
              more than 80 Mathematics PhDs continuing their 
training in research and
              instruction under the mentorship of 
established researchers and educators.
              Our proposal seeks to 
sustain, strengthen, enhance, revise, and integrate the
              five areas of 
mathematics education at UW-Madison: (1) Mathematics
              Undergraduate 
Education, (2) Applied Mathematics, Engineering, and Physics
              
Undergraduate Program (AMEP), (3) Mathematics PhD Program within the
              
Department of Mathematics, (4) Applied Mathematical Sciences
              
Interdisciplinary Program within the Center for Mathematical Sciences
              
(GPAMS), and (5) Postdoctoral Training in Pure and Applied 
Mathematics.
              

Our primary goals are (1) to broaden the mathematics education of
              
undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows so that 
they
              will be able to (a) interact and communicate effectively with 
scientists and
              engineers (b) carry out mathematical research at a 
very high level, and (c)
              appreciate the role of computing in the 
mathematical sciences and, when
              appropriate, perform computations; 
(2) strengthen our traditional
              undergraduate, graduate, and 
postdoctoral programs in core mathematics, and
              (3) decrease the time 
to PhD degree to an average of 5 years or less. The
              components of 
our proposal integrate research and education in pure and
              applied 
mathematics, at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate level
              
in order to train mathematical scientists capable of handling the 
above
              noted tasks.
Highlights of our new initiatives include:
 1.  Laboratory
              Components of Undergraduate Courses A laboratory                               
                                         component in one or more courses will be developed
              that will  clearly                                                      
              illustrate the successes and limitations of Applied Mathematics Modeling       
                                                                   of physical problems. The
              experiments would be demonstrations carried                                    
                                      out to clearly illustrate points and not to train
              students for experimentation.                                            
              Potential courses for such a component are: Applied Dynamical Systems and
              
Chaos, PDEs, Introduction to Applied Mathematics, and undergraduate and      
                                                          graduate Fluid Mechanics. 

2.
              Integrated Undergraduate, Graduate, and Faculty Research Lab in Spatial        
                                            Systems\noindent Individually and in groups,
              students will study various                                                    
                spatial systems (mostly on lattices) from combinatorial and probabilistic    
                                                    perspectives, with some use of computer
              simulation. Research questions that                                            
                   arise in faculty and postdoctoral fellowsresearch will be described to
              students                                                who investigate these
              and other questions that surface in their course of                            
                                  investigation. This Lab will meet in late afternoon, and we
              shall seek out one or                                                  two
              bright high school students as possible participants, e.g. students from local 
                                                           high schools who are among the
              winners of the Wisconsin Math., Engin., & Science                              
                    Talent Search. 
 
3. Mathematics PhD Program and GPAMS. With the
              effective use of VIGRE 
funds, we will: 
(a) Recruit quality American
              graduate students with offers of 
traineeships (VIGRE fellowships and Teaching
              Assistantships);
(b) Provide graduate students with a quality graduate
              program, 
including interdisciplinary training that giving experience 
in
              solving practical mathematical problems; 
(c) Reduce the time-to-degree by
              targeting substantial fellowship 
money on a small group of students who have
              the potential of becoming 
research mathematicians at top universities and
              labs.
Cognizant of the fact that many graduates do not work in academic
              
settings, we plan to widen the scope of the current Mathematics PhD 
program
              in the Department of Mathematics, supplying our graduate 
students with the
              necessary experience in solving practical 
mathematical problems. To these
              ends, we are planning to start an 
 Applied Mathematics Consulting . This
              would take the 
form of nonstandard graduate courses for mathematics graduate
              
students whose main goal is to set up interdisciplinary cooperation, 
at a
              research level, between mathematics graduate students and 
researchers in
              other fields at the University. Students would take 
this two-semester course
              in their second year, supervised by a 
faculty member in the Department of
              Mathematics, with the help of 
post--doctoral fellows funded through VIGRE.
              The goals of this 
project are to foster new connections between researchers
              in 
mathematics and other disciplines and to encourage interaction 
between
              mathematics graduate students and faculty in other 
disciplines.

 4.
              Post-Doctoral Training ProgramOur post-doctoral program -                      
                                                               the Van Vleck (V^2) program
              has attracted some of the best  recent PhDs:                                   
                                 each V^2-postdoc has a faculty mentor for both research and
              teaching, and                                                  teaches two
              courses a semester.  They collaborate with faculty, work with                  
                                                    PhD students, participate in seminars,
              and teach elementary and advanced 
undergraduate courses and, at least once, a
              graduate course. The 
V^2--program is an extension of our graduate program
              providing 
continuing (collaborative) research and teacher training for new
              
PhDs.

We will extend and strengthen our postdoctoral program, to 
include
              a Vigre Van Vleck component, the V^3--program. We propose 
to award several
              V^3--postdocs. The post--doctoral fellows will 
provide essential mentoring to
              the graduate students with 
interdisciplinary postdocs mentoring students in
              GPAMS. The 
interdisciplinary post--doctoral fellows will also participate    
                                                                                      in the
              Applied Mathematics Consulting Program previously described. 
V^3--postdocs
              will be supported in part by regular teaching duties 
(one course each
              semester). They will be: (1) mentored by local 
faculty, develop an
              independent research program, and improve 
teaching skills; (2) develop
              communication skills through 
presentation of research seminars, including one
              colloquium talk for 
a general audience; (3) prepare papers for publication in
              
professional journals; (4) prepare a research proposal for 
submission to a
              funding agency at the conclusion of her or his 
appointment.

As part of our
              VIGRE program, we will, in addition, develop several new                       
                                 undergraduate and graduate courses, including a Mathematics
              College                                                           Teaching
              Course (How to teach Math at the College level). 

Funding for this award is
              provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences
and the MPS Directorate's
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.
