Title       : Molecular Genetics of Ribosomal RNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a9819124

Award Number: 9819124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry F. Noller harry@nuvolari.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Noller
98-19124
Molecular Genetics of Ribosomal RNA

1. Technical

This
              study concerns the structure and function of ribosomal RNA
using genetic
              approaches.  The central tool is the plasmid pKK3535 (which carries the full
              rrnB ribosomal Rna operon from E. coli) and several of its derivatives,
              including inducible plasmids such as pSTL102 (which carries drug-resistant
              mutant alleles of the 16S and 23S rRNA genes).  Mutations are created in these
              constructs, either randomly or by site-directed mutagenesis, and their
              ribosomal phenotypes studied in vivo and in vitro. Both dominant and recessive
              mutants of rRNA are studied using this system. RNA-RNA and/or RNA-protein
              interactions are analyzed by suppressor analysis of second-site mutations that
              arise either within the cloned rRNA genes or in the cellular genome. The
              central questions that are addressed in these studies focus on the structural
              dynamics of ribosomal RNA, which is believed to be fundamental to the mechanism
              of translation.  Potential examples of rRNA dynamics have emerged from analysis
              of changes in the accessibilties of bases in rRNA to biochemical probes in
              various functional complexes, including: (1) protection of the 530 loop of 16S
              rRNA from chemical probes upon tRNA binding, which cannot be fully accounted
              for by direct contact of the 530 loop with tRNA; (2) protection of "Class III
              Sites" in 16S rRNA upon binding of tRNA, antibiotics or 50S subunits to 30S
              subunits; (3) enhanced reactivity of A2602 of 23S rRNA upon binding of tRNA;
              (4) protection of certain basesin domain IV of 23S rRNA upon binding of tRNA;
              and (5) the large number of bases protected in 23S rRNA by the small
              aminoacyl-CCA oligonucleotide analogue of the 3'-terminus of tRNA. The many
              experimental difficulties associated with studying mutant rRNA will be
              addressed by using experimental strategies such as bead capture of
              aptamer-tagged mutant rRNA and allele-specific chemical probing, in addition to
              genetic approaches based on the extensively developed rRNA expression vectors
              mentioned above.

2. Non Technical

Ribosomes are responsible for synthesis
              of proteins in all living cells, using the genetic code to translate the
              nucleotide sequence of messenger RNA into the amino acid sequence of the
              protein chain.  Ribosomes are ancient and enormously complicated molecular
              machines, which are themselves constructed from both RNA and proteins.  Thus,
              ribosomes are of fundamental importance to biology.  A large number of
              well-known antibiotics are known to act by blocking the function of bacterial
              ribosomes.  Most of these antibiotics appear to interact witih ribosomal RNA,
              in keeping with our emerging belief that it is the ribosomal RNA, rather than
              its proteins, which is the main functional component of this molecular machine.
               This study is designed to use the powerful methods of molecular genetics to
              dissect the role of ribosomal RNA in protein synthesis.  The central qustions
              in these studies are: can the "moving parts" of the machine can be identified,
              and can their function within the ribosome in living cells be deduced? The
              working hypothesis is that many, if not all, of these moving parts will turn
              out to be made of ribosomal RNA.  This study is aimed at finding out which
              parts of the RNA move, what they interact with during protein synthesis, and
              how their movement is coupled to the fundamental workings of the ribosome.
              




