Title       : US-Tunisia Cooperative Research: Development of High Performance Control Systems
               for Electro-Mechanical Actuators with Harmonic Drive Gears
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1999      
File        : a9819869

Award Number: 9819869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32387              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fathi H. Ghorbel ghorbel@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5928,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9819869
Ghorbel

Description: This award is to support a US-Tunisia research
              project to study the fundamental issues in modeling, analysis, and real-time
              implementation of nonlinear control laws for electromechanical systems with
              Harmonic Drives (H-D).  The Principal Investigator is Dr. Fathi Ghorbel,
              Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas.
               The Tunisian collaborator is Dr. Rached Dhaouadi, Assistant Professor of
              Electrical Engineering at Ecole Polytechnique de Tunisie, La Marsa, Tunisia. 
              They plan to develop methodologies to quantify the hysteresis effect in the
              dynamic torque-displacement relationship, exhibited in experimental work on a
              harmonic drive system.  They first will formulate mathematical models for the
              H-D system.  These models must lead to mathematically well posed differential
              equations when coupled with the equations of motion of the overall system.  The
              second phase will investigate the integration of these models into a complete
              drive system and the development of nonlinear control strategies to compensate
              for the nonlinear effects on the overall system performance. The singular
              perturbation technique will be investigated to elaborate a control methodology
              for the model reduction, the control design and the stability analysis. 
              Numerical simulation and experiments will be used to test these drive control
              concepts.

Scope:  This project deals with an important topic in high
              performance industrial and instrumentation servo systems.  The two scientists
              plan to collaborate in the development of the mathematical model to be carried
              out at Rice University.  They will also collaborate in the following phases of
              model parameter identification, numerical simulation, and the experimental
              investigation and model validation.  This proposal meets the INT objective of
              supporting joint research in areas of mutual interest.  This project is
              co-funded by the Division of International Programs and by the Division of
              Civil and Mechanical Systems.   

