Title       : University-Industry Partnerships: A Program of Benchmarking and Outreach in the
               EPSCoR States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a9819351

Award Number: 9819351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Martha L. James                         
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199028             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis G. Tornatzky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Waugaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Grth Policies Bd
	      
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  27709    /   -

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The southern Technology Council (STC) will work with research universities in
              the 18 EPSCoR states and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, in a broad-based
              effort to use benchmarking research to better understand and improve policies,
              practices, and performance in university-industry R&D relationships.  The
              proposed project addresses the fact that universities are now being called on
              to play a wider array of partnering roles vis-a-vis industry.  These go beyond
              technology transfer per se, and extend to issues such as: (1) partnerships in
              curriculum and instruction; (2) industry liaison structures and services; (3)
              university-industry cooperative research; (4) niversity-industry-government
              partnerships in economic development strategy; (5) the capitalization of
              partnerships; and (6) community leadership education on university roles in the
              "new economy".  EPSCoR-state universities are involved in all of these issues. 
              Nonetheless, there is a great variance across institutions in their success in
              partnering, as well as their knowledge about innovative models that have been
              developed elsewhere.  This is a natural venue for the use of benchmarking
              discipline that includes:  (1) identifying an area of organizational activity;
              (2) gathering performance data therein (preferably quantified); (3) identifying
              best practices and policies used by exemplary organizations to enhance
              performance in that area; (4) dissemination and implementation of results; and
              (5) recycling the whole process.  In the proposed project, this sequence of
              steps will be followed through the execution of a small number of
              carefully-selected benchmarking research mini-projects. Leadership from
              EPSCoR-state institutions will be deeply involved in that selection process,
              and in ongoing project oversight.  The proposed project will include
              benchmarking research approach to other important topics concerning the
              university-industry interface.  The project will produce up to five major
              reports which will be disseminated to approximately 1000 academic and community
              leaders in the 18 EPSCoR states and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
