Title       : Political Regimes and Agency Policymaking: Measuring Political Influence on
               Bureaucracy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9819681

Award Number: 9819681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61464              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Shipan charles-shipan@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the United States today, political bureaucracies make the overwhelming
              majority of public policy decisions.  This is not to deny the importance of
              policy-making by the other branches of government,  yet the sheer amount of
              policy-making done by the bureaucracy dwarfs the output of these other
              institutions.  To cite just one measure, the Federal Register, which lists all
              rules and regulations issued by the bureaucracy, usually covers more than
              50,000 pages per year.

In this investigation, the researcher uses a formal
              model to derive testable propositions about the influence of other political
              actors on the bureaucracy.  He develops a spatial model of political influence
              that is more explicit in its assumptions and predictions than are previous
              studies of the relationship between bureaucrats and other political actors.  In
              addition, the theory highlights substantial problems with previous
              methodological approaches and introduces a more appropriate approach for
              estimating political influence, one, which acknowledges that different
              political regimes will have different effects on agencies.

The investigator
              provides preliminary support of the model by analyzing the monitoring
              activities of the Food and Drug Administration.  He then collects data on a
              variety of other agencies.  After collecting the data, he estimates the
              influence on bureaucracies by using approaches he has developed.  To allow for
              comparison of different types of agencies, a variety of agencies are examined,
              including the Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal Trade Commission,
              the Food and Drug Administration, the Food Safety Information Service, and
              others.

The investigation makes several significant contributions to an
              understanding of the role of bureaucracies in a representative democracy. 
              First, it develops a rigorous theoretical model that can be tested.  Second, it
              points to problems with previous empirical tests of political influence that do
              not account for the existence of different regimes.  Third, it proposes a
              methodological approach that follows from the theoretical model.  Finally,
              through the estimation and testing of the model it gives political scientists a
              more accurate picture of the relationship between agencies and other political
              actors.

