Title       : Collective Action in Exchange Networks; Coalitions, Identity, and Interest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9819249

Award Number: 9819249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Macy mwm14@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research lines on social exchange and collective action have developed largely
              in isolation. This project extends the scope of exchange network theory by
              allowing collective action among structurally disadvantaged actors. It also
              extends collective action research by embedding the social dilemma in a network
              of exchange relations and power processes. The proposed experiments are
              designed to tease apart the relative importance of two factors believed to
              motivate collective action: shared identity and mutual self-interest.
              Specifically, we will investigate the use of collective action by low-power
              actors to overcome structural disadvantages in exchange networks. Our main
              hypotheses are that (1) coalitions will form among low-power actors, despite
              individual incentives to free ride, and (2) these coalitions will reduce
              structural disadvantages. The experimental design holds self-interest constant
              while manipulating both personal and structural attributes expected to shape
              identification with similar others. We manipulate personal traits using a
              variant of the 'minimal group' paradigm, widely applied in social identity
              research. However, exchange network theory is principally concerned with
              structural, not personal, determinants of power. We therefore also investigate
              the formation of coalitions among actors occupying structurally equivalent
              positions (those identically connected to others in the network). The results
              will inform a new theory of coalition formation that incorporates both mutual
              self-interest and shared-identity as catalysts of collective action. 
