Title       : US-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement: A Demographic Analysis of Life History
               Variation and Seed Dispersal in the Ant-Dispersed Proteaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9819840

Award Number: 9819840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18862              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen L. Stanton mlstanton@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 1066,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9819840
Stanton

This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate
              student, Ms. Caroline Christian, working under the guidance of Professor
              Maureen L. Stanton, of the Center for Population Biology at the University of
              California, Davis.  Ms. Christian will conduct a demographic analysis of the
              life history variation and seed dispersal in the ant-dispersed Proteaceae of
              South Africa.  

Many animals serve as mediators for seed dispersal, but due
              to habitat alterations many seed dispersers are being lost, resulting in a
              decline in many plant species.  Ant seed dispersal is the major seed dispersal
              method in many fire-prone shrublands worldwide.  This dispersal method is
              especially important in the Cape Floristic region of South Africa, which
              contains an unusually high number of rare ant-dispersed species.  Through its
              displacement of native ant dispersers, the non-indigenous Argentine ant is
              reshaping ant seed-dispersal mutualisms in this region, but little is known
              about the long-term consequences on plant populations.  Ms. Christian will
              examine the two potential selective forces that have shaped the two life
              histories found in the ant-dispersed Proteaceae: seed dispersal by ants, and
              fire frequency.  She will examine the population dynamics of two Proteaceae
              species which share similar life histories, but have different reproductive
              characteristics.  Through controlled field experiments, Ms. Christian will
              examine how the components of seed dispersal influence seed dormancy, seed
              survivorship, and seedling establishment.  Data from the field experiments and
              from demographic plots will be used to develop a matrix simulation model to
              predict which types of species are most sensitive to alterations in seed
              dispersal methods.   This predictive model can have significant conservation
              applications.  Dr. Hamish Robertson, a leading African ant taxonomist at the
              South African Museum, will provide guidance on this project to Ms. Christian.
              

The results will provide important new knowledge about plant population
              dynamics.  This project will also support an international research experience
              very early in the career of an outstanding graduate student.

