Title       : Extending and Renewing the Education of Mathematicians (EREM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9819940

Award Number: 9819940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2362795            (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Michael Beals beals@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald A. Goldin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Landweber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Greenfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819940
Michael Beals

The Rutgers University Mathematics Department, in its
              project "Extending and Renewing the Education of Mathematicians," will change
              the way that postdoctoral fellows and graduate students interact with faculty,
              undergraduates, and each other.  It will also increase opportunities for
              undergraduates, graduate students and post-docs to participate in applications
              of mathematics in other disciplines and in industrial practice.  The improved,
              vertically integrated program will bring new research areas to the curriculum,
              prepare beginning mathematicians for the variety of career paths available to
              them, and increase the access of students to mathematical research at the
              highest level.  Five research groups - discrete mathematics, number theory,
              control theory, non-linear partial differential equations, and mathematical
              physics - will participate in the program.

Postdoctoral fellows will be
              chosen to work with these groups, and their research and pedagogical
              opportunities will be designed to promote interaction across all levels of
              mathematical experience within the University.  Faculty mentors from these
              groups will supervise the research development of the post-docs.  The post-docs
              will be provided a mentored progression through a variety of types of teaching
              at the university level, such as instruction in large multi-section courses,
              small upper level undergraduate and graduate courses, courses with
              non-traditional pedagogy including small group work, and courses involving
              appropriate use of technology.  They will engage actively in the construction
              of course modules for undergraduate courses and seminars for undergraduates and
              graduate students, while being involved with undergraduates in REUs and with
              graduate students in guided study and minitutorials.  The faculty mentors will
              also see that the post-docs have opportunities to interact across disciplinary
              boundaries. Opportunities for internships in industry and government will be
              provided where appropriate.

Graduate students chosen as VIGRE Trainees will
              participate in a program designed to provide broadened curricula and early
              exposure to and active involvement in research in the five core areas. 
              Mentored "rotations" - guided study and research participation with faculty
              members - will supplement the first two years of graduate course work. 
              Examples of the tasks of the trainees in the rotations could include reading a
              technical paper or part of a book, scientific programming in support of the
              research efforts of a faculty member, or preparation of a small-scale seminar
              talk.  The trainees will interact with faculty, VIGRE post-docs, and
              undergraduates in seminars in the five research areas, and will be exposed to
              the cross-disciplinary and non-academic uses of mathematics in an Outside
              Speakers Seminar.  Opportunities for internships in industry and government
              will be provided for the trainees where appropriate. The trainees will have a
              structured and mentored progression through a variety of types of teaching,
              such as grading, recitation instruction, independent courses, course
              development, use of technology, workshops, supervision of independent study,
              and will participate in an ongoing seminar on Issues in Mathematics Education
              at the Post-Secondary Level.

Additional professional development support
              will be provided to VIGRE trainees and post-docs in such areas as professional
              communications (writing papers and giving presentations), understanding and
              using funding opportunities (reading requests for proposals, writing
              responses), refereeing and reviewing, getting invited to meetings and making
              good use of them.

Undergraduates will participate in the project through
              direct research opportunities; seminar activities; mentoring relationships with
              faculty, post-docs, and graduate student trainees; and curriculum revision. 
              Advanced undergraduates will be encouraged to engage in REU activities during
              the academic year, and a summer REU, in which faculty from the five core areas
              will participate, will be supported by VIGRE.  "Junior seminars" in these areas
              will be developed to present work at a level that advanced undergraduates and
              graduate students can understand; VIGRE post-docs will help to organize the
              seminars and talks will include those by VIGRE trainees.  In addition to the
              REU's, which will provide faculty, post-doc and graduate trainee mentoring to
              undergraduates, upper level undergraduates will have the opportunity to work
              with first-year students and sophomores and through participation in workshop
              sections and involvement with the Gelfand Outreach Program in Mathematics. 
              Course modules and revised courses will be designed as part of a curriculum
              review; such redesign will involve undergraduates (as a part of an REU
              activity) and graduate students.  For example, the undergraduate number theory
              course can be reconsidered to provide more emphasis on applications
              (encryption, coding theory, etc.); a new year-long upper level undergraduate
              course devoted to mathematical modeling will be developed; control theory
              modules can be designed to provide students with the opportunity to actually
              see ordinary differential equations and computer controls combined to predict
              and modify some simple-appearing physical situations.  Undergraduate and
              graduate courses involving elements of the five core areas have grown in number
              as faculty add new and updated courses; the VIGRE project offers the
              opportunity to conduct careful analysis of the content, level, and
              prerequisites for these courses, with the goal of designing coherent packages
              of such courses.

Funding for this award is provided by the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Directorate's Office of Multidisiplinary
              Activities.

