Title       : Almost Nonparametric Inference in Mixture Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a9819013

Award Number: 9819013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89085              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hoben Thomas hxt@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Hettmansperger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              People vary:  Some people are tall, others are short.  Sometimes this
              variability comes in clusters.  For example, most people are right handed,
              fewer are left handed, but there are shades of ambidextrousness in between. 
              These are observable features of people, but unobservable features of people
              are likely of a similar character.  For instance, thought processes are
              unobserved, but different people may use different thinking strategies to solve
              the same problem.  But how many different thought strategies might be expected,
              what proportion of the people use which strategies, and which strategies seem
              the best?  Such questions might seem impossible to answer, but they can often
              be answered using statistical ideas.

The goal of this research is to develop
              statistical solutions with plausible assumptions regarding the unobservable
              processes of focus.  Such procedures have many potential applications.  One is
              to identify different kinds of thought processes as a prelude to helping
              children develop more adequate ones.  Similarly, it is important to understand
              what changes in thought take place and when they occur.  Another is to identify
              early on those children who have advanced thinking processes which might
              otherwise go unrecognized.  In this research, statistical methods are developed
              to test for the presence of multiple strategies, assess the number of such
              strategies people have available, and estimate the probability that an
              individual employs a particular strategy when confronted with certain thinking
              tasks.
