Title       : US-Turkey Workshop: ICFA International School/Workshop on Instrumentation in
               High Energy Physics, Istanbul, Turkey, June 28-July 9, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1999   
File        : a9819743

Award Number: 9819743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marleigh Sheaff sheaff@wishep.physics.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5940,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819743
Sheaff

Description: This award is to support the 1999 ICFA
              School/Workshop on Instrumentation in Elementary Particle Physics, to be held
              at the Department of Physics, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, from June
              28th, through July 9th, 1999.  The US organizer is Dr. Marleigh Sheaff,
              Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin.  The
              co-organizer, and director of the school, is Dr. Nizamettin Erduran, Department
              of Physics at Istanbul University.  This will be the eighth in a series of
              schools/workshops organized by the International Committee for Future
              Accelerators (ICFA).   There will be lecture courses in various
              state-of-the-art instrumentation techniques in current use in experimental
              particle physics.  These will be taught by recognized experts in the field. 
              There will be at least six "hand-on" laboratory courses designed to demonstrate
              the material presented.  The purpose of this activity is twofold.  The first
              goal is to encourage increased participation by young scientists from
              developing countries in elementary particle physics experiments by providing
              them with the information and skills needed to undertake detector development
              for these experiments.  The intention is to foster possible future initiatives
              in detector development at the participants' home institutions.  The
              instrumentation techniques that are presented have many wide-ranging
              applications such as in medical imaging and in non-destructive evaluation of
              materials.  The second goal is to encourage future collaborations in elementary
              particle physics involving physicists from developed and developing countries. 
              It is expected that approximately one third of the students in the
              School/Workshop will be from the Turkey and the region around it, another one
              third will be from other developing countries, and a third from technically
              advanced countries.

Scope:  This project will support four scientists and
              six graduate students from the United States, and about the same number of
              junior scientists from the Middle East, Africa and from Nepal to participate in
              an international school and workshop.  They will benefit from the teaching of
              advanced experimental techniques and from the opportunities to develop
              international collaboration in areas of experimental physics, and in other
              applied fields where these experimental techniques have been useful.  This
              proposal meets the INT objective of supporting international workshops that are
              likely to increase collaboration in areas of mutual interest. 

