Title       : Forced Confabulation and Child Witness Suggestibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9819303

Award Number: 9819303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria S. Zaragoza mzaragoz@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although there is an extensive scientific literature on the suggestibility of
              children's eyewitness memory, the vast majority of these studies have focused
              on a single type of suggestive interviewing situation, namely, instances where
              the misleading (or false) information is explicitly provided by the
              interviewer.  However, in many of the real-world investigative or therapeutic
              contexts where suggestive interviewing if of concern, the nature of the
              suggestive questioning is to press the child to provide details of events they
              do not remember or never experienced.  In other words, the child is forced to
              fabricate events he/she never witnessed.  Yet, the extent to which such forced
              confabulation might later compromise the integrity of children's eyewitness
              memory is poorly understood.  This research builds on earlier work by the
              investigator that demonstrated that, following such interviews; children
              sometimes come to have false memories for the events that they had earlier
              knowingly confabulated.  One goal of the proposed experiments is to assess the
              generalizability of these findings to situations that have greater forensic
              relevance.

Children (1st, 3rd, and 5th grade) will witness a live event
              involving an unfamiliar male.  Shortly thereafter they will be asked a series
              of questions about the man's activities.  Some of the questions will inquire
              about fictitious events that never happened, including questions that falsely
              implicate the man of wrongdoing (e.g., asking how he broke a videotape, when he
              never did so).  The critical manipulation is that the children will be pressed
              to answer all of the questions, even if they must guess.  After a retention
              interval, the children will be tested on their memory for the source of the
              answers they confabulated.  The issue of primary interest is assessing the
              extent to which children falsely remember witnessing events they have in fact
              never seen, but had earlier fabricated when pressed to do so.  In addition, the
              proposed experiments will assess the role of forensically relevant contextual
              factors such as interviewer feedback, repeated questioning, and reflective
              elaboration in children's false memory for confabulated events.  Finally, one
              experiment will evaluate the efficacy of a theory-based intervention for
              minimizing children's false memory errors.

The current project addresses the
              following four questions:  (1) What factors promote the creation of false
              memories for knowingly confabulated incidents, and what factors facilitate
              resistance to these memory error: (2) Does susceptibility to false memory for
              knowingly confabulated details change over the elementary school years?  (3)
              What is the relationship between "resistance to confabulation" and true vs.
              false memory production?  (4) How do the characteristics of self-generated
              confabulations influence false memory creation?  The results have the potential
              to advance current forensic theory and practice by answering basic questions
              regarding children's susceptibility to false memory under circumstances that,
              although common in real-world forensic investigations, have yet to be
              investigated.

