Title       : US-Africa Workshop: Research Opportunities in Chemistry, Pretoria, South Africa,
               April 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1999   
File        : a9819953

Award Number: 9819953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Getzinger   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Schoneboom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9819953
Getzinger

This award supports 17 participants (four US and 13
              African) in the US-Africa Workshop on Collaborative Research Opportunities in
              Chemistry, to be held in Pretoria, South Africa, April 1999.  Representatives
              of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), the American
              Chemical Society, and the Chemical Manufacturers Association will meet with
              their counterparts from the chemical societies in Ethiopia, Ghana, Nigeria,
              South Africa, and Tanzania, and with representatives from the African
              Association of Pure and Applied Chemistry, the International Union of Pure and
              Applied Chemistry, and the Chemical and Allied Industries Association.  The
              co-organizers are Dr. Richard Getzinger and Mr. John Schoneboom, of the
              Directorate for International Programs at AAAS, and their counterparts with
              five African chemical societies.  Participants include active researchers,
              society administrators, and representatives of chemical industrial
              associations.

Africa has the potential to produce significant scientific
              discoveries in the areas of medicine, agricultural applications, and
              environmental chemistry.  But few African chemists know about the research
              being conducted outside their own countries, nor are US chemists cognizant of
              the research activities of their African peers.  The objectives of the workshop
              are to identify specific ways that US and African chemical societies can work
              together to enhance their respective capacities and impacts, and to create
              important new collaborative research opportunities for US and African chemists.
               The participants will identify topics of mutual importance for international
              collaborative research, and the manner in which the participating societies can
              encourage and facilitate such activities.  Additionally, this workshop will aid
              in the establishment of more regular communication mechanisms, which will
              enable the societies to exchange information on important scientific and
              management issues. The Division of International Programs and the Division of
              Chemistry are jointly supporting this workshop.  

