Title       : VIGRE: Vertical and Horizontal Integration of Research and Education in
               Statistics and Mathematical Sciences at Carnegie Mellon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a9819950

Award Number: 9819950
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2498843            (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Eddy bill@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Kass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian W. Junker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Lehoczky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. Shreve  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn Roeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William O. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819900
Eddy 

At Carnegie Mellon University, the Department of Statistics
              and the Department of Mathematical Sciences will build on their complementary
              strengths to develop a joint, vertically-integrated program of education and
              research.  Responding to national needs, the program will (i) train
              postdoctoral fellows for careers emphasizing research in settings that require
              versatility, (ii) aim to recruit and retain U.S.  graduate students, avoiding
              excessive time to complete Ph.D.s while providing students with a high
              probability of success after graduation, and (iii) help increase the numbers of
              U.S.  undergraduates, including women and minorities, who pursue advanced
              degrees in mathematical and statistical sciences.  The program emphasizes
              cross-disciplinary research and understanding the needs of learners in a
              context of disciplinary advancement.  Many of the activities grow from two
              previously-funded Group Infrastructure Grants to our respective departments,
              and from a very successful Undergraduate Summer Research Institute in Applied
              Mathematics.  For instance, we plan to use the graduate support model from the
              infrastructure grant to Mathematical Sciences, we will expand the operation of
              the Summer Institute to include students from Statistics, and we will adapt for
              Mathematical Sciences some of the postdoctoral mentoring procedures that have
              worked well in Statistics.  

Our evaluation of this training program will
              assess the following:
involvement of undergraduates in meaningful research
              experiences; its success in producing acceptable average time-to-degree for
              VIGRE graduate trainees; its effectiveness in expanding the mathematical
              horizons and career opportunities of students at both the undergraduate and the
              graduate levels, with particular focus on the graduate program; its
              effectiveness at the postdoctoral level in preparing VIGRE postdoctoral fellows
              for careers as professional mathematical scientists; its effectiveness in
              developing the communications skills of VIGRE participants; the effectiveness
              of the mentoring of undergraduate students, graduate trainees, and postdoctoral
              fellows; overall effectiveness of the research teams and other efforts to
              integrate research and education; the effectiveness of the
              partnership-in-training between the Departments of Statistics and Mathematical
              Sciences; and the degree of involvement of women and minorities.

Funding for
              this award is provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS
              Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.

