Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research for Poltiical Science: Shaping Democracy:
               Competition and Party Strategy in Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1999  
File        : a9819213

Award Number: 9819213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianne C. Stewart                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9750               (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry E. Brady hbrady@bravo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The project proposes a sample survey of district-level party leaders in Mexico
              to test and extend theories of party strategy derived from, and usually applied
              to, established party democracies.  Classic questions about party competition
              are posed:  under what conditions do parties choose intensive strategies
              focused on increasing the yield of votes from their core constituencies, and
              when do they follow extensive strategies by expanding into marginal
              constituencies?  How do strategies differ in two- and three-party competition? 
              Answers to these questions can give insights into broader processes affecting
              new democracies, such as how parties define and establish positions in the
              electoral marketplace as competition expands, and how these positions affect
              the dimensionality of partisan competition.  The project also sheds light on
              questions of specific interest to the study of Mexico:  how a dominant party
              with hegemonic resources and opposition parties organized initially as pressure
              groups transform into competitive organizations with coherent policy
              packages.

	The sample survey is directed to the leaders of Mexico's 300
              electoral districts from all three major parties.  The total population
              contains 900 members, about 314 of whom are targeted for interviews.  Although
              the unit of observation is the district leader, the sampling unit is the
              district.  Mexican districts are equivalent to wards in the United States, and
              district leaders are functionally the same as activists in Kitschelt's studies
              (1989, 1990) of West Europe.  All three leaders from each selected district are
              interviewed.  This methodology helps to reconstruct the conditions of local
              competition, and is based on the expectation that strategy is formed
              interactively with competitors.  The study focuses on three parties, but
              disaggregating the organizational structure permits the use of statistical
              techniques which include factor analysis and regression.  The questionnaire is
              designed to take advantage of a very small, but exciting, and emerging body of
              data on parties, party organizations, and party personnel in new and
              established democracies.  Thus, the data can serve as a basis for the study of
              Mexican parties, and also to place Mexico in cross-national perspective with
              other emerging democracies.

	Party strategy has never been a major area of
              inquiry in the literature.  This omission has a theoretical basis:  the
              dominant approaches to the study of party competition view parties as
              mechanical representations of sociological or political processes, not as
              actors in their own right.  This proposal suggests two primary types of
              strategy.  Then, hypotheses are cullled from spatial and actor-centered
              theories.  These approaches yield strong expectations for the two-party case,
              but contradictory rival hypotheses for the three-party case.  A simple, general
              model of strategy formation that combines environmental and
              intra-organizational variables is proposed.  Testing existing approaches for
              the two-party case while extending their reach to three-party competition in
              Mexico with empirical evidence help to push the boundaries of current
              theory.

	Mexico represents an interesting case for two reasons.  First,
              subnational areas of two- and three-party competition permit testing multiple,
              and sometimes contradictory, rival hypotheses within one country.  Second,
              party building in Mexico and in other Latin American countries is occurring in
              historically unique circumstances:  free-market economic policies break the
              link between local production and local consumption, creating a constituency of
              winners which is too small to sustain electoral success.  Although populist
              parties built in the 1930s were multiclass alliances that relied on a political
              economy of inclusion, contemporary party building must find new mobilizational
              strategies.          

