Title       : Physical and Biological Processes Linking the Sources of Larval Production to
               Subsequent Recruitment into Subtidal Benthic Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9819489

Award Number: 9819489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Whitlatch   (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip S. Bogden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Whitlach
9819489

This project will investigate the interplay between larval
              production, distribution, settlement, and recruitment and to determine how
              these factors influence differences in the structure and species composition of
              subtidal benthic communities. Previous studies using a newly developed
              automated sampling device indicate that recruitment of many invertebrate
              species occurs during slack water periods, particularly at low tide. This
              pattern may explain how some benthic species can maintain locally persistent
              populations even in turbulent environments. To assess the generality of this
              finding, Dr. Osman and collaborators will conduct a series of field
              investigations with four primary objectives. First, they will examine tidal
              hydrodynamics and associated transport withip an embayment in order to
              establish the patterns and correlations among water movement, larval
              distributions, and recruitment. Second, the scientists will investigate the
              spatial and temporal relationships between larval production, release,
              availability, and recruitment. Experiments will focus on three distinct groups
              of species; one with strong local source areas and shortlived (hours) larvae
              (colonial ascidians, bryozoans), a second group with equally strong local
              sources but with longer-lived (days) larvae (some solitary ascidians), and the
              third with a distributed regional source of long-lived larvae (e.g. barnacles).
              Third, investigators will examine how recruitment influences the establishment
              and long-term maintenance of sub-populations within a larger regional
              population. Experiments will quantify the immigration of recruits into an area,
              determine their survival rates, evaluate their ability to replicate and become
              a local population, and examine subsequent population maintenance through
              multiple generations. The field studies will combine newly-developed devices
              for measuring larvae and recruits of benthic species with standard techniques
              for measuring large-scale currents and local turbulence intensities. Finally, a
              numerical model will be developed to predict spatial distributions of larvae
              and recruits for species with different life histories. The model will combine
              knowledge of tidal flows with quantitative descriptions of larval production,
              distribution, settlement, and recruitment obtained from experiments. The
              model's sensitivity to plausible variations in these factors will be used to
              assess our ability to predict spatial and temporal variability in marine
              population and community dynamics.


