Title       : Flexible Bayesian Econometric Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9819444

Award Number: 9819444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Geweke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed research is to advance econometric modeling in two
              directions. In the first direction, tools are developed that (a) significantly
              expand the universe of data sets that can be used for testing and estimation
              models of economic behavior and (b) drastically reduce the time and effort
              required to conduct formal statistical inference in newly formulated models.
              Tn. the second direction, econometric models are formulated that (a) impose
              assumptions that are closer to those of economic theory and (b) permit greater
              flexibility in those aspects of models to which economic theory does not speak,
              than is now the case.

Two aspects of the methods to be employed are common
              to these objectives. The first aspect is that inference in econometric models
              is Bayesian, conditioning on the data and maintaining consistency with the
              likelihood principle. The second aspect is that simulation methods are used to
              solve key technical problems that cannot be attacked analytically. In the first
              direction of advance, forward simulation from prior and data densities will be
              used to permit inference about models, parameters, and functions of interest
              conditional on selected features of the data. The ability to use selected
              features of the data enables expansion in the universe of data sets that can be
              used. As opposed to backward simulation methods like Markov chain Monte Carlo
              or simulated method of moments, these forward simulators are very easy to
              construct. This simplicity greatly reduces the development time in econometric
              modeling. In the second direction of	advance, very flexible distributional
              assumptions will be used to permit the data, as opposed to arbitrary but
              technically convenient assumptions, to drive inference. These assumptions
              include multivariate normal mixture models with conditional dependence on
              covariates or state variables. Restrictions from economic theory, such as
              concavity, can be
imposed in these models by means of appropriate prior
              distributions and Markov chain
Monte Carlo posterior simulation
              methods.

The objectives of the project significantly enhance the
              capabilities for empirical work in economics, and related disciplines like
              sociology and political science. The outcome of the project will include
              state-of-the-art, user friendly software that will be made freely available.
              This software, in turn, will become part of a web-based educational and
              software system being developed in this and related projects. Graduate student
              participation in the project is essential to these outcomes, and will be
              complementary to
these students' dissertation research.

