Title       : Constraining and Understanding Bacterial Biomass and Production Variability in
               Ocean Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1999     
File        : a9819581

Award Number: 9819581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh W. Ducklow duck@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7334

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1650,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ducklow

This work is a part of the Synthesis and Modelling Program (SMP) of
              US JGOFS aimed at modelling and synthesis of data on carbon fluxes and
              transformations mediated by oceanic bacterioplankton.  Bacteria are a major
              (and perhaps the dominant) component of biomass in many ocean systems and are
              practically the sole agents of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) turnover in
              aquatic ecosystems.  Further, they contribute to particle formation and
              breakdown through intense biosynthetic and hydrolytic processes, thus
              influencing vertical sedimentation rates and patterns.  An unprecedented amount
              of data on bacterioplankton abundance and production rates was obtained during
              JGOFS but it has yet to make its mark in ocean biogeochemistry.  At the time
              the JGOFS studies were designed in the mid-1980's, conceptual models of
              bacterial processes were crude, and numerical models were largely nonexistent. 
              Development of both types of models has advanced in the JGOFS decade, but
              mostly without benefit of empirical constraints.  JGOFS bacterial data, on the
              other hand, have some significant shortcomings: extrapolations of biomass
              levels from abundance (and more recently biovolume) measurements are uncertain
              by perhaps an order of magnitude.  Carbon-based rates of production derived
              from isotopic precursor incorporation rates are similarly uncertain.  By
              participating in the JGOFS SMP, by improving and constraining existing models
              with new data, and by developing new models, both conceptual and numerical, the
              investigators plan to meet two principal goals: l) reduce the uncertainties of,
              and add meaning to the observations; and 2) improve our understanding of how
              bacteria influence carbon fluxes and ecosystem functions in ocean plankton
              systems.  This research represents a collaborative effort between an
              observational marine microbial ecologist (Ducklow) and two ocean
              biogeochemical/ecological modelers (Fasham and Anderson).


