Title       : Teacher Leader Institutes to Support the Dissemination of Activity-Based Physics
               Teaching Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a9819626

Award Number: 9819626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $982555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla W. Laws lawsp@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Garrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maxine C. Willis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Sokoloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Cooney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald K. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819626
LAWS

In this four-year project the Activity-Based Physics (ABP)
              Group will help teachers and their students learn to engage in authentic
              inquiry by:  

1) Developing a series of Professional Development Institutes
              at Dickinson College and the University of Oregon to give 120 secondary school
              educators in physics 160 hours of direct experience using and integrating
              computer technology with inquiry-based professional development materials
              developed by members of the Group. These Institutes will enable teachers to
              improve and critically evaluate their own teaching practices and serve as
              change agents for science and mathematics teachers in their regions.

2)
              Creating teacher materials including a Teacher Resource Guide and an Action
              Research Kit to support teachers in the successful adaptation and critical
              evaluation of the impact of computer-enhanced, activity-based curricula in
              their own classroom settings. 

3) Evaluating the success of the professional
              development institutes, teacher materials, and educational materials so the
              principles that underlie the design of professional development materials and
              teacher institutes can be used by others engaged in the standards-based reform
              of science and mathematics teaching.

The creation of the materials and
              Computer Tools to be used in the Institutes has been guided by the outcomes of
              physics education research and include Tools for Scientific Thinking Laboratory
              Guides, RealTime Physics Laboratory Modules, Workshop Physics, Workshop
              Science, and an Interactive Lecture Demonstration Series.

The matching funds
              amount to 19% of the NSF award.

