Title       : Interface Dipolar Engineering in III-V Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9819659

Award Number: 9819659
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $640000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall I. Nathan nathan@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfonso Franciosi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Palmstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1589,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This FRG (Focused Research Group) project aims for greater understanding of
              materials science and device physics aspects of dipole layers at heterojunction
              interfaces, and to modify them for improved device performance across a variety
              of common compound semiconductor structures: lasers, HBTs, MOSFETs, HEMTs, and
              Schottky barriers. The project involves theory, growth, characterization, and
              prototype device studies. First principle calculations will be performed by
              collaborators at EPFL (Switzerland), and coupled with material processing for
              improved device performance. Recently dual purpose molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
              facilities devoted to the exploration of interface properties and the
              fabrication of working devices have produced tunability of band offsets and
              Schottky barriers through local modifications of the atomic termination of
              critical interfaces. In parallel with experiment, a convergence of different
              theoretical models, including first principles calculations, the theoretical
              alchemy approach and linear response theory results, are establishing a common
              theoretical framework. Most theoretical and experimental studies have
              identified heterovalent semiconductor junctions with polar orientation as those
              that exhibit the strongest dependence of interface properties on local
              interface termination. Therefore IV/III-V, II-VI/III-V, III-V/IV/III-V and
              III--V/II-VI/III-V interfaces may represent a class of highly tunable interface
              systems, as compared to the more conventional isovalent systems (e.g.,
              III-V/III-V) where the valence difference across each interface allows
              fabrication of large electrostatic dipoles with orientation and magnitude
              largely controlled by the growth conditions.
For heterojunction interfaces,
              parameters such as the valence and conduction band discontinuities, and the
              built-in potentials affect carrier confinement on both sides of the active
              region where radiative recombination occurs in heterojunction lasers, emitter
              efficiencies in HBT's, as well as the gate voltage swing and the gate leakage
              current in MOSFET and HEMT structures. For metal/semiconductor interfaces,
              present in all solid state devices, the possibility of reducing or increasing
              the Schottky barrier height without changing the doping of the semiconductor
              constituent would enhance ability to fabricate low resistivity contacts to new
              wide bandgap materials for which doping technology is still limited (e.g.,
              III-V nitrides, silicon carbide, diamond), simplify the exploitation of
              ballistic transport in practical devices, decrease the leakage current in
              MESFET's, and potentially yield Schottky barrier photon detectors with tunable
              long -wavelength cut-off and/or lower dark currents. Thus, the project seeks to
              exploit heterovalency-induced, extrinsic local interface dipoles in a variety
              of III-V materials systems of current practical interest, including
              AlGaAs/GaAs, GaInAs/InP, GaInP/GaAs, and AlGaN/GaN. Different ultrathin
              heterovalent interlayers (e.g., Si, Ge, Si-C, Zn-O) will be fabricated by MBE
              to tune the band alignments as well as in related metal/semiconductor
              junctions. Interlayer type and growth conditions which minimize out-diffusion,
              and assess the range of offset tuning that can be achieved in high-quality,
              device grade structures will be determined. The ultimate goal is to clarify the
              microscopic mechanisms that determine the offset tuning while developing a
              series of new interfacial engineering principles for device optimization. This
              FRG project is co-supported by two NSF programs, and the MPS OMA(Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities).
%%%
The project addresses basic research
              issues in a topical area of materials science and engineering having high
              potential technological relevance. The research will contribute new knowledge
              at a fundamental level to important fabrication aspects of electronic/photonic
              devices. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is
              expected to contribute to improving the perform-ance and stability of advanced
              devices and circuits.  An important feature of the program is the integration
              of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area.
***

