Title       : RIDGE Field School on the Structure and Genesis of the Troodos Ophiolite, Cyprus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9819266

Award Number: 9819266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bilal U. Haq                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132282             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Christie dchristie@coas.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1319,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A RIDGE Field School will be held in Cyprus during June, 1999 to study the field
              geology of the Troodos Ophiolite, a classic region of old ocean crustal rocks
              which can provide important insights into the structure and genesis of modern
              oceanic crust. The school will focus on the upper parts of ophiolite section,
              where seafloor volcanics and the underlying intrusive sheeted dikes and upper
              plutonic sections are exposed. This section also displays a record of
              hydrothermal alteration processes below the ancient seafloor, at both high and
              low temperatures.  The Troodos Ophiolite is the only accessible major ophiolite
              to have survived not only almost undeformed, but also unmetamorphosed. As such,
              it provides an excellent insight into the structure and construction of the
              ocean crust. A visit to this unique locality is an invaluable experience for
              any scientist working on volcanic and hydrothermal processes at mid-ocean
              ridges, providing new insight into the nature of the sub-surface features that
              underpin those seen at the surface in active mid-ocean ridges. In the course of
              a 6-day field trip, the geological section can be comprehensively inspected,
              argued over in outcrop, and further illustrated by a few, well-targeted
              lectures.  This format leads to a much improved understanding of crustal
              construction at spreading centers, for scientists at all levels, but the focus
              of the school will be for graduate students and early-career scientists.  The
              field school will be lead by a group of eleven invited researchers with an
              expertise in the geology of the Troodos Ophiolite and/or mid-ocean ridge
              processes. The convenors will be Joe Cann, University of Leeds; Kathy Gillis,
              University of Victoria; and Costas Xenophontos, Cyprus Geological Survey
              Department. Logistics will be handled by the RIDGE office at Oregon State
              University.


