Title       : Space Weather: DE-1 FUV-observed Thermospheric Disturbances and Their
               Spatial/Temporal Correlation with Negative Ionospheric Storm Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9819658

Award Number: 9819658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194846             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Strickland dstrick@euler.cpi.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Daniell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Computational Physics Inc
	      2750 Prosperity Ave., Suite 600
	      Fairfax, VA  22031    /   -

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A three year investigation is proposed to address the evolution of
              thermospherically disturbed regions produced during geomagnetic storms and
              their correlation with negative ionospheric storms.  The proposal is motivated
              by the successful outcome of a two year investigation by the PI under a NASA
              contract to derive thermospheric composition images on the dayside from DE-1
              FUV imaging data.  The images are in the form of O/N2, the column abundance of
              O relative to N2 referenced to a fixed depth in the latter species.  The work
              demonstrated that the radiance data can be converted to O/N2 with sufficient
              accuracy to effectively quantify the structure and intensity of regions of
              reduced O/N2  (O depletion patches [ODPs]) arising from intense heating at high
              latitudes during geomagnetic storms. O/N2 images have been produced from
              various storm-time data showing reductions in O/N2 by more than a factor of two
              over extended mid-latitude regions.  In the current work, the focus will be on
              first-principles ionospheric modeling to understand the behavior of the
              observed ionosphere within thermospherically disturbed mid-latitude regions.  A
              key aspect of the modeling will be to reproduce the measure-ments inside and
              adjacent of O depleted regions within constraints imposed by DE-1-based O/N2. 
              Whereas a key goal of the proposed NASA work will be correlating data with data
              (DE-based O/N2 with ionospheric measurements), here a key goal will be to
              better understand the neutral density behavior at E-region heights within O
              depleted regions through the stated modeling effort.  The approach is to
              attempt to replicate ionospheric observations during O depletion events by
              modifying the empirical models of neutral densities and winds used in the
              ionospheric models.  That is, an attempt will be made to deduce something about
              thermospheric structure in O depletion events by working backwards from the
              observed effects of these events on ionospheric structure.  The long range goal
              is to be able to use satellite images of O/N2 to map out regions likely to be
              experiencing negative ionospheric storm effects.
