Title       : Understanding Jurors Use of Highly Diagnostic Statistical Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9819305

Award Number: 9819305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123173             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan J. Koehler Koehler@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding and Improving Jurors' Use of Highly Diagnostic Statistical
              Evidence

Jonathan J. Koehler

There is no more pressing issue in the
              controversy that swirls around the use of scientific evidence in the courtroom
              than how jurors interpret and use the tiny statistics that arise in connection
              with forensic science evidence.  For example, many people assume that these
              statistics are persuasive in cases where a criminal suspect matches traces of
              DNA evidence recovered from the scene of a violent crime.  That is, they
              believe that after hearing coincidental match statistics that range from 1 in
              thousands to 1 in billions, jurors will be convinced that the matching suspects
              are indeed the source of the recovered DNA evidence.  Others believe that
              jurors will be confused by the numbers and will not find the evidence
              compelling.

Who's right?  My own preliminary research with mock jurors
              indicates that the way in which statistical evidence is presented may exert a
              powerful effect on how legal decision makers think about and use the evidence. 
              
I offer a descriptive theory and two experiments to help understand
              how
legal decision makers respond to highly diagnostic statistical
              evidence.
The theory -- called exemplar cueing theory -- predicts when
              decision
makers will find statistical match evidence relatively strong
              and
persuasive and when not.  It holds that judgments and choices related
              to
the strength and persuasiveness of statistical match evidence are guided
              by
the availability of coincidental match exemplars.  To the extent
              decision
makers can easily generate examples of chance matches, the evidence
              will
seem less compelling as proof of identity.  

This theoretical
              framework is broad enough for understanding how people
think about many low
              probability events such as one's chances of winning
the lottery or the risks
              posed by environmental catastrophe or genetic
disease.  It is also
              sufficiently refined that it may help us understand
when jurors will be
              persuaded by a defendant's argument that a DNA match is
purely
              coincidental.

These data will be useful to a variety of constituencies, from
              the judges
and policy makers who must develop instructions and standards for
              the
admissibility of statistical evidence, to the scientists, law
              enforcement
officers, and attorneys who must find ways to communicate the
              meaning of a
match.

