Title       : Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Relationship between Nitrogen Uptake and
               Net Community Production using a Synthesis of JGOFS Data and 1-D Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1999  
File        : a9819151

Award Number: 9819151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243848             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond N. Sambrotto sambrott@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1650,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Sambrotto

	The measurement of Net Community Production (NCP) is a robust
              estimate of the amount of organic material produced in surface waters of the
              ocean.  NCP can serve as a starting point for models of carbon export from
              surface waters and the ocean's capacity to absorb carbon dioxide from the
              atmosphere.  However, most models of ocean production are based on a limiting
              nutrient such as phosphorus or nitrogen and the reliability of this class of
              models therefore will depend on how accurately the consumption of limiting
              nutrients can be converted to the absorption of carbon dioxide by the ocean. 
              The PIs will calibrate the relationship between NCP and new (nitrate)
              production in order to assist in the goal of predicting the role of the ocean
              as a carbon sink.  The question of how to best convert between surface ocean
              elemental cycles will be examined with the a null hypothesis being that the
              stoichiometric oxidative ratios found in ocean thermocline waters (the Redfield
              ratios) are a quantitative way to translate between nitrogen and NCP.  A
              comparative approach will be used to examine the extent of coupling between the
              surface nitrogen and carbon cycles.  In instances where carbon and nitrogen
              appear to be uncoupled in the Redfield sense, possible methodological causes
              will be carefully evaluated.  Following this analysis, the role of early bloom
              vs. nutrient limited conditions; dominant taxa; dissolved organic matter (DOM)
              levels; N2 fixation; iron limitation and other factors will be considered as
              agents modifying the relationship between nitrogen and carbon fluxes.  The
              degree of coupling in representative ocean regions will be evaluated in a
              one-dimensional numerical model with realistic upper layer physics.  These
              results will allow biogeochemical modelers to judge when the use of Redfield
              ratios for conversion is appropriate and identify what (if any) circumstances
              merit an alternate conversion approach.  This will contribute to more accurate
              predictions of carbon flux that are sensitive to the relevant biological
              processes.


