Title       : Studies with Liquid Helium Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2000   
File        : a9819122

Award Number: 9819122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Hallock hallock@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9819122
Hallock
This low temperature physics project investigates the unique
              properties of helium films. Of interest are the fundamental behavior of the
              films and their application in other studies of problems of interest in
              Condensed Matter Physics. New aspects of the He-3/He-4 mixture film system,
              including localization, measurements on hydrogen substrates, the determination
              of two dimensional Fermi liquid parameters, and the search for a new superfluid
              state in the two dimensional He-3 atop a He-4 film at very low temperatures
              will be investigated. The work explores capillary condensation and avalanche
              phenomena with helium in porous materials, and examines the relevance of
              current theoretical notions to such systems. Experiments are conducted with
              helium films on patterned substrates in one and two dimensions, with a focus on
              two dimensional localization. The methods include NMR, quartz crystal
              microbalance resonance, third sound, and heat capacity studies of the thermal
              properties of He-4 and He-3/He-4 mixture films, and high resolution capacitance
              measurements of capillary condensation and avalanche events in porous
              materials. In addition to contributing to progress in understanding the
              behavior of helium films themselves, the work has relevance to the wider
              community in the areas of Fermi systems, localization, two dimensional phase
              transitions, avalanche phenomena, and capillary condensation. It also provides
              excellent training for the graduate students and research participation
              opportunities for the undergraduates who are associated with it.
%%%
This
              research investigates the remarkable properties of liquid helium. Such study
              provides unique insights into nature which are not available by the study of
              any other substance.  Thin films of helium provide information on the behavior
              of weak binding surfaces such as hydrogen, which aids in the understanding of
              the general problem of wetting of surfaces. Study of the wave character of such
              thin films on surfaces which have been deliberately patterned allows an
              enhanced understanding of how waves can be trapped in novel environments. The
              study of thin film mixtures of the two naturally occurring forms of helium may
              result in the discovery of an exciting new kind of superfluid which is
              predicted but has not yet been observed. Helium in its friction-free superfluid
              state is utilized to further understand the dramatic avalanche behavior
              observed when helium drains from spongy substances. These experiments allow a
              better understanding of the process of fluid removal from porous materials.
              Students involved in this work are provided with a high quality hands-on
              research experience using sophisticated instrumentation.  


