Title       : Pattern Exploration: Integrating Math and Science for the Middle School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a9819428

Award Number: 9819428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica M. Neagoy                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1938755            (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinz-Otto Peitgen peitgen@acc.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Barba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Voss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith A. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Connie Boutwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Franklin J. Vodolo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geneva Woodward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819428
PEITGEN

Building on the current NSF-supported middle- and
              high-school project, "Teacher Enhancement through Chaos and Fractals," this
              three-year teacher leadership and professional development materials project
              has a focus on the exploration and discovery of patterns through fractal
              geometry for the middle grades, and an expansion in the project's current
              geographic reach to seven urban and rural counties of south Florida:  Broward,
              Collier, Miami-Dade, Hendry, Martin, Monroe, and Palm Beach.  The project
              targets approximately 300 middle school teachers of mathematics and science in
              two phases.  Phase one, which covers the first year, provides for an initial
              regional cadre of 54 lead teachers, who participate in writing and development
              seminars, teacher enhancement in the subject area, and leadership development. 
              Phase two, which covers years two and three, provides for the enhancement of an
              additional 120 teachers of middle-school mathematics and science each year. 
              The project has a goal of preparing teams of teachers from each middle- school
              in the participating districts.  The lead teachers who are prepared in phase
              one assist in the enhancement, coaching, and mentoring of the phase two
              teachers.

Core activities of the project include:  (1) spring writing and
              development seminars, where -- with the project's leadership team -- lead
              teachers write, re-write, and test the workshop materials that provide the
              basis for the workshop design and lesson plans in the following summer;  (2)
              three-week summer institutes, with both large and small group sessions and a
              teaching camp with middle-grades students;  (3) weekend follow-up sessions; and
               (4) small group mentoring throughout the following school year.

Over the
              four years of the Teacher Enhancement through Chaos and Fractals project, its
              leadership team and lead teachers produced a series of CATEs (Curriculum and
              Textbook Enhancements) on chaos and fractals, which underwent several stages of
              writing, testing, and rewriting in dedicated writing seminars at Florida
              Atlantic University in the springs of 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998.  These CATEs
              -- available in six units -- form the base for an initial writing seminar in
              the spring of 1999 aimed at the generation of adapted CATEs for middle school
              teachers.      


