Title       : US-Mozambique Workshop: Integrated Analysis and Management of Renewable
               Resources, Maputo, Mozambique, June 6-11, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9819930

Award Number: 9819930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul V. Desanker desanker@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5928,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9819930
Desanker

This award supports nine US participants in the
              US-Mozambique Workshop on Integrated Analysis and Management of Renewable
              Resources, in Maputa, Mozambique, June 6-11, 1999.  There will also be 20
              Mozambican participants, including researchers from Eduardo Mondlane
              University, resource managers, and policy makers.  The co-organizers are
              Professor Paul V. Desanker, of the Department of Environmental Sciences at the
              University of Virginia, and Professor Luisa Santos, of the Faculty of Agronomy
              and Forestry Engineering at Eduardo Mondlane University.  The purposes of the
              workshop are to begin development of an integrated assessment framework to
              analyze different natural resource management options, and to identify topics
              of mutual importance for international collaborative research.

Both
              Mozambique's recovery from a prolonged period of armed conflict (which ended in
              1994), and the initiation of programs for economic recovery and development,
              have led to the intensification of agricultural and forestry production and
              increased demands on its natural resources.  As a result of these events,
              Mozambique is experiencing many land use changes, and some areas are now at
              risk for environmental degradation.  Many Mozambican researchers, resource
              managers, and policy makers are involved in the establishment of programs and
              policies for the sustainable management and development of its natural
              resources, but currently little information is shared across disciplines. This
              multidisciplinary workshop will include presentations on research activities in
              the fields of agriculture, agroforestry, forestry, hydrology, land use change
              and the ecological consequences, and integrated assessment modeling.  The
              workshop will enable the US participants to learn about Mozambique's multitude
              of land, water, forest, and wildlife resources, most of which have never been
              studied by US researchers.  Additionally, the creation of an integrated
              modeling framework will be a valuable aid for Mozambican researchers, resource
              managers, and policy makers to use in the development of scientifically viable
              resource management and sustainable development programs.  Further, researchers
              worldwide will have access to new knowledge about Mozambique's natural
              resources, as well as the ecological and societal impacts of land use changes. 
              The project supports the participation of one US graduate student and two
              junior investigators.   

