Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Dispensing and Metering of Nanoliter Liquid Volumes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9819282

Award Number: 9819282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63281              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Jones jones@ece.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9819282
Jones

This award provides funds to support a 9-month research visit
              by Dr. Thomas Byron Jones, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
              University of Rochester, for collaboration with Dr. Masao Washizu, Department
              of Mechanical Engineering, Kyoto University, Japan.  The goal of their research
              is to develop and test microelectrode systems for manipulation and control of
              nanoliter-sized liquid volumes using dielectrophoretic (DEP) forces.  DEP
              liquid control offers the prospect of enhanced functionality for IOTAS (micro
              total analysis systems) for chemical and cellular/biological processes,
              especially in applications where available liquid or cell samples are very
              small, toxic, or biologically hazardous, or where strict isolation of samples
              must be maintained.  A long-term objective would be programmable systems where
              liquid injected by a micropipette is dispensed reproducibly into nanoliter
              droplets for transport one-at-a-time across a substrate for such processing as
              laser-optical or dielectrometric assay, mixing, or separation.

The
              experimental approach in this research will integrate the new electric
              field-actuated droplet transport scheme, developed by the host, with DEP liquid
              handling to meter and dispense aqueous solutions and chemical compounds in
              liquid form.  Once successful in demonstrating voltage-actuated droplet
              dispensing, the collaborators will integrate the electrode structure with the
              droplet transport scheme to create a very basic m-TAS device. The ultimate
              objective will be a voltage-controlled structure that draws a microliter volume
              of liquid from a reservoir (probably via a dielectric siphon) and then
              dispenses this into nanoliter droplets.  The project will be mutually
              beneficial because of the complementary expertise of the collaborators which
              will contribute to the two-way exchanges of ideas, skills, and techniques
              planned for this research.  This project is supported under the Science
              Fellowship Program between the National Science Foundation and the Japan
              Foundation Center for Global Partnership.
***


