Title       : Developmental Biology: An Interactive CD-ROM for the High School Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9819250

Award Number: 9819250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $847440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Pasquale spasquale@bscs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph D. McInerney  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ellen T. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Grunwald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Biol Scs Curriculum Study
	      5415 Mark Dabling Boulevard
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80918    719/531-5550

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9819250
MCINERNEY

This project seeks funding to create a CD-ROM with
              accompanying printed materials that can be used in high school biology
              classrooms to modernize the teaching of developmental biology.  The material
              will be presented in a format of 10 class periods of inquiry-based instruction,
              which could replace or accompany the treatment of developmental biology in
              existing high school textbooks; BSCS will use the module in all three of its
              BSCS texts.  Four general topics of Developmental Biology will be covered:  the
              development of individual organisms, development and evolution, development and
              the methods of science, and personal and social implications of developmental
              biology.  Motion footage of development of several species, 3-D graphics (which
              can be manipulated by students), simulations of modern and classic experiments,
              links to external databases, as well as basic text material will be
              incorporated in the CD-ROM.  Supplemental material for teachers will be
              supplied.  Students will be presented with printed material, including hands-on
              activities and laboratory investigations, which will be integrated with the
              CD-ROM content.  The 20-month project will involve BSCS, the Eccles Institute
              of Human Genetics at the University of Utah, and Learning Systems Consultants
              (who will be subcontracted to create the CD-ROM).  BSCS has submitted a
              well-planned and time-tested development and evaluation process.  BSCS and the
              University of Utah will distribute the CD-ROM via a commercial
              publisher.
		


