Title       : Facultative Feeding by Planktotrophic Larvae of Echinoids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a9819593

Award Number: 9819593
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Julian julian@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry R. McEdward  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McEdward

		Advances in our understanding of the ecology of reproduction and
              development in marine organisms require combining life history theory with
              functional analyses of larvae as pelagic organisms.   This combination should
              prove to be an important integrative link between these fields .  A central
              question will be what ecological factors influence the development of feeding
              larvae?  A concentration on energetics is important because this is central to
              many general theoretical models of life history ecology and evolution.  This
              project will provide new information on the development of planktotrophic
              larvae by evaluating the consequences of facultative feeding in a closely
              related, co-occurring group of echinoids that differ widely in egg
              size.
		Traditionally marine invertebrate larvae have been classified into two
              mutually exclusive, qualitatively different nutritional types: feeding and
              non-feeding. Most larvae that require food for development are thought to come
              from very small eggs and require food throughout larval life. Non-feeding
              larvae develop from very large yolky eggs and cannot obtain or utilize
              exogenous food until after metamorphosis. Many life history traits are
              correlated with nutritional mode, such as egg size, fecundity, larval
              morphology, development time, and juvenile size. Empirical observations of the
              distribution of life history traits and theoretical modeling of larval
              strategies have led to the view that the extremes of the two nutritional
              patterns represent the most successful reproductive strategies.
		Recent work
              on the feeding requirements of echinoid larvae challenges the predictions made
              by the classic models of reproductive strategies in marine invertebrates. A
              surprising range of "intermediate" strategies that had not been recognized
              before, nor predicted, has been documented. Among echinoids (sea urchins and
              sand dollars) there exists a continuum of feeding strategies across which
              larvae vary substantially in the degree to which they require food for
              development to metamorphosis. The amount of nutritional reserves provided in
              the egg by the parent is positively correlated with the stage at which the
              larvae require exogenous food. It is predicted that egg energy content also
              determines the capacity for facultative feeding, i.e., the ability to acquire
              exogenous food before endogenous reserves are exhausted and feeding becomes
              obligatory. The lack of information on facultative larval feeding precludes a
              meaningful assessment of the ecological and evolutionary implications of
              differences in larval strategies.
		The project seeks to assess the
              contribution of facultative feeding in planktotrophic echinoid larvae. Two
              approaches will be used. First, laboratory experiments will be used to evaluate
              empirically the contribution of facultative feeding to larval development rate
              and juvenile energy content in six related, co-occurring species that have
              different egg sizes and different abilities to develop in the absence of food.
              Second, new theoretical models of larval development and growth will be
              constructed to analyze the consequences of facultative feeding on the relative
              advantages of different levels of parental investment. These studies are
              designed to generate new information on the relationships that underlie the
              diversity of larval strategies among marine invertebrates.


