Title       : Space Weather: A Climatology of Particle Inputs to the Terrestrial Atmospheric
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9819915

Award Number: 9819915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Wuest mwuest@swri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Sharber  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Southwest Research Inst
	      6220 Culebra Road
	      San Antonio, TX  782385166    /   -

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              One of the most important aspects of space weather research is an understanding
              of the outflow of particle energy from the Sun and its effect on the
              terrestrial environment.  One approach to improving the understanding of the
              terrestrial effects is to develop models of particle input which can provide
              spectral or total energy inputs as a function of position as well as global or
              hemispheric energy input.  This research proposes to achieve such a model by
              building on a climatological model currently being developed using data from
              the UARS Particle Environment Monitor (PEM).  The principal limitation of the
              PEM data set and climatology is the lack of high-latitude coverage that results
              from the 57-degree inclination of the UARS orbit.  Accordingly, this proposal
              seeks to augment the current UARS climatology with additional low-altitude
              data.  The primary data set will be TIROS/NOAA spectral particle data since it
              contains spectral measurements up to the MeV range.  Data from the ISIS 1 and 2
              polar orbiters, which made spectral measurements from the keV to MeV range,
              will also be added to extend the coverage through the ~1970 solar maximum and
              declining phase of Solar Cycle 20 and a portion of the ascending phase of Cycle
              21.  The new, extended climatology will be an empirical statistical model built
              using a combined low Earth orbit database from which the user may obtain
              average spectral characteristics, precipitating particle fluxes, and ionization
              rate profiles as functions of latitude, local time, and activity level.  A
              unique aspect of this model will be the inclusion of differential measurements
              of high energy fluxes that extend to the ~MeV range.  The model may be made
              operational by using solar wind measurements at the L1 point.
