Title       : Support of the Duke University Center for the Study of Primate Biology and
               History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a9819576

Award Number: 9819576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $994098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth E. Glander glander@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elwyn L. Simons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1106      LIVING STOCK COLLECTIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This awards provides a portion of the core support for the Duke University
              Primate Center (DUPC).  The DUPC houses the largest and most diverse collection
              of prosimian primates in the world and is recognized as a focal point for
              prosimian research and conversation.  The DUPC concurrently operates as a
              research resource providing animals, tissues and blood samples to scientists on
              a local, regional, national and international level. Behavioral research is
              enhanced by Natural Habitat Enclosures (NHE) totaling 65 acres.  In-house
              research is conducted by faculty, staff members, visiting scientists, and
              post-doctoral researchers from local, national, and international institutions.
               Research on prosimians has continued to increase during recent years in scope,
              intensity and sophistication, and is now one of the most active and exciting
              fields of primatogy. However, prosimian primates are not a renewable resource. 
              Importation of wild-caught prosimians has declined, but the Malagasy government
              has uniquely supported the need to diversity the DUPC's population of
              endangered prosimian species.  The captive propagation of prosimians has become
              a necessity in order to support continued research on this important and
              little-known group of primates.  The DUPC is the only university-related
              research facility in the world devoted exclusively to the study of prosimians.
