Title       : Implications of Disequilibrium Ecology for Environmental Ethics and Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9819617

Award Number: 9819617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest D. Partridge gadfly@igc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Traditional environmental ethical theories and policy practices are based upon
              the assumption that natural ecosystems are balanced, integrated, stable and in
              equilibrium. Recently, several ecologists and some philosophers have subjected
              this assumption to severe criticism that bears far-reaching implications for
              environmental ethics and policy. For example, wilderness management practices,
              the Endangered Species Act, the Global Warming Treaty, sustainable development,
              food and agricultural aid, population policy, pollution control regulation -
              all this and more rest upon assumptions that human welfare depends upon the
              maintenance of a fragile ecosystemic "integrity," "balance" and "equilibrium."
              All these assumptions are challenged by "the new ecology."  This research
              project undertakes three tasks: a)To examine and clarify the meaning of the
              concepts and therefore the claims of both the "new" and the "old" ecologists -
              thus determining just what is, and is not, entailed by these claims. b)To
              examine the methodology of both contending schools of ecology, and to assess
              the adequacy of the evidence and the strength of inference offered in support
              of their claims. c) On the basis of (a) and (b) to articulate the implications
              (if any) of the new ecology for ethical theories and policy practices that are
              based upon the concepts and assumptions of "the old ecology."  During the award
              period, the investigator will teach an interdisciplinary seminar on "Concepts
              in Ecology." Results will include lectures, colloquium participation,
              manuscript preparation and submission to journals, and the development of a
              book.  

