Title       : Improved Bargaining Position in Negotiations as a Motive for Mergers and
               Exclusionary Practices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9819373

Award Number: 9819373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136193             (Estimated)
Investigator: Esther Gal-Or esther@mail.business.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Several theoretical models will be developed aimed at evaluating the
              welfare consequences of mergers and exclusionary practices that are motivated
              by the parties' attempt to improve their "negotiating position" vis-a-vis
              powerful business partners and customers.  (Exclusionary practices include
              things like clauses in contracts between two firms forbidding one of the firms
              from dealing with a third firm.)  In evaluating the recent mergers in the
              computer and telecommunication industries or in assessing the welfare
              consequences of exclusionary clauses utilized by Microsoft in contracting with
              its business partners, the Justice Department can benefit from such a
              "negotiation" based analysis of mergers. The existing literature on the topic
              is not very useful in this context since it assumes that the customers and
              suppliers of the merged entity are powerless, price-taking entities. In
              addition, it models sales of goods and services between upstream and downstream
              firms as "spot exchange" trades, rather than trades under contract. In
              contrast, in the present project explicit negotiations over contract terms
              among firms will be incorporated into the analysis. The implications of mergers
              (both horizontal and vertical) and of exclusionary clauses upon the outcome of
              the negotiations will be assessed. In particular, the objective is to
              understand the welfare consequences of such practices as a function of the
              relative extent of competitiveness of the industries in which the merged entity
              and its negotiating partners operate.
     The following are examples of
              questions to be addressed in the project:
1.  Under what circumstances do
              firms have incentives to vertically or horizontally integrate in order to     
              enhance their bargaining position in negotiations?
2.  How do those
              circumstances relate to the characteristics of the markets in which they
              operate?
3.  What are the welfare consequences of such mergers?
4.  Under
              what circumstances do exclusionary practices arise in an attempt to enhance
              negotiating position? 
5.  Are such practices always welfare reducing?
6. 
              Can asymmetric equilibria emerge where some firms resort to exclusionary
              practices while their      competitors do not?
7.  What patterns of ownership
              can emerge at the equilibrium?  In particular, can asymmetric equilibria      
              exist, such that a subset of firms in an industry (or in two related
              industries) is jointly owned while the       remaining firms choose to operate
              independently?
