Title       : Environmental Technology Education Transfer to Native American Tribal Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9454633

Award Number: 9454633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert K. Boggess                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl F. Topper topper@mesastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sue D. Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Kearl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravindra M. Srivastava  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mesa State College
	      1100 North Avenue
	      Grand Junction, CO  815013122    970/248-1424

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Native American Tribal environments have often historically been  neglected; and
              tribes have inadequate resources and expertise to  deal with cleanup and
              prevention of further pollution.  Because  tribes need to know how to measure
              and analyze their own  environmental risks, a technologically educated and
              trained Native  American environmental work force is needed.  This project is
              using  existing resources to create and transfer an interdisciplinary 
              environmental technology associate degree curriculum for tribal  colleges and
              other community colleges with roles in educating  American Indians.  It is also
              providing faculty enhancement,  instructional materials, and a rotating
              equipment program.  The  curriculum focuses on those technologies used for
              environmental  monitoring, site assessment, solid waste management, and
              pollution  prevention, as these are the prominent environmental issues facing 
              tribal lands.  From incorporation of support disciplines  (mathematics,
              science, communications), students are developing  analytical skills for
              situations for which they are not  specifically trained.  Mesa State College,
              Navajo Community  College, and Northern New Mexico Community College are the
              resource  colleges, each with different established environmental technology 
              programs.  The pilot group of tribal and tribally related colleges  are Navajo
              Community College, Northern New Mexico Community  College, Crownpoint Institute
              of Technology and Southwest Indian  Polytechnic Institute.  Two additional
              tribal colleges may be  added.  The project methodology is interactive, using
              workshops,  site visits, iterative writing/review, and hands-on training.  The 
              tribal colleges are part of the process from the beginning and will  take
              ownership of the curriculum.  Baseline data on the tribal  colleges will be
              gathered and progress will be evaluated over a  three-year period.
