Title       : Planning for Virtual Schools in Electronic Villages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1994 
File        : a9454803

Award Number: 9454803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99824              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman R. Dodl ndodl@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Hix  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger W. Ehrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea L. Kavanaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454803  Dodl    This proposal for a one-year planning grant (8-16-94 to
              8-15-95) describes development of a  partnership alliance among the Montgomery
              County School system, commercial educational  service providers, and the
              Blacksburg Electronic Village (BEV), an established partnership  among Virginia
              Tech, the Town of Blacksburg, and Bell Atlantic-Virginia.  The primary goal  of
              the planning period is to lay the groundwork for developing and documenting a
              virtual school,  an unbounded educational environment with no walls, no halls,
              no bells, where (virtual)  collaborative classrooms encompass the entire
              community and exploit connections among diverse  educational resources -
              schools, libraries, homes, businesses, local and global networks.  This 
              virtual school, to be implemented and evaluated over a three-year development
              period following  the planning grant, is enabled by the Blacksburg Electronic
              Village which, by providing high--  speed full connectivity throughout the
              entire town of Blacksburg, offers a unique opportunity for  us to create a
              virtual school.    In the one-year planning period, we will undertake a series
              of planning meetings, workshops, and  preliminary evaluations of basic
              equipment, network links, and network services for an emergent virtual  school
              comprised of teachers and classes in one elementary school, one middle school,
              and one high  school in Montgomery County, Virginia.  This is a rural area with
              broad geographic and demographic  diversity.    Also in the one-year planning
              period, we will plan for study of the sociological, educative,  methodological,
              economic, and political processes by which a replicable, sustainable virtual
              school model  for educational (and community) networking can be constructed and
              maintained in a rural setting.  We  will also begin documentation of our
              development efforts, and will formulate and initiate studies to  evaluate
              ensuing changes that occur, as well as begin documenting the processes by which
              these changes  occur.    The prim ary output of this planning period will be a
              proposal to be submitted to NSF for a three-year  development effort to create
              and evaluate a virtual school.
