Title       : Curriculum Development Workshop on Advanced Materials Science & Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9454556

Award Number: 9454556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300378             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Holloway pholl@mail.mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The science and technology of advanced materials impacts a number  of
              industries.  The fields of microelectronics, transportation,  energy storage,
              power production, biomedical, and environmental  science and technology are
              typical examples.  Physics and chemistry  form the basis for these
              technologies, and they are applied in a  number of engineering disciplines. 
              the expertise needed to impact  the knowledge and expose the students to
              available opportunities in  materails science and technology is not commonly
              available in two  and four year colleges.  In addition, high school students
              are  essentially unaware of the field, its importance, and the  opportunities
              that exist for future employment and contributions.   The objective of this
              workshop are to introduce advanced materials  science and technology to
              teachers at the two and four year coleges  around the State of Florida and high
              schools throughout the region,  with special emphasis on predominantly minority
              institutions.  The  workshop will result in the incorporation of materials
              science into  their curricula.  It is expected that this incorporation of 
              materials science into the physics, chemistry and engineering  curricula will
              enable students to understand fundamental  principles. It will also introduce
              them to the exciting hgiher  educational opportunities and professional careers
              available in the  field of materials science and engineering.  Products
              resulting  from this project will include lesson plans and course materials 
              for physics and chemistry at the high school and college levels (4  courses).
