Title       : GRT/The Learning Sciences Ph.D. Program: Building a Scientific Infrastructure
               for Applications of Advanced Technologies for Teaching and Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9454155

Award Number: 9454155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Reiser reiser@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                New insights from cognitive scientific studies of learning and  significant
              advances in the nature of computer technology make the  Learning Sciences a
              critical area of study for innovations in  teaching and learning based on sound
              theory and evidence.  The  Learning Sciences Ph.D. program is a new
              interdisciplinary doctoral  program launched at Northwestern University's
              School of Education  and Social Policy in 1991 with over twenty newly-hired
              faculty (in  the disciplines of Education, Computer Science, and Psychology) 
              targeting the training of a new generation of professionals in the  field. 
              Faculty and students in the program are engaged in research  to advance the
              scientific understanding and practice of learning  and education, and the
              theory, design, construction, and assessment  of innovative technologies and
              learning environments for schools  and workplaces.  The Learning Sciences Ph.D.
              comprises a cohesive  training program integrating substantive treatment  of
              three areas  of specialization in its core coursework, methodological 
              foundations, and research apprenticeships: (1) the study of  social  contexts
              of learning which investigates the social, contextual, and  cultural dynamics 
              of learning in situation ranging from classrooms  to out-of-school setting, (2)
              the study of cognition, developing  scientific models of the structures and
              processes by which domain  knowledge and skills are acquired and (3) the study
              of learning  technologies, which concentrates on the theory-guided design and 
              use of multimedia computing, artificial intelligence, and  communications
              technologies for supporting learning and teaching  processes.  This proposal
              describes the graduate training program  in Learning Sciences and our plans for
              aggressive recruiting to  attract underrepresented groups to this field in the
              context of  Northwestern's recent dramatic increases in minority doctoral 
              program enrollment.
