Title       : Southwest Center for Advanced Technological Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1997   
File        : a9454643

Award Number: 9454643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1766637            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Musgrove RMusgrove@TSTC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Farouk Attia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Therese A. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver D. Hensley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford Felder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas St Col Sweetwater
	      300 College Drive
	      Sweetwater, TX  79556    915/235-7333

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Southwest Regional Center for Advanced Technological Education  is a
              collaboration among two-year colleges, four-year colleges and  universities,
              industries, and Tech Prep consortia in West Central  Texas, New Mexico, and
              Oklahoma to provide technical education in  a vast rural region through
              distance education. The project is  developing the infrastructure and the
              pedagogy to deliver many  technical courses through distance learning.  These
              include  existing courses in CAD/CAM/CIM which are being converted for 
              delivery via distance learning to two-year institutions and  secondary school
              sites.  Faculty at two-year colleges are working  with the Department of
              Education at Texas Technical College to  develop new instructional materials. 
              In particular, the Center is  developing new AAS programs in polymer technology
              and electro-  mechanical technology to complement needs of industry in the
              area.   Through an intensive effort at developing distance education and 
              electronic networking in the consortium, the Center is enabling the  member
              institutions to share their substantial resources, to  deliver quality
              instruction throughout the area, and to exchange  data and information rapidly
              and efficiently.  This "center without  walls" addresses the intertwined
              problems distance, expense, and  limited resources inherent in delivering
              advanced technological  education in such a large region.  Its findings,
              strategies,  tactics, materials, and methodologies constitute a significant 
              contribution to technical education in the nation.
