Title       : Morse High School Networking Infrastructure for Education Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1994 
File        : a9454707

Award Number: 9454707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91690              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Shacklett shacklett@scubed.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morse High School
	      4100 Normal Street
	      San Diego, CA  92103    619/293-8204

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454707  Shacklett    The NSF Networking Infrastructure for Education Planning
              Grant will provide a process model  for integrating a networking infrastructure
              into the Morse High School Center for Technology  and Pacific Rim Studies
              magnet. The infrastructure will support Morse High School's effort to 
              implement reform concepts contained in the master plan for high schools in
              California: Second  to None: A Vision of the New California High School. The
              project centers on the development  of an interdisciplinary career path
              curriculum supported by multimedia technology. The goal of  the proposed
              educational reform is that every high school graduate will have the knowledge
              and  skills needed to make the choice of entering a career path in the work
              force or to continue in  post secondary education.    Statement of Objectives  
               By the end of the planning grant period, October 1994 through September 1995,
              the project will  have developed a process model for implementing Second to
              None that includes the following  components:           a process for
              developing an interdisciplinary curriculum for one of the five magnet      
              career paths           a process for delivering staff development for teachers
              and other staff functioning in       a Second to None teaching and learning
              environment           a process for involving industry as full partners in the
              Second to None teaching and       learning environment           a process for
              integrating a networking infrastructure that will support and enhance      
              student learning, staff development, industry and parent/community involvement,
              and       administration/classroom management.    Methods to be Employed     In
              developing the career path curriculum, Morse will be working with the Education
              Committee  of the San Diego Biomedical Industry Council (BIC), an association
              of 60 pharmaceutical,  biotechnology and biomedical device companies in S.D.
              County. The BIC will provide an  industry team to join with an
              interdisciplinary school team in developing a c urriculum centered  on
              producing a product related to the industry. Students from various disciplines
              (industrial  technology, marketing, math, science, English, social studies)
              will be recruited for the new  biomedical career path to design, produce and
              market a product. The curriculum will be based  on the four areas of research
              and development, regulatory affairs, manufacturing and marketing.  In
              developing the curriculum, project planners will develop new teaching and
              learning strategies  which are supported by state-of-the-art technology.     
              Significance of the protect     The project will result in a process model that
              can be used by other schools which are  integrating technology and implementing
              educational reforms to improve the learning experience  and outcomes for
              students. The model can be followed by interested individuals, schools, and 
              other organizations through monthly progress updates posted to the World Wide
              Web of the  Internet. The project will also produce a course catalog describing
              how courses incorporate  career paths and use technology.
