Title       : Planning Grant for the Development of the NIE MOST (MissouriSupporting Teachers)
               Electronic Support System to Promote Problem-Based Learning Using a
               Computational Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1994  
File        : a9454790

Award Number: 9454790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96020              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Laffey laffeyj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454790  Laffey    The Missouri Supporting Teachers (MOST) project is a
              nine-month grant to a consortium of  statewide stakeholders to plan a program
              of educational reform and technological innovation.   The consortium holds a
              commitment to an integrated teacher support system and network  infrastructure
              designed around the needs of teachers implementing an integrated math and 
              science curriculum through problem-based learning and computational science
              techniques.  The  MOST project will support the needed systemic change by
              planning the implementation of:         (1) a network infrastructure which
              creates a community of educators and leverages       knowledge and experience
              across the community,         (2) an electronic teacher support system designed
              around the practices and challenges of       teaching and learning, and        
              (3) a consortium of change agents with a cohesive vision and a common set of
              tools for       supporting teacher professionalization and school
              restructuring.    The planning grant will support four main activities.  The
              first is to extend and articulate a  powerful model of problem-based learning
              and computational science being developed in the  Lee's Summit School District,
              as well as to learn from other projects which are exploring and  advancing
              these key principles and methods.  Second, preliminary designs for the
              electronic  teacher support system and network infrastructure will be developed
              and prototyped, in order  to specify the requirements for implementation and
              maintenance.  Third, the consortium of  stakeholders will be extended and
              elaborated, so that a pathway is drawn for including all major  constituents. 
              And fourth, the planning grant will enable the development and articulation of
              a  strategic and tactical plan which can draw support for the long-term
              efforts.    The restructuring of the teaching/learning process to achieve
              meaningful learning of math and  science as exemplified by problem-based
              learning requires a radical reconceptualization of the   way teachers are
              developed and supported.  The MOST project is well situated to build and test 
              a powerful and innovative model of teacher professionalization which is
              implemented in the  field, supported by a community of practitioners, and
              enabled by a technology infrastructure.   The MOST project leverages (1)
              Missouri's continuing commitment to building a network  infrastructure for
              schools and the existing MOREnet services, (2) the exciting work and 
              experience of teachers in Lee's Summit, (3) a base of research and development
              in electronic  support systems, and (4) the commitment of key statewide
              stakeholders.
