Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships in Democratization and Democratic Politics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a9454007

Award Number: 9454007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Dalton rdalton@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jozsef Borocz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harry Eckstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rein Taagepera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                We propose a NSF Graduate Research Traineeship program on  Democratization and
              Democratic Politics at the University of  California, Irvine.  The recent
              democratic transitions in the world  and the continuing process of
              democratization in established  democracies are creating fundamental new
              challenges for the social  sciences.  These experiences are prompting a
              reconsideration of  past models of political development and the lessons of
              earlier  academic debates on the social, cultural and institutional 
              foundations of democracy.  In addition, these changes are "natural 
              experiments: that provide new data and new research questions that  should
              result in new theoretical insights.  Past waves of  democratization have
              stimulated some of the most creative advances  in the social sciences -- we
              expect the same of the present  democratization wave.  Thus we propose an
              innovative,  interdisciplinary curriculum to train doctoral students in the 
              principles of democratic politics, the conditions fostering the  development
              and maintenance of democracies, and the expansion of  the democratic process. 
              We expect that the scholars produced by  this program will contribute to our
              understanding of the present  democratization wave, and the more fundamental
              theoretical  questions involved in research on the political choices and 
              institutional arrangements made to sustain and nurture democratic  politics.
