Title       : Teacher Enhancement in Molecular Biology and Recombinant DNA Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1994   
File        : a9454355

Award Number: 9454355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lowell J. Bethel                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106282             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jnanendra K. Bhattacharjee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9454355     Bhattacharjee    The Teacher Enhancement workshop in molecular
              biology and  recombinant DNA technology supported by the NSF was initiated to 
              provide high school biology teachers with needed basic knowledge  and
              proficiency in recent advances of molecular biology and  recombinant DNA
              technology.  The objectives of the project are to  improve the teaching of
              biology, attract more students to careers  in biomedical sciences, and make
              Ohio high school graduates "DNA  literate."  This summer workshop should
              involve two weeks of  intensive lectures (topics include structure and function
              of DNA,  genome size and propoerties of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genes,  and
              the principles and applications of gene cloning and recombinant  DNA
              technology), discussions, special seminars (topics include  oncogene and
              career, human genome project, evolution and plant  biotechnology), field trip
              to an Ohio biotechnology company, lesson  plan development, and hands-on
              laboratory experiments involving  simple recombinant DNA techniques (E. coli
              transformation, plasmid  DNA Isolation, restriction digestion and gel
              electrophoretic  analysis of recombinant DNA).  Twenty teachers would be
              selected  for each workshop.  Through expanded outreach efforts, at least  half
              of the teachers will be actively recruited from the inner-city  high schools of
              Ohio.  Each participating teacher will be provided  with a stipend, travel,
              room and meal expenses as well as a  textbook, accessories, video tapes, a list
              of granting agencies and  research resource laboratories in Ohio, an
              electrophoretic gel box  and power supply, and various laboratory supplies. 
              The  instructional team would include the PI, one faculty associate,  other
              Miami faculty, graduate teaching assistants, high school  master teachers,
              curriculum and assessment consultants.  In order  to increase the impact of the
              project, the PI and the faculty  associate would conduct regional and annual
              summative follow-up  activities.  Second-tier teachers from the sch ools and
              districts of  the participating teachers will be included in the follow-up 
              activities.  As a result of this project, at the end of the current  grant
              period more than 10,000 students in more than 100 high  schools in Ohio woul be
              benefitted.
