Title       : MIT/WHOI Joint Program Graduate Research Traineeships in Coastal Ocean Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9454129

Award Number: 9454129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Farrington jfarrington@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Beardsley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9454129  Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute  Farrington                     
                        ABSTRACT    We propose to increase and enhance the interdisciplinary
              training  and graduate education in coastal ocean processes within the MIT- 
              WHOI Joint Program in Oceanography nd Applied Ocean Sciences and  engineering. 
              The traineeship program will consist of an  introductory overview summer prior
              to the first academic year  semester during which trainees will be introduced
              to the broad  range of oceanography and ocean engineering research.  The first 
              summer includes participation in a ten day cruise, and specific  seminars by
              faculty involved in interdisciplinary coastal ocean  research.  Trainees will
              enroll in the existing normal X of  graduate courses in oceanography or ocean
              engineering to gain a  broad education in oceanography or ocean engineering and
              an in-  depth education in their specialization.  An intensive graduate  level
              seminar offered each year between the fall and spring  semesters will provide a
              more detailed in-depth introduction (for  first year students) and
              progressively more intense involvement  (for second through fifth year
              students) in interdisciplinary  coastal ocean research.  Trainees will
              undertake  PhD thesis  research within an interdisciplinary context.  A
              Science-Policy-  Management Seminar for trainees who have advanced to PhD
              candidacy  will involve faculty of the Joint Program and external experts 
              active at the science-policy-management interfaces.
