Title       : Curriculum Implementation through Staff Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1995     
File        : a9454360

Award Number: 9454360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry Kepner                            
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1040166            (Estimated)
Investigator: Max S. Bell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila Sconiers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9454341  Goldberg    This five year national project will promote a deeper
              understanding  of physical science among elementary school teachers and enhance
               the  pedagogical and computer technology skills of secondary school  physics
              and physical science teachers. This will be accomplished  through a set of
              constructivist-oriented workshops that feature  specially designed computer
              programs. In Phase I, year-one,  computer programs for four physics topics
              (SERIES I): Light,  Electric Circuits, Static Electricity and Magnetism will be
               refined. Five additional topics: Small Particle Model of Matter,  Color and
              Vision, Heat and Temperature, Force and Particle Motion  and Wave Motion
              (SERIES II)  will be developed. These all focus on  the development of
              "powerful ideas"; a set of which form a  conceptual framework. In Phase II,
              Year-2, elementary school  teacher workshops with SERIES I & II materials will
              be held. Each  workshop with 5-days of intensive instruction for one topic will
              be  grouped with others to provide a minimum of 15-days plus one day of 
              follow-up. Concurrently, but separate from the elementary school  teachers,
              secondary school science teachers will attend a single  workshop of 12-days
              plus a two 2-day follow-up session. These  secondary school teacher workshops
              will help teachers develop a set  of learning strategies using the computer
              materials and low-tech  materials to create a constructivist-oriented classroom
              . A total  of 72-teachers will participate in these training programs.    In
              Phase III the training of the elementary and secondary school  teachers in the
              use of these materials will continue both at the  San Diego site and sites
              across the nation. For the latter, 24  geographically distributed leadership
              teams: a university faculty  member, a high school physics or physical science
              teacher and an  elementary teacher, will participate in a six-week training
              program  at SDSU during each of two summers. Two sessions will be held each 
              summer, each accommodating 12-teams.  After the first summer of  training each
              leadership team will be fully supported, with monies  and senior personnel
              guidance, to deliver their first second tier  workshop of 1-week duration.    
              During Phase IV each leadership team will provide second tier  workshops which
              have a minimum of 3-weeks enhancement for a  teacher. A minimum of 1-workshop
              for each of three years is  required. Partial support for these is provided on
              a reimbursement  basis. These second tier participants may earn graduate credit
               for  these workshops.
