Title       : NSF Graduate Research Traineeship Program: Integrating High-Performance
               Computing into Research in Mathematics, Physical Sciences and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a9454175

Award Number: 9454175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret F. King margaret_king@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Turinsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Thomas Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Traineeships will fund 5 graduate students at North Carolina State  University
              to pursue doctoral research in the interdisciplinary  area of high performance
              computing within the context of a specific  application.  Their training will
              equip them to perform research in  area of national need that specifically
              incorporate high  performance computing.  Trainees and the faculty directing
              their  research will be affiliated with the newly revitalized Center for 
              Research in Scientific Computation (CRSC).  Students' training will  utilize
              two recently developed curricula at NCSU:  the  Concentration in Computational
              mathematics (CMA), which is an  option for graduate students in applied
              mathematics, and the  Computational Engineering and Sciences (CES) program, an 
              interdisciplinary program in the colleges of Engineering and  Physical and
              Mathematical Sciences administered by one of the  Principal Investigators (PIs)
              of this proposal.  Trainees' academic  programs will include interdisciplinary
              research seminars focusing  on application of high performance computing;
              participation in  regional and national research conferences; opportunities to 
              collaborate with researchers in industrial and international  settings; and
              instruction in teaching.  In addition to the  technical PIs (Banks and
              Turinsky) and an administrative PI(King),  the Traineeship program will involve
              several highly active research  mathematician, scientist, and engineers. 
              Traineeships will  substantially boost our recent progress in designing
              programs for  outstanding students in scientific computation.
