Title       : Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center (ATEEC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1996      
File        : a9454638

Award Number: 9454638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2999866            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen J. Kabat Lensch ekabat@eiccd.cc.ia.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Dickinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hazardous materials Traini
	      ATEEC
	      Bettendorf, IA  527226804    563/441-4090

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is a rapidly growing need for advanced technology  environmental education
              programs to prepare students for the  workplace of today and tomorrow.  To
              build a high performance  environmental education infrastructure, the Hazardous
              Materials  Training and Research Institute (HMTRI), the Partnership for 
              Environmental Technology Education (PETE), and the University of  Northern Iowa
              Center for Environmental and Energy Education is  establishing a national
              Advanced Technology Environmental Education  Center (ATEEC).  The vision is to
              create a world class network of  community college environmental programs
              linked with high schools  that inform and prepare students for entry into these
              two-year  programs.  The Center has established three broad goals:  (1) 
              Develop nationally validated curriculum models and advanced  instructional
              materials;  (2) Establish comprehensive programs of  professional development;
              and  (3) Build a clearinghouse to serve  as a national center of environmental
              information and as a hub for  the networking of environmental educators,
              business and industry,  federal agencies, and professional societies.  The
              Center will  provide leadership to: enhance core and advanced math science, and
               technology components of environmental education; utilize advanced  electronic
              communications networks; focus upon meeting the needs of  diverse learners;
              encourage instructional materials which utilize  advanced technologies; and
              develop teaching and curriculum  standards for environmental education. The
              ATEEC will touch  hundreds of instructors and improve the education of
              thousands of  students throughout the nation.
