Title       : Toward Universal Participation in the NII: Phase 2 of the National School
               Network Testbed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9454769

Award Number: 9454769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2231881            (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly C. Hunter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Huntley  (Principal Investigator former)
              Denis Newman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melanie Z. Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan L. Bernstein  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bolt Beranek & Newman Inc
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    /   -

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454769  Huntley    The proposed Testbed partnership, led by BBN, University of
              California, Irvine, and Global  SchoolNet Foundation, includes over 1000
              schools, within nearly 500 school districts and 19  states. Over 60 Testbed
              partner organizations represent elementary and secondary schools,  school
              districts and regional collaboratives, state education agencies;
              vocational-technical  schools, community colleges; colleges and universities;
              science centers and museums: several  thousand homes; educational publishers;
              business/industry organizations; and educational  research organizations and
              service providers, collectively working on all aspects of educational  reform. 
              The Testbed builds synergy among partners sharing a common spirit of
              constructivism  and a quest for equity. The goal of the Testbed partners and
              activities is to achieve significant  impact on educational networking by
              providing empirical evidence to taxpayers, governments  and private industry
              that "scaling up" the NII requires active participation, not just access, for 
              everyone. The Testbed partnership will provide concrete understanding of the
              design,  construction and management of communications networks and information
              services to support  educational innovation in local schools and communities. 
              The Testbed will help communities  make appropriate investment in full-scale,
              self-sustaining educational networking by: 1)  developing tools and services to
              empower individuals and local groups to produce value on the  network -
              enabling the user-constructability essential to reform in math and science; 2) 
              organizing information access for people who share one computer, 3)
              establishing and assessing  technical and training support models through a
              Testbed Exchange; 4) developing an evaluation  framework and cost-benefit
              assessments; 5) combining a wide range of high-quality educational 
              applications within and across schools and districts; 6) pro actively
              disseminating the learnings  of the partners to decision makers at loca l,
              state, and national levels and linking to information  agencies such as the
              InterNIC and Ask ERIC.    The partners bring hundreds of millions of dollars to
              the collective test bed infrastructure  through investments from local tax and
              bond levies, state legislatures, private foundations,  industry contributions,
              and conservatively contribute $20 million to the Testbed agenda over  three
              years through many forms of cost-sharing.
