Title       : Civil Infrastructure Systems Graduate Research Traineeships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9454022

Award Number: 9454022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amde M. Amde amde@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Vannoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Colville  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Civil Engineering at the University of Maryland,  College
              Park respectfully requests five traineeship positions in  the subdiscipline
              area of Civil Infrastructure Systems (CIS).  CIS  is an area for which the
              Department of Civil Engineering at the  University of Maryland, College Park
              has outstanding resources and  personnel.  Research in the area of bridge and
              building  infrastructure systems has been targeted to benefit from the 
              Graduate Research Traineeship program.  The research will focus on  extending
              useful life and retrofitting to resist natural hazards.    New structural
              systems, new techniques and materials that are  modified or not previously used
              in construction will be considered.   The research will also consider
              technology developed int he  aerospace, automotive and industrial sectors for
              transfer and use  in civil engineering and construction.  Enhanced traditional 
              construction materials, as wee as, new emerging construction  materials will be
              considered.    The University of Maryland has formal academic linkages with 
              several traditionally Black universities.  The Project Directors  will take
              advantage of this existing network to recruit trainees.   Recruitment plans
              include intensifying current efforts, as  well  as, developing innovative
              approaches.  The Project Directors have  mad extensive plans for the trainees'
              multidisciplinary training,  interaction with industry, training for faculty
              roles and  participation in international activities.
