Title       : MIE: Educational Strategy for Fostering Excellence and Increasing Minority
               Graduates in Sciences, Engineering and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1994     
File        : a9354117

Award Number: 9354117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert L. Bridgewater                   
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74933              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor T. Okereke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central State University
	      
	      Wilberforce, OH  45384    513/376-6011

NSF Program : 1582      MODEL INST OF EXCELL NON-RESER
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354117  Okereke    Central State University (CSU) intends to maintain
              excellence in  its educational mission and its successes in developing new and 
              innovative programs within the last decade in the Sciences,  Engineering and
              Mathematics. CSU will improve, strengthen and  expand these programs in
              science, engineering and mathematics, as  well as introduce other new and
              innovative programs. The  university intends to develop plans to further
              strengthen its  centers of excellence in manufacturing engineering, water 
              resources management and Center for Scientific Visualization and  the Center
              for Applied Mathematics, as well as the traditional  physical and natural
              science departments such as biology,  chemistry, mathematics and computer
              science, and physics.    One of the goals of the effort is to significantly
              increase the  number and quality of minorities that enroll in, and graduate 
              form, the science, engineering and mathematics programs at the  university. The
              other is to increase the number of these  graduates who go to graduate school
              to earn advanced degrees in  the physical and natural sciences. Ultimately, the
              achievement of  these goals will significantly expand the pool of minorities
              who  opt for careers in the physical and natural sciences.    CSU hopes to
              achieve these goals by evaluating the existing  programs that impact the
              enrollment, retention, and ultimately  the graduation of its students in the
              sciences. Activities such  as recruitment, advising, mentoring, tutorial
              assistance,  curriculum development, and the availability of scholarships and 
              financial aid will be reviewed. Other programs such as library  facilities,
              student living environments, laboratory facilities  and research participation
              by undergraduate students would also  be evaluated. The goal of this
              comprehensive evaluation is to  identify and reinforce program and
              institutional strengths and to  correct the underlying weaknesses.
