Title       : Exploring Technology": A Novel Introduction of Prospective Engineers and Early
               Childhood Teachers to Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1994   
File        : a9354482

Award Number: 9354482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack L Waintraub                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119226             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioannis N. Miaoulis imiaouli@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Wertlieb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354482  Miaoulis        This project proposes to develop a novel curriculum
              that will  stem from a strong partnership between the College of  Engineering
              and the Department of Child Study and will provide  a common solution to two
              separate major problems: the  inadequate preparation of early childhood
              teachers in  understanding and teaching science and technology, and the 
              enthusiasm generation and retention of engineering students.  Teams of
              engineering faculty members, and graduate and  undergraduate students will
              develop a coordinated pool of  mini-courses that focus on exciting topics of
              applied science  and technology. These courses will be interdisciplinary in 
              nature, will include open-ended laboratory and/or field  experiences, will
              involve semester-long team projects and will  be designed to allow students
              with no previous college-level  background to participate. Although the courses
              will be  rigorous and emphasize depth versus breadth, special attention  will
              be given to creating an understanding and appreciation for  the scientific and
              engineering process. Engineering freshmen  and Child Study majors will each
              select and take two of these  courses. In addition to these courses, Child
              Study majors, the  future K-3 teachers, will take a Science and Technology 
              Curriculum Development seminar-course that will train them to  transfer
              technical knowledge to the development of teaching  units appropriate for young
              children. The focused nature of the  courses will allow the proposed program to
              grow from the roots,  since courses will be proposed and developed following
              personal  research and other interests of individual faculty members,  while
              being supported from the top, by a strong institutional  commitment. The
              project, which will be cost-shared by the  university, can be easily
              disseminated to numerous colleges and  universities that combine science and/or
              engineering  departments with teacher preparation units.  ***
