Title       : Collaborative Research: An Integrated, Computer-Assisted Approach to Teaching
               Introductory Geology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1994     
File        : a9354799

Award Number: 9354799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Fullagar fullagar@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354799  Fullagar  This project is a collaborative effort between Duke
              University and  the University of North Carolina.  An introductory geology 
              laboratory course is being developed which emphasizes a  multidisciplinary
              approach to solving geological problems using  state-of-the-art information
              technologies.  Laboratories are being  designed as case studies utilizing an
              electronic data bank  integrated with more traditional maps and hand samples. 
              Each case  study requires students to use tools such as satellite images, 
              topographic and geologic maps, cross-sections, three-dimensional  animations,
              and simplified geophysical and geochemical data to  unravel the geologic
              history of an area. Hypothesis formulation and  testing are being emphasized. 
              Not only are students learning  factual information in the context of real
              geologic problems, but  they also are seeing how geologists use physics,
              chemistry,  mathematics, and biology to study Earth. In addition, they are 
              becoming familiar and comfortable with the use of computers and  sophisticated
              data handling techniques in a user friendly  environment.  Laboratories and
              exercises are being designed by  investigators from both institutions. 
              Software programming is  being carried out at Duke.  Evaluation and assessment
              are primarily  utilizing the larger introductory classes at UNC.  Duke faculty
              and  students have created over twenty computerized  prototype "field  trips"
              over the last two years, and a pilot study of how the  technology employed in
              the field trips can be applied to teaching  introductory geology has been
              conducted.  Thus, the investigators  are able to use the programming expertise
              and classroom testing  experience already gained in developing this
              comprehensive  introductory laboratory course.  Dissemination is planned
              through  several channels including: 1) a full-day workshop at a GSA  national
              meeting; 2) the distribution of an announcement to all  geology departments in
              the country; 3) publication of the results  in the Jou rnal of Geological
              Education; and 4) commercial  publication of the products.
