Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships in "Integrating High Performance Computing into
               Research on the Physics of Complex Materials"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1997      
File        : a9354978

Award Number: 9354978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Campbell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Physics of the University of Illinois at  Urbana-Champaign
              (UIUC) proposes a Graduate Research Traineeship  (GRT) Program in "Integrating
              High Performance Computing into  Research on the Physics of Complex Materials"
              (henceforth ICPCM).   The program will train five graduate students to the
              Ph.D. level  in physics and will prepare them for careers in industry, 
              research laboratories, and teaching in colleges and universities.   The fields
              represented in ICPCM -advanced computation, materials  science, and complex
              systems - are all critical and emerging  areas of science, engineering, and
              technology.  Further, ICPCM is  a natural area in which to train students, for
              the combination of  skills required to master this area provides excellent 
              preparation for a variety of later careers.  The UIUC provides an  ideal
              environment for such a ICPCM program, for it combines  internationally
              recognized research strengths across the whole  range of materials with equally
              distinguished strengths in  computation and computational physics.    The
              ensuing proposal details the scientific focus of the  proposal, describes the
              commitment of the Physics Department to  provide additional courses,
              supplemental training, and new  workstation and laboratory space, and outlines
              plans for summer  school and other activities, including providing advanced 
              training for students and faculty at historically minority  institutions to
              facilitate the transition to graduate programs  for talented minority students.
