Title       : Interactive Computer visualization in the Introductory Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9354531

Award Number: 9354531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karolyn K. Eisenstein                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98679              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria M. Bragin vbragin@ix.netcom.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Douglass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pasadena City College
	      1570 E Colorado Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911062003    626/578-7123

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354531  Bragin                                                 At Pasadena City
              College, where 25% of the students are born in  another country and 70% belong
              to ethnic minorities, minimal  English language proficiency is an obstacle to
              learning. This is  compounded by poor college preparation, bad study habits, 
              inadequate writing skills, limited economic resources, and great  variability
              in concept comprehension. Teaching such students  requires that the material be
              presented in an engaging fashion that  allows immediate grasp of principles
              regardless of the students'  background. This project aims to achieve these
              objectives and to  increase student retention and interest in scientific
              careers by  integrating computer visualization and simulation into a core of 
              introductory science courses: a new interdisciplinary course in  physical
              science and biology (Introduction to Environmental  Science), 3 introductory
              chemistry courses, and 2 introductory  geology courses. Customized courseware
              developed in the  NEXTSTEP-486 programming environment will utilize equipment 
              purchased with a recently awarded NSF-ILI (Instrumentation and  Laboratory
              Improvement) grant to one of the principal  investigators. These applications
              together with courseware that has  already been developed by the PIs will be
              used to illustrate  abstract concepts and model complex natural phenomena.
              Students  will explore the effect of changing parameters on a variety of such 
              systems. Pre-lab computer simulations will familiarize students  with equipment
              and laboratory protocols before performing  experiments thereby instilling
              confidence and facilitating  exploration and "discovery". Powerful multimedia
              capabilities will  be utilized to the fullest by incorporating sound, full
              color high  resolution images and video into the applications. Students will 
              use the Internet to access scientific data from public archives and  bulletin
              boards and communicate with peers at other campuses thus  providing a sense of
              connection to the  broader scientific  community. The proposed curricular
              improvements will raise  retention rates, attract more students to scientific
              careers, and  increase overall scientific literacy among students from 
              populations grossly underrepresented among professional scientists.
