Title       : Chemistry Domesticated: An Alternative Curriculum for the Two-Semester
               Introductory College Chemistry Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9354642

Award Number: 9354642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Cornelius cornelius@acad.lvc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lebanon Valley College
	      College Avenue
	      Annville, PA  17003    717/867-4411

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354642  Cornelius       Agencies and chemical educators are calling for major
              changes in  the curriculum for general chemistry at colleges and universities. 
               A call is frequently heard for chemistry to be relevant to the  everyday lives
              of students.  This project, Chemistry Domesticated,  is providing a radical
              change in how the material in general  chemistry is organized and how it is
              presented to students, while  leaving intact much of the material which must
              prepare students for  further courses in chemistry and other sciences.  The
              chemical  topics in a particular chapter are being chosen on the basis not of 
              the chemist's view of the world, but of what chemistry is necessary  for the
              understanding of materials and activities familiar to  students.  Chapters have
              titles such as Soil and Fertilizer, Blood,  The Laundry Room, and Ice Cream. 
              The subjects for the 22 chapters  are being chosen to provide a foundation for
              a broad range of  topics in general chemistry.  The chapters are linked by
              chemical  topics discussed in adjacent chapters, such as the chemistry of 
              calcium carbonate being important in both the chapter on Hard and  Soft Water
              (as scale) and the chapter on Eggs (as the major  component in egg shell). 
              Numerous appropriate experiments and  demonstrations have already been
              published in the science education  literature, and they are being put to work
              in Chemistry  Domesticated.  The proposed curriculum is intended not to
              displace  the current general chemistry curriculum, but to provide an 
              alternative to the curriculum that is under attack.  The project  plans call
              for a year of development, a year of implementation and  modification, and a
              year of evaluation.  ***y
