Title       : Science, Community, and Diversity: Revitalizing Undergraduate Curricula-
               Concluding Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1996  
File        : a9354521

Award Number: 9354521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline R. Ross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Wisc Gen Admin Of
	      1720 Van Hise Hall
	      Madison, WI  537061559    608/262-1234

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354521  Ross  This grant extends the activities of the Women and Science 
              Program currently funded by the Division of Undergraduate  Education of the
              National Science Foundation, and sponsored and  administered by the Women's
              Studies Consortium of the  University of Wisconsin System. The goal of the
              program is to  attract and retain qualified female and minority students in 
              science, mathematics and engineering, by reforming aspects of  introductory
              science courses--content, climate and  pedagogy--that discourage capable
              students from further study  of science. The program is founded on the
              assumption that  incorporating new scholarship about gender, science and 
              pedagogy into the design of introductory curriculum will  increase the quality
              of introductory courses in ways that will  be attractive to female and minority
              students.  The program  supports Distinguished Visiting Professorships of Women
              in  Science on host campuses selected from among the universities  of the UW
              System. Visitors are scientists (from inside and  outside of Wisconsin) who
              have successfully implemented race-  and gender-friendly teaching innovations
              at their home  institutions. Visitors teach model introductory science courses 
              and participate in extensive faculty development activities  with their hosts.
              The program also offers Faculty Fellowships  to release host faculty to develop
              new curricula.  In addition,  faculty development workshops are sponsored at
              various UW  System institutions. The Visitors and Fellows develop new or 
              revised courses that will affect thousands of students in the  near future.
              Faculty development activities will enhance the  content, climate, and pedagogy
              of introductory science courses  more broadly throughout the UW System.  A
              comprehensive  evaluation of the program in underway.  Findings and curricular 
              materials will be disseminated nationally.  ***
