Title       : Project CLEA: Contemporary Laboratory Experiences in Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9354514

Award Number: 9354514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence A. Marschall marschal@gettysburg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn A. Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mia K. Luehrmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Hayden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Richard Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gettysburg College
	      North Washington Street
	      Gettysburg, PA  17325    717/337-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354514  Marschall  This grant continues for two more years a project under
              which the  current investigators have been developing a series of modules for 
              the introductory astronomy lab since the Fall of 1992. The modules  address a
              pressing need for modernization in introductory astronomy  laboratories: Though
              astronomy is a very popular course for  undergraduates, and for many their
              first and only college  experience in science, laboratories in introductory
              astronomy have  difficulty doing experiments because of the faintness of 
              astronomical objects, the long time scale of many phenomena and the  fickleness
              of weather. Most astronomy exercises currently available  to astronomy
              instructors rely on analysis of photographs or canned  data and exemplify
              techniques that are increasingly out-of-date.  Students rightly regard many of
              these activities as make-work.  The  current project, Contemporary Laboratory
              Experiences in Astronomy  (CLEA), is developing 8 Windows-based exercises,
              running on  IBM-compatible computers, that provide realistic observing 
              experiences for introductory labs based around simulations, digital  images,
              and, observations with CCD cameras on small telescopes.  Each module consists
              of software, student guides, teachers'  manuals, and technical documentation.
              The Windows modules, along  with 5 Mac-based exercises and two digital imaging
              exercises  introduced before NSF support, have been introduced into classes at 
              Gettysburg College and distributed widely by ftp and by mail. CLEA  software is
              currently in wide use.  This project continues the work  for another two years,
              developing an additional 8 modules and  rewriting software and manuals so that
              the exercises can be used on  Macintosh computers with color displays. This
              includes  documentation, distribution, and dissemination of the modules. The 
              new exercises improve students understanding of astronomy and  provide the
              means and the impetus for revitalizing introductory  astronomy laboratories
              around the country
