Title       : An Innovative Computing Curriculum for Scientists, Engineers, Mathematicians and
               Educators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1994   
File        : a9354818

Award Number: 9354818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Richard Newman newman@cs.fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wade H. Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harlan D. Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Fronk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sara F. Stoecklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    305/768-8000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354818  Newman  As computing continues to become an essential and integral part
              of  the basic skills of all undergraduates, it is critical that the  service
              courses for non computing majors reflect the advances made  within the
              computing disciplines.  This project integrates recent  developments in
              computer based techniques with the current best  educational practices to
              create an innovative computer curriculum  for Scientist, Engineers,
              Mathematicians, and Educators.  The  curriculum is based on an emphasis of
              solution correctness, team  orientation, and the use of advanced languages,
              tools, and  application packages.  This foundation is combined with the 
              fundamentals of the Software Engineering, Object Oriented, and  Cleanroom
              paradigms to provide the skills necessary for each  undergraduate to take
              advantage of potential computers can provide  them in their educational and
              professional careers.    This project produced the foundation for three
              sequences of  introductory level computing service courses.  The courses were 
              categorized as application based consumer computing, software  development of
              small projects by a single individual, and large  scale, team based, system
              development.  The initial motivation for  these sequences of courses was based
              on the innovative curricula at  Florida Tech.  The foundation for the course
              sequences developed by  this project included an analysis of the expected needs
              of the  academic majors, a set of evaluation criteria, and a set of  preferred
              educational paradigms for course development.  Initial  course outlines were
              prepared, sample multimedia presentation were  developed, and a sequence of
              reports were produced.  This effort  also produced several general conclusions
              and a proposal for the  continuation of this project.  ***y
