Title       : Project Oriented,Collaborative Laboratory Program in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1993  
File        : a9354728

Award Number: 9354728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143383             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Fuller rfuller@center.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy L. Pruitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354728  Fuller    Students in each course in a collaborative laboratory project
               (CLP) apply the special skills, etc. they are learning in that  course to a
              research project. Thus, introductory biology  students use basic techniques to
              provide some data for a  project while more advanced students use their special
               expertise to quantify a different element of the research. For  example, a CLP
              on the effects of nutrients and zooplankton on  phytoplankton communities is
              designed as a collaborative  project for the introductory biology, the
              phycology and the  ecology courses. The introductory students take samples and 
              quantify zooplankton; ecology students analyze the water  chemistry and
              quantify zooplankton; and the phycology students  quantify the phytoplankton.
              Each student brings an expertise to  the project and all make a significant
              contribution to the  scientific endeavor. This approach requires interaction
              among  students and faculty and fosters a cooperative learning  environment
              that pairs students with students, faculty with  students and faculty with
              faculty. This "community of learners"  extends beyond a single course to
              encompass all levels of the  curriculum. Furthermore, students appreciate the
              relevance of  their results, recognize the relatedness of different 
              sub-disciplines within biology and are introduced to the types  of
              skills/techniques that they will participate in if they  continue in biology.
              These CLPs make the science that students  do more substantive, interesting and
              meaningful, and more  sophisticated at all levels. This approach to teaching
              science  more accurately reflects how science is done, and can serve as  a
              model for how science is taught in all disciplines.
