Title       : A First-year Course: Mathematical methods in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1994     
File        : a9354437

Award Number: 9354437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ann P McNeal                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236787             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Cornette cornette@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph A. Ackerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren D. Dolphin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Stanley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354437  Cornette         Iowa State University faculty members in Mathematics
              and in Zoology  and Genetics will develop and implement a one-year 
              mathematics/mathematical modeling course for freshman and sophomore  students
              majoring in the biological sciences. The emphasis of the  course will be on
              understanding mathematical models using  biological processes to demonstrate
              the applications of calculus.  Calculus and differential equations are
              essential tools for  describing systems that change with time and will form the
              core of  the mathematical content. The students will collect data from a 
              number of 'wet lab' experiments that demonstrate time varying  systems, and
              will use the data to construct models and learn the  concepts and manipulations
              of calculus. This lab feature is a  unique component of the proposal.  The
              mathematics will begin with  the elements of calculus and will culminate with
              stability analysis  of the solutions to two differential equations in two
              unknown  functions. Both discrete and continuous systems will be studied. 
              Students will also develop computer models of more complex  biological systems
              using commercially available software (Stella)  and will write some elementary
              codes. We also plan to have students  use Stella later in the curriculum in
              physiology and environmental  science.  Faculty in Zoology and Genetics will
              develop the  biological experiments and descriptions. To facilitate use of the 
              materials with large numbers of students and at other institutions,  the
              illustrations of biological systems and some analyses will be  developed as
              multimedia computer software recorded on read only  memory compact disks.  The
              targeted student population includes the  large fraction of biology students
              who do not take an engineering  calculus course. The majority of these students
              are women.
