Title       : Materials Chemistry Case Study Approach to Facilitate Learning the Fundamentals
               of Chemistry: Introductory College and Secondary Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1994  
File        : a9354518

Award Number: 9354518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stanley Pine                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Jane Shultz Mary.Shultz@Tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354518  Shultz                                                 The project will
              develop an introductory chemistry course based  upon the properties of
              materials.  It will be discovery based in  that students will observe phenomena
              in the laboratory, then use  those observations to develop an understanding of
              the chemistry  involved.  A principal goal of the project is to provide an 
              exciting learning experience for the students.  Many science  courses deny
              students access to the joys of discovery and  understanding that so delights
              both young children and practicing  scientists. While for individuals, this
              situation is regrettable,  for aspiring teachers it is disastrous since they
              are the ones who  will shape the understanding of tomorrow's leaders.  This
              project would put the joy of discovery back into science  courses.  For
              example, atomic structure and bonding would start  with a hands-on examination
              of the material properties of a variety  of metal samples. The brittle ones
              have restricted spatial  directionality in the bonding with few nearest
              neighbors while the  soft, ductile ones have expanded bonding spheres with many
              nearest  neighbors. Students will be sent into the laboratory for an  adventure
              in exploring first. The class will then be encouraged to  develop an hypothesis
              for their observations. Only after this  process, will the instructors, through
              directed questions, guide  the students to realize the importance of bonding
              and structure.  The class will then be encouraged to extrapolate and extend
              this  understanding to materials not examined.  A educational evaluator is a
              member of the project team.  Initial  contact with a publisher could lead to
              widespread dissemination via  a textbook.  ***
