Title       : Integrating High Performance Computing into Research: Computational Fluid
               Dynamics in Engineering and Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a9354937

Award Number: 9354937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremiah P. Ostriker jpo@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Garry L. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antony Jameson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frediano V. Bracco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Karniadakis  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Advancing our understanding in a wide range of scientific and  engineering
              fields require the solution of the fluid equations  over a very large range of
              densities and physical scales.  These  problems, which are not soluble on the
              current generation of  computers, can be solved with the new generation of
              massively  parallel high performance computers using object oriented  languages
              and are likely to form one of the most important  scientific applications of
              these machines.  The MAE and  Astrophysics departments at Princeton are at the
              forefront of  research into the development of numerical algorithms and 
              computer technology to utilize the next generation of machines in  this effort.
               The engineering and scientific goals are the  applications to aerodynamics
              (the design of airplanes, cars and  ships); to turbulence research; and to
              structure formation in the  universe.  Progress in these different application
              areas requires  a continuing research effort toward the development of
              algorithms  amenable to parallel processing, automatic grid adaption,  coloring
              schemes for domain decomposition of an arbitrary  unstructured tetrahedral 
              grid, and implementation of efficient  message passing algorithms to reduce the
              communication costs on  distributed memory architectures.  These problems are
              generic,  and not specific to a particular field of application.  It is  felt
              that a multi-disciplinary approach to the study of such  problems would greatly
              benefit the training of students and  enhance the effective use of high
              performance computing in  research.  The MAE and Astrophysics departments have
              collaborated  in this effort in the past, and will continue to do so in the 
              future.    We request support for five graduate students to be trained in  the
              design of algorithms for the numerical solution of partial  differential
              equations using massively parallel computer  platforms and the application of
              complex hydrocodes to  engineering and physics problems ranging from turbulence
              research  in aerodyna mics to the evolution of cosmological structure.
