Title       : BRIDGES: Undergraduates Teaching Technology in the Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9354809

Award Number: 9354809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rafael Martinez-Planell                 
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149451             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Fels MFFELS@pucc.Princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carole Stearns  (Principal Investigator former)
              Leslie K. Johnson  (Principal Investigator former)
              William E. Bonini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Mahoney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Billington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354809  Stearns         Faculty in the sciences and engineering in cooperation
              with the  Teacher Preparation program at Princeton University are developing 
              teaching field experiences for undergraduates.  Students, working  with
              University faculty, prepare a teaching unit related to  science, technology, or
              mathematics, then teach the unit to  students in public schools.  Students in
              three courses in  technology, physics, and engineering and environmental
              geology work  with their professors to develop mini-units for presentation in 
              pre-college classrooms in lieu of writing a research paper.  The  staff of
              Princeton's Teacher Preparation Program supervise the  field experience and
              instruct the undergraduates in appropriate  pedagogy.  This project brings
              undergraduates' skills acquired at  the University into classrooms with young
              students and also  provides a bridge between the university and the pre-college
               classroom by offering school children access to lessons on science  and
              technology that enrich their academic experience. It offers  undergraduates
              direct experience with teaching, a career path many  do not now consider but
              might with early encouragement and  satisfying encounters with young students. 
              The teaching experience  enhances the undergraduates' learning by having to
              present the  material to others.  This field experience is a new component in 
              the Princeton curriculum, affording undergraduates the opportunity  to hone
              their communication skills and apply their studies to a  significant area of
              social concern, upgrading the science and  technology content of the
              pre-college curriculum.  ***y
