Title       : Signaling in Plant Development and in Response to the Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a9354969

Award Number: 9354969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Cosgrove fsl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elwin L. Stewart  (Principal Investigator former)
              Eva J. Pell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah M. Assmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hector E. Flores  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Signal transduction is emerging as an important principle underlying much of
              plant development  and adaptation to the environment.  Signaling often involves
              multiple levels of response, from  organ, tissue and cell interactions to
              events at the level of membranes, cytoplasm and gene  expression.  In our view,
              the most informative analyses of signal transduction involve  multidisciplinary
              approaches where the signal is characterized through its multiple levels and 
              forms of expression (genetic, biochemical, physical, physiological, etc.)  We
              propose to establish  a graduate training program with innovations in our
              instructional approach and research guidance  with faculty from six (6)
              departments to pursue collaborative research across multiple levels of  signal
              transduction.  Toward this goal, we will develop a problem-based learning
              course to  explore multiple facets of plant signal transduction.  Graduate
              students will engage in  multidisciplinary research by attacking research
              problems at the interface of two (or more)  research efforts.  An annual
              Distinguished Investigator seminar/workshop series and concluding 
              international symposium will provide additional opportunity for student
              development.  Our  program will enrich the background and "tool-kit" available
              to the next generation, as well as  the current generation, of researchers to
              investigate the mechanisms by which plants develop and  react to their
              environment.
