Title       : Planning Grant to develop a Center for the Enhancement of Mathematics & Science
               Teacher Education through Advanced Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9354371

Award Number: 9354371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51170              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Pellegrino PELLEGJiv@vuctravax  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Venable  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip S. Crooke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354371  Pellegrino  Faculty at Vanderbilt University are developing a new
              course,  Computer Algebra Systems in Mathematical Modeling, that is open to 
              any student who has had at least one semester of calculus.  The  course has two
              primary objectives: (1) to introduce students to a  computer algebra system
              (CAS); and (2) to use this technology to  investigate applications that are
              accessible to all undergraduates  who have some calculus background.  Besides
              the development of the  course, this project serves as one of the planning
              exercises for  the creation of the Vanderbilt University Center for the 
              Enhancement of Mathematics and Science Teacher Education through  Advanced
              Technologies (CEMSTEAT).  The new course emphasizes  applying mathematics to
              problems that arise in the real world.   Modules for the course are being
              developed and will be assembled  into a course supplement.  These modules treat
              applications in the  natural and social sciences.  The development team is
              employing the  expertise of the Learning Technology Center at Peabody College
              of  Vanderbilt University.  Experts at the Center are advising the  development
              team on how multimedia and other technology components  can be used.  The
              development team is consulting also with faculty  members in the sciences and
              teacher education in choosing  applications that meet the needs of their
              students.  Evaluation of  the course addresses three issues: (1) the nature of
              student and  faculty use of a CAS and mathematical concepts in conjunction with
               the proposed modules; (2) student learning and understanding of  mathematical
              modeling; and (3) students' applications of the CAS to  modeling and other
              mathematical concepts.  As activities of  CEMSTEAT, the materials and knowledge
              of student learning developed  are available to a national audience.  ***y
