Title       : Whole Computer Science: Emphasizing Cooperation and Communication in
               Introductory Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9354423

Award Number: 9354423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia M. Lo lo@cs.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane M. Ritter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur M. Farley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen F. Fickas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Clinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354423  Lo  We are revising our introductory computer science curriculum to 
              incorporate principles of whole computer science.  Whole computer  science
              emphasizes cooperative learning and problem solving,  communication skills,
              critical thinking, and individual  resourcefulness, while relating computer
              science to other  disciplines and to everyday life.  Incorporation of
              techniques from  this highly successful pedagogy to college level curricula
              should  help to address the critical problems of recruitment and retention  of
              women as well as the training of computer science professionals  with strong
              teamwork and communication skills.  We believe this  approach to be
              particularly important for retention of women  students because of the many
              studies which have shown that women  are more successful in a cooperative
              setting rather that a highly  competitive, individual-oriented environment.  We
              are developing a basic set of whole computer science learning  modules.  Each
              module will include (1) a rich programming  assignment that encourages
              interaction, sharing, and re-use; (2) a  set of cooperative in-class exercises
              and homework assignments and  (3) a resource library which serves to create a
              microcosm of a real  work environment.  Communication skills will be taught
              through  essay assignments, project writeups, a classroom community 
              newsletter, and documents included in the resource library.  We  will develop
              grading techniques appropriate for the whole computer  science model. 
              Evaluation of our curriculum innovations will be conducted through  recruitment
              and retention statistics; courses questionnaires  designed to assess students's
              perception of the importance of  specific traits and skills for success in the
              course and in the  field of computer science; interviews/ discussions with a
              student  focus group; and feedback from faculty at other universities  involved
              in curriculum innovations and from industrial affiliates.   Our results will be
              disseminated through papers to be submitted to  c onferences and publications
              focused on computer science education.   Publication of a teacher's sourcebook,
              a videotape, and workshops  presentation are planned as part of a later grant
              proposal to NSF  UCCD.  ***y
