Title       : Transgenic Plants for the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1994     
File        : a9354721

Award Number: 9354721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Karcher suek@bilbo.bio.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanton B. Gelvin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354721  Karcher         We propose a series of investigative laboratories using
              transgenic  plants for the introductory biology curriculum. Plant biology is 
              frequently an area that is neglected in the teaching of biological  sciences,
              yet plants display unique characteristics in their  developmental and
              physiological processes that set them apart from  their animal and microbial
              counterparts. The transgenic plants that  we shall develop for these
              laboratories contain an uidA (gusA)  reporter gene under the control of various
              promoters that respond  to different environmental or developmental signals.
              Following  induction by these environmental or developmental signals, the gusA 
              gene will respond by producing the enzyme B-glucuronidase (GUS).  When plant
              tissue is stained with the chromogenic compound X-gluc,  those tissues that
              produce GUS will turn blue. Using investigative  experiments, students will
              monitor both the physiological response  of plants to these signals, as well as
              the induction of gene  activity as reflected by GUS activity. Thus, students
              will be able  to see that physiological and developmental responses correlate 
              with specific gene activity. The assay is highly visual, safe for  the
              undergraduate laboratory, easy to conduct, and relatively  inexpensive. In
              addition, we shall develop a laboratory manual and  a CD-ROM program to be used
              by students and teachers when  conducting these experiments. We shall test
              these laboratories  first in selected courses in the Purdue University
              Department of  Biological Sciences core curriculum. We shall subsequently have 
              these laboratories tested by colleagues in undergraduate laboratory  courses at
              other universities. The laboratories will be evaluated  both for efficacy as a
              teaching tool, and for ease in preparation  and presentation by the laboratory
              instructors. Finally, we shall  aid in the distribution of the laboratory
              material to other  colleges and universities.  ***y
