Title       : Social Science Experts & Community Participation in Precursors to the U.S. War
               on Poverty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1990    
File        : a9008411

Award Number: 9008411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 15,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21164              (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel Cazenave   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              A central focus for research in science studies is the relationship            
              between experts and society.  This study will analyze the influence            
              of social science experts in encouraging democratic participation              
              in the formation and implementation of public policy.  To explore              
              this topic, secondary, archival, and oral history data will be                 
              examined in a qualitative historical study of social scientists                
              employed in developing precursors to the U.S. "War on Poverty"                 
              Community Action Programs.  Alternative theories will be considered            
              in an analysis of the degree and nature of the impact of political             
              and other social forces on the activity of social science experts.             
              These theories will also be used to analyze conflicts in work roles            
              and assumptions of the social scientists in shifting from a                    
              "scientific" to a "professional reformer" model of expertise.  This            
              shift occurred during this period.  Other research questions focus             
              on the social scientists' conceptualization of community                       
              participation, the persons served by their actions, and the impact             
              those actions had.  The results of this study will expand our                  
              understanding of both the potential and limitations of the use of              
              social science experts in the promotion of citizen participation               
              in community reform initiatives.  Results will include a book                  
              manuscript and articles in refereed journals and other                         
              publications.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research has an important and timely focus; its results will              
              be useful and accessible to a wide audience.  The qualifications               
              and track record of the investigator are excellent; institutional              
              support is very good; the research plan is sensible.  Support is               
              highly recommended.
