Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Transport of Fluid and Macro- molecules in
               Polymeric Gels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1990 
File        : a9008275

Award Number: 9008275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence T. Baxter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1773,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Transport of Fluid and Macro-                     
              molecules in Polymeric Gels.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or comple-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month visit by Dr. Laurence                   
              T. Baxter to India to work with Dr. Ramesh A. Mashelkar,                       
              Director of the National Chemical Laboratory ?NCL! at Pune on                  
              "Transport of Fluid and Macromolecules in Polymeric Gels."                     
              Recently, the NCL has developed super-absorbent polymers,                      
              i.e., polymers capable of absorbing several hundred times their                
              own weight of water or other liquids.  NCL designed one such                   
              polymer, Jalshakti, to improve the ability of plants to                        
              obtain water in arid climates.  NCL's polymers have potential                  
              uses in many areas, such as agriculture, medical and personal                  
              hygiene products, controlled-release drug delivery, and                        
              separations.  The researchers plan to model the transport of                   
              fluid and macromolecules in polymer gels, incorporating                        
              hydrodynamic and steric effects, as well as the thermodynamic                  
              properties of the gel.  They will use this model to predict                    
              macroscopic transport properties, such as diffusivity or                       
              hydraulic conductivity, as well as concentration and pressure                  
              profiles, from microscopic properties.  Their goal is to                       
              relate structure to function, to take thermodynamic parameters                 
              and incorporate them into a framework to analyze dynamic                       
              transport effects.  The will test the mathematical model                       
              experimentally, by measuring effective diffusivity, perme-                     
              ability, and macromolecular concentration profiles, through                    
              standard techniques available at NCL.  The investigators                       
              hope that insight into transport within gels obtained froma                   
              verifiable model will yield a rational basis for polymer                       
              design, and for optimization of system parameters for                          
              effective drug release or water absorption, or both.                           
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
