Title       : Efficiency and Macroeconomic Consequences of Deterministic and Stochastic
               Inflation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1990      
File        : a9008775

Award Number: 9008775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80453              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland J. Benabou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project develops models of the interaction of inflation with              
              the price system which are microtheoretic but can be aggregated to             
              shed light on inflation.  Two complementary directions of research             
              are pursued, corresponding to the deterministic and stochastic                 
              components of inflation.  First, the project studies inflationary              
              trends in a monopolistically competitive search market with costly             
              price setting.  The model captures the idea that inflation results,            
              through increased price dispersion, in more resources spent on                 
              search.  Second, the project examines the effects of the variance              
              in inflation rates, in a duopoly model where buyers and sellers                
              face a Lucas-type signal extraction problem.  The central issues               
              here are how inflation variability affects the informational                   
              content of prices, buyers' incentives to become informed, and                  
              firms' monopoly power.                                                         
                                                                                             
              According to conventional macroeconomic wisdom, one of the main                
              channels through which inflation disrupts the efficiency of markets            
              is through the increased variability and dispersion of relative                
              prices.  This in turn is said to cause many inefficiencies, such               
              as incorrect production decisions, more resources spent on search              
              and a deterioration in the informational content of prices.  There             
              is substantial empirical support of this view of inflation.  The               
              contribution of this project comes from developing a rigorous                  
              microeconomic foundation for addressing the macroeconomic issue of             
              inflation and for interpreting empirical facts.  By dealing with               
              inflation both in trend and in variance, and analyzing its effects             
              in two very different models, this project should encompass a wide             
              range of efficiency effects, and cast theoretical light on several             
              important propositions about inflation.
