Title       : Portable Real Time Speech System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1990       
File        : a9008586

Award Number: 9008586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald L. Engel                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49644              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert J. Berman BERMAN@BU-BIO.BU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2840,
Abstract    :
                   In the past five years researchers have made good progress                
              in the areas of speech recognition and synthesis.  Despite the                 
              inevitable delay between publication of new results and                        
              appearance of new technology based on these results, novel                     
              applications are invariably developed for these technologies.                  
              These applications, in turn, spawn new research questions.  This               
              work concerns the problems of real time speech recognition and                 
              synthesis for a person with a particular speech disability.                    
              Each year throat cancer, which is the fifth or sixth most common               
              type of cancer in the United States today causes a large number                
              of individuals to undergo a partial or total laryngectomy.  These              
              individuals are no longer able to speak in a normal fashion.                   
              Advances in VLSI have catalyzed the development of speech                      
              recognition and synthesis hardware.  One of the popular speech                 
              aid devices is the "ElectroLarynx" produced by Siemens, Inc.  It               
              is a battery-operated, hand-held vibratory device which, when                  
              pressed against the throat of a laryngectomized person, creates                
              sufficient "turbulence" in the throat to partially simulate the                
              undifferentiated sound produced by a normal larynx.  This sound                
              is then converted into speech in the upper oral cavity.  The                   
              problem is that a voice produced in this fashion sounds very                   
              mechanical; certain phonemes cannot be produced or are produced                
              only marginally; and the speech can be difficult to understand.                
                   The practical goal of this project is to use current                      
              hardware and speech technology to build a device which will                    
              produce a high-quality, life-like voice in a very small package.               
              The research goal of this project is to study the complexity of                
              the voice produced by a partially laryngectomized person in terms              
              of its speech recognition properties.  This is a more difficult                
              problem than standard speech recognition and thus, very high risk              
              undertaking.                                                                   
                   The researchers will be attacking the engineering problem of              
              designing a more practical speech aid device to replace the                    
              "Electrolarynx" and the research question of how the augmented                 
              speech of a laryngectomized person differs in speech recognition               
              features from standard speech.
