Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Geometric Function Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1990    
File        : a9008051

Award Number: 9008051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. David Minda minda@ucbeh.san.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The goals of this mathematical research are to apply                      
              differential geometric tools to the study of problems arising in               
              geometric function theory.  A common feature of the work is the                
              use of conformal metrics, especially the hyperbolic, euclidean                 
              and spherical metrics.                                                         
                   One of the primary areas of interest will be a reexamination              
              of the Bloch constant in light of a recent result which provided               
              the first improvement in the lower bound in fifty years.  While                
              the improvement is small, the method is new.  Moreover, a new                  
              geometric derivation of the improved bound opens up                            
              the possibility of further improvement as well as applications                 
              to other extremal problems (some of which have already been                    
              made).  Extensions of this work to several complex variables also              
              will be considered.                                                            
                   A second line of investigation involves the derivation                    
              of analytic expressions which are necessary and sufficient for                 
              a given function to be univalent on a domain.  These are given in              
              terms of two-point distortion theorems, of which there are many.               
              Two particular goals in the work concern conditions which imply                
              univalence in domains which are not simply connected                           
              and establishing whether an expression can be found which, when                
              satisfied by all univalent functions, gives information about the              
              connectivity of the underlying domain.                                         
                   Work on circle packing as a means for approximating                       
              conformal mappings will continue.  This relatively new point of                
              view was introduced five years ago by W. Thurston and has led to               
              several new lines of investigation in function theory.  In                     
              this project, work will be done expanding on recent successes in               
              the approximation of conformal maps of finitely connected                      
              domains to the case of mappings on Riemann surfaces.                           
              Equivalently,  attention will focus on the use of circle packings              
              to approximate the covering map of a disk onto a region of finite              
              connectivity.
