Title       : Rational Choice Models of the Supreme Court
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9008140

Award Number: 9008140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73741              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pablo T. Spiller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The importance of the Supreme Court in shaping public policy has               
              long been recognized by scholars and public officials alike.                   
              Much of the scientific literature on the Court has focused on                  
              voting behavior or on the cases, disputes, or parties that come                
              before the Court.  In contrast, there has been little emphasis on              
              the way the court actually interacts with other institutions of                
              the political system.  Analyses of the Court have usually                      
              examined the Court decisionmaking process in isolation or in the               
              context of broader social or economic conditions without                       
              embedding it in a more general framework of political and                      
              regulatory institutions.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this research is to develop empirical tests of                  
              rational choice models of the Supreme Court.  The main thrust of               
              the project is that to understand the movements over time in                   
              judicial statutory interpretation, it is useful to model the                   
              Court as an institution constrained not by traditional legal                   
              rules of precedent but rather by the nature and composition of                 
              other political institutions.  This rational choice model posits               
              that the Court interacts strategically with Congress, attempting               
              to implement its policy preferences without generating any                     
              repercussions from the House or the Senate.  The model will be                 
              tested in the framework of analyzing the Court's industrial labor              
              relations decisions.  The data will consist of 171 labor cases                 
              decided between 1949 and 1987.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research will advance understanding of how judges implement               
              their policy preferences within the context of institutional                   
              bargaining and constraints.  It will also show the linkages                    
              between Supreme Court decisions and political sentiments in the                
              Congressional and executive branches.  Finally, the results will               
              lead to the further development of empirically-estimable rational              
              choice models that may have considerable significance in certain               
              areas of regulation policy.
