Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Constraints on the Evolution of Breeding Date in
               Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1990 
File        : a9008444

Award Number: 9008444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37869              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Wiggins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Constraints on the Evolution of                   
              Breeding Date in Birds.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award will support a 15-month visit by Dr. David A.                       
              Wiggins to Sweden to work with Dr. Lars Gustafsson of Uppsala                  
              University on "Constraints on the Evolution of Breeding Date                   
              in Birds."  Most birds exhibit considerable variation in the                   
              timing of clutch initiations within populations.  Because                      
              breeding date correlates with several components of fitness                    
              (clutch size; the number of young produced; the number of                      
              young recruited to the breeding population in subsequent                       
              years), breeding date is thought to be under considerable                      
              directional selection.  However, despite significant                           
              heritability estimates for breeding date in natural populations                
              of birds, several studies have failed to detect significant                    
              changes in breeding date.  Recent work has suggested that                      
              breeding date fails to respond to selection due to a large                     
              environmental component affecting female nutrition.  The                       
              researchers propose to carry out experiments on the timing of                  
              breeding in collared flycatchers (Ficedula albicollis) on the                  
              island of Gotland, a population unique in that a high                          
              proportion (25%) of fledged young return to the island the                     
              following summer, thus enabling quantitative genetic estimates                 
              from comparisons of adult and offspring reproductive traits.                   
              The researchers propose to both delay and advance the date of                  
              laying by manipulating eggs in a randomly chosen sample of                     
              flycatcher clutches, altering the clutch initiation date by                    
              approximately one week.  In this population, differences of                    
              breeding date of one week have significant effects on most                     
              reproductive traits.  The researchers will band all offspring                  
              from experimental and control nests and then compare the                       
              clutch initiation dates of these offspring in the following                    
              year with those of their mothers.  This will allow the                         
              researchers to test the current models of the evolution of                     
              breeding date by estimating: 1) the magnitude of the environ-                  
              mental component of breeding date variance; 2) the heritability                
              of breeding date; and 3) the evolutionary consequences of                      
              variance in breeding date.
