Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Location of Defects and Reactive Elements in
               Chromia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1990 
File        : a9008108

Award Number: 9008108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31641              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald I. Potter kpost@mail.ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet M. Hampikian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0512204   Nondestructive Measurement              
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1771,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Defects and Locations of                          
              Reactive Elements in Chromia.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Donald I. Potter                    
              will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by                     
              Dr. Janet M. Hampikian to the CSIRO Division of Materials                      
              Science and Technology in Melbourne, Australia, to work under                  
              the direction of Dr. C. J. Rossouw on "Defects and Locations                   
              of Reactive Elements in Chromia" to shed new light on the                      
              mechanisms causing the reduction in oxidation kinetics of                      
              chromia-forming alloys due to reactive element additions.                      
              Many high temperature alloys rely on the formation of a                        
              protective layer of chromia.  A decrease in chromia scale                      
              growth, corresponding to an increase in part lifetime, is one                  
              of the effects of reactive element additions to these alloys.                  
              This proposal focuses on determining the role that these                       
              reactive element dopants play in the chromia lattice.                          
              Specifically, the researchers will establish the type of                       
              point defect that controls diffusion in undoped chromia, as                    
              well as the position of the dopants.  To accomplish this,                      
              they will channel enhanced microanalysis and statistical                       
              analysis of electron channeling microanalytic data.                            
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
