Title       : Covalent Phosphorus Residues in Flavoproteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1993    
File        : a9008173

Award Number: 9008173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale E. Edmondson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed work will focus on the structure and function of                  
              protein-bound covalent phosophorus residues in two                             
              proteins: Azotobacter vinelandii (strain OP) flavodoxin and                    
              bovine milk xanthine oxidase.  In the case of flavodoxin, a novel              
              phosphodiester crosslink between a seryl and a threonyl residue                
              has been identified.  Work  over the past project period has                   
              shown this crosslink appears to have a structural function and                 
              that cloning the flavodoxin gene and expressing it in E. coli                  
              results in formation of the flavodoxin without this covalent                   
              phosphorus residue.  The PI plans to extend these studies to 1)                
              identify the sequence location of the phosphate-bridged seryl and              
              threonyl residues, 2) examine the comparative physical and                     
              chemical properties of the "dephospho" cloned flavodoxin with                  
              that of the phospho wild-type form, 3) initiate studies to                     
              characterize the enzyme system responsible for incorporation of                
              the phosphodiester linkage into the protein, 4) initiate studies               
              using site-directed mutagenesis as a probe of protein structure                
              and function, 5) identify non-phospho crosslinks suggested to                  
              occur in Azotobacter  vinelandii  (strain 478) flavodoxin and                  
              maybe present in flavodoxin isolated from other organisms, and                 
              6) prepare a polyclonal antibody against a synthetic peptide                   
              containing a ser-thr phosphodiester linkage to use as a probe to               
              test whether this linkage occurs in proteins in other organisms.               
              Previous work in this laboratory (supported by NSF) has shown                  
              bovine milk xanthine oxidase to contain a phosphoseryl residue                 
              near the active site Mo center of the enzyme.  Preliminary                     
              31P NMR and mass spectroscopic data suggest substrate                          
              turnover results in the incorporation of solvent oxygen into this              
              phosphorus residue.  Work is proposed to extend these findings to              
              determine if this phosphoseryl residue is the active site                      
              nucleophile involved in the mechanism of xanthine oxidation.                   
              Evidence for covalent 32P incorporation in the related enzymes:                
              chicken liver xanthine dehydrogenase and rabbit liver aldehyde                 
              oxidase will be obtained by cell growth in the presence of 32Pi                
              and using antibodies to probe whether synthesized xanthine                     
              dehydrogenase and aldehyde oxidase also contain covalently-bound               
              phosphorus residues.  From this laboratory ENDOR data and recent               
              ENDOR data published by Bray; evidence is presented to suggest a               
              phosphorus ligand to the functional Mo center of xanthine                      
              oxidase.  Further experiments will be done to further determine                
              whether this signal is indeed due to phosphorus and whether that               
              phosphorus is due to the phosphoseryl residue.  The results of                 
              these studies should expand our understanding of the role of                   
              phospho residues in protein structure and function and may have                
              relevance to a wide range of problems in biochemistry.
