Title       : Electric Dipole Moments of Chiral Ion Pairs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9008877

Award Number: 9008877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret V. Merritt MMerritt@Wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              This Research Opportunities for Women Career Advancement Award                 
              is in the general area of organic chemistry.  Dr. Margaret V.                  
              Merritt of the Chemistry Department at Wellesley College will                  
              develop methods for using electric dipole moment measurements                  
              to examine the association and structure of chiral ion pairs.                  
              The interionic geometry of ion pairs in particular solvents may                
              be correlated with the electric dipole moment.  In this study,                 
              both of the ions will have an asymmetric center: the cation                    
              will be a quaternary amine and the anion will be the salt of                   
              mandelic acid.  The capacitance and conductance measurements                   
              will be made with the advice of Dr. Ernest Grunwald, emeritus                  
              professor of Brandeis University, who has experience in this                   
              field.  A postdoctoral worker and an undergraduate student will                
              participate in the project.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This award will enable Dr. Merritt to establish a new                          
              capability that is complementary to kinetic studies she has                    
              carried out previously.  It is anticipated that undergraduate                  
              students will be able to participate readily in these new                      
              projects.  Future student projects will involve the preparation                
              and characterization of novel chiral ion pairs and                             
              determination of the solvent dependence of the dipole moment of                
              a single ion pair.  Infrared and proton nmr spectroscopy and                   
              X-ray structure characterization will also be utilized.
