Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Simplified Fabrication Methodsfor Silicon
               Concentrator Solar Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1990 
File        : a9008184

Award Number: 9008184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28488              (Estimated)
Investigator: R M. Swanson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard R. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              13        Physics                                 
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1761,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium Term Research: Simplified Fabrication Methods                    
              for Silicon Concentrator Solar Cells.                                          
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Richard M. Swanson                  
              will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by                     
              Dr. Richard R. King of Indiana University with Professors                      
              Martin A. Green and Stuart Wenham of the Electrical Engineering                
              Department of the University of New South Wales, Kensington,                   
              Australia.  The researchers plan to focus on the area of                       
              silicon concentrator solar cells, primarily of the type                        
              contacted on both sides, and designed for concentration                        
              ratios between 20 and 100.  Because this concentration range                   
              is relatively low, and the required cell area for a given                      
              power output is correspondingly high, this research will                       
              emphasize simplified fabrication procedures in order to                        
              reduce the cost per unit cell area as much as possible.  For                   
              instance, they will explore the use of electrochemically                       
              deposited metallization as an alternative to vacuum deposition                 
              of metal, and investigate designs which do not require                         
              alignment of one photolithographic level to another, and                       
              cells which are fabricated by printing patterns directly on                    
              the cell, thus eliminating the need for photosensitive                         
              resists.  The goal of this research is to find the ways in                     
              which such high-throughput processes can be used while                         
              maintaining the cell efficiency at a level greater than about                  
              90% of the value obtained when complex, microelectronics                       
              fabrication techniques are used.  The researchers also will                    
              fabricate cells designed for concentration ratios of about 5.                  
              Since the cost of the silicon substrate becomes a very                         
              significant fraction of the total system cost in this                          
              concentration ratio, the use of monocrystalline, thin-film                     
              silicon for this type of cell will be explored.                                
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
