Title       : Heat-Transfer Processes in Discontinuous Permafrost Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9008771

Award Number: 9008771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Hinkel Kenneth.Hinkel@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The possibility of climatic warming in high-latitude zones has            
              fueled growing concern about prospects for widespread melting of               
              permafrost across large areas of the Arctic.  The dynamics by which            
              permafrost melts are not fully understood, however.  Longstanding views        
              that held conductive heat transfer as the primary mechanism have been          
              challenged by new theories that hold that nonconductive heat transfer          
              also plays an important role in the freezing and thawing of permafrost.        
              This project will assess the degree to which each of these mechanisms          
              and other possible processes affects permafrost dynamics in a variety          
              of settings in central Alaska.  Measurements of a variety of different         
              soil, snow and ice, temperature, and moisture conditions will be               
              collected at a set of paired permafrost and non-permafrost sites.              
              These data will be used to analyze relationships among these different         
              variables and to test different models of heat transfer within                 
              permafrost.                                                                    
                   This project will provide valuable new data on conditions within          
              and immediately above the soil in permafrost and non-permafrost                
              regions, and it will provide an effective test of competing hypotheses         
              regarding heat transfer mechanisms that affect the stability of                
              permafrost.  In addition to contributing to new insights about                 
              permafrost dynamics, this project also will make methodological                
              contributions by testing the efficacy of new instruments in harsh              
              environments.
