Title       : Women's Labor Force Activity and Child Care in Brazil: ROW Research Planning
               Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9008730

Award Number: 9008730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela J. Smith                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel Connelly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research focusses on the interrelationships between               
              women's labor force activity and child care in metropolitan                    
              Brazil. In a predominantly rural economy, women's work and child               
              raising are not generally incompatible. However, growing                       
              industrial and sector services separate the workplace from the                 
              home, with work sites becoming increasingly inappropriate for the              
              care of children. When employment and child supervision are no                 
              longer compatible, they impose competing demands on women's time.              
              This research explores the simultaneity of child care and                      
              women's labor force participation decisions in Brazil, a country               
              in which sweeping economic and demographic changes have certainly              
              led to an increased demand for non-parental child care. The                    
              research seeks to place child care choices in the context of                   
              household decisions making with the household choosing the                     
              optimal allocation of the time of all of its members, given the                
              option of purchasing substitute child care.                                    
                                                                                             
              In the simplest case, focussing only on the time use of the                    
              mother, the outcome of this modelling will be a labor supply                   
              function for all women of child-bearing age and a child care                   
              demand function for women with young children. These                           
              relationships will be studies using data from a 1985 Brazilian                 
              survey which includes over 53,000 metropolitan households and                  
              contains extensive information on economic activities of each                  
              household members, as well as a series of questions on child                   
              care. The estimation strategy will take into account the                       
              correlation  in the error terms between labor supply and child                 
              care demand, and the censoring of the data at zero hours employed              
              and zero hours of non-parental child care.                                     
                                                                                             
              The resulting estimates will provide an initial understanding of               
              the factors affecting women's labor force participation in Brazil              
              and how the presence of young children influences the decision                 
              process. Although it is suspected that women with young children               
              are less likely to participate in the labor force, the research                
              will assess the magnitude of the effect and how it differs with                
              households and individual characteristics. Factors affecting the               
              demand for non-parental child care are less well understood than               
              those affecting labor force participation, particularly within                 
              the context of a developing country, and the emphasis of this                  
              research on child care is its unique contribution.
