Title       : Clustered Surrogate File Scheme for Very Large Knowledge Bases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1991    
File        : a9008694

Award Number: 9008694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55158              (Estimated)
Investigator: Soon M. Chung schung@cs.wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              In the context of a very large knowledge base which consists of                
              rules and the extensional database of facts, the major problem is              
              how to process the relational operations on the extensional                    
              database in the minimum amount of time to satisfy the user                     
              queries. To speed up the relational operations on very large                   
              knowledge bases, parallel processing is essential. But most of                 
              the previous index schemes and file structures were designed for               
              sequential processing environment, so they can not be easily                   
              mapped to parallel processing systems. One reasonable indexing                 
              scheme for parallel processing systems is the concatenated code                
              word (CCW) surrogate file which has small size and simple                      
              maintenance requirement.  The CCW surrogate file can be used to                
              index the rules as well as facts, and relational operations can                
              be directly performed on the CCW surrogate files.  CCW surrogate               
              files can be mapped well into the parallel architectures because               
              their structure is quite compact and regular.                                  
                                                                                             
              The main goal of this research work is to develop optimal                      
              clustered CCW surrogate file and data file structures suitable                 
              for parallel processing systems.  Parallel relational operation                
              algorithms based on the clustered file structures that are                     
              designed in this project will be evaluated and their performance               
              compared with other knowledge base management systems.  The                    
              efficient index and file structures developed for very large                   
              knowledge bases support parallel relational operations used in                 
              logical inference mechanisms, thus making these systems more                   
              effective.
