Title       : Curation of the Paul Rowe Archaeological Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1991     
File        : a9008241

Award Number: 9008241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25530              (Estimated)
Investigator: William Green bill-green@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Paul Rowe, an amateur archaeologist, made surface collections and              
              excavated archaeological materials from over 200 sites in                      
              southwestern Iowa.  Because of the care with which he worked and               
              the extensive documentation associated with these materials, they              
              are widely used and provide an important data base.  The                       
              collection includes lithics, ceramics, and both worked and                     
              unworked faunal remains.  The materials are currently held by                  
              several institutions.                                                          
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. William Green and                
              his colleagues will continue their work to make these materials                
              of maximum research use.  In this next phase of their project,                 
              the team will correlate objects with the relevant documentation                
              and ascertain the specific sites from which each collection                    
              derives.  Detailed data will be entered into the Office of the                 
              State Archaeologist's files, and the objects themselves will be                
              sorted by site and by material class within each site, labeled by              
              catalog number, and boxed in standard-size storage containers.                 
              They will be added to the State Artifact Repository.  One portion              
              of the collection is held by the Mills County Historical Museum,               
              and it will be surveyed to determine physical condition and the                
              nature of its documentation.  Recommendations for treatment will               
              be developed.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The Rowe collection is important because it can provide insight                
              into prehistoric cultural development in the Midwest United                    
              States.  Because of storage and documentation problems, the                    
              collection cannot now be used efficiently.  The work by Dr. Green              
              and colleagues will serve to remedy this situation.
