Title       : Characteristics of Spatial Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9008803

Award Number: 9008803
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell P. Balda Russell.Balda@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan C. Kamil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              All of us have, at one time or another, taken special pains to                 
              place a prized object in some special location where it would be               
              well hidden.  We were also sure we would never forget this                     
              location.  However, when it was time to retrieve the object, we                
              could not remember where we had hidden it.  Some species of birds              
              in the western U.S. perform a similar behavior, but with one                   
              important difference.  They appear not to forget the location of               
              their hidden treasure.                                                         
                                                                                             
              One of the most dramatic examples of the use of spatial memory is              
              provided by seed-caching birds that remember the location of                   
              thousands of distinct locations for many months.  Spatial memory               
              in these species is robust and of long duration.  In this series               
              of experiments, Dr. Balda and his colleagues will study the                    
              nature of this memory system in Clark's nutcracker, pinyon jays,               
              and scrub jays using carefully managed laboratory procedures in                
              which many variables can be manipulated and controlled.                        
                                                                                             
              In nature, these birds spend hundreds of hours each autumn                     
              harvesting pine seeds from native conifer trees, carrying these                
              seeds off some distance, and then burying the seeds in                         
              underground caches.  These cached seeds are not exposed and                    
              cannot be detected.  Yet, these birds return to these cache sites              
              months later and recover their caches with almost errorless                    
              accuracy.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Questions to be addressed include:  How many cache sites can a                 
              bird remember?  How long can these sites be remembered?  How does              
              this behavior develop in young birds?  Are there species                       
              differences in how much information birds can remember?                        
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will help us to understand spatial                
              memory at both the evolutionary and behavioral levels and to                   
              develop an understanding of animal cognition in a broad                        
              biological and psychological perspective.
