Title       : Prehispanic State Formation in the Lupaqa Area, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1991       
File        : a9008181

Award Number: 9008181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41405              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Stanish   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Charles Stanish                  
              will conduct archeological survey work in the Lake Titicaca Basin              
              of Southern Peru.  The research focuses on the Lupaqa, a                       
              prehistoric group which survived into early historic times and                 
              was described in Spanish chronicles.  The Lupaqa consist of a                  
              distinct, spatially limited, regional group which maintained its               
              identity although it was conquered by and incorporated into                    
              successive Tiwanaku and Inca empires.  Based on his prior work in              
              the region, Dr. Stanish will conduct a surface survey.  He will                
              locate and map Lupaqa sites, and on the basis of surface                       
              materials recovered, assign these to appropriate time periods.                 
              The nature of the extent and configuration of surface remains                  
              will permit a good deal of inference about site organization and               
              function.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Archaeologists wish to understand how large complex entities such              
              as empires expand and maintain their control over subject                      
              populations.  There is much disagreement about the extent to                   
              which direct force of arms is involved and the strategies used                 
              not only to establish but also to maintain power.  Because the                 
              Lupaqa constitute such a "marginal" group and because they were                
              consecutively incorporated into two such kingdoms they provide an              
              excellent context in which to examine this issue.                              
                                                                                             
              The research is important for several reasons.  The basic forces               
              which shaped Andean prehistory are evident in the world today.                 
              Many countries such as the Soviet Union and Ethiopia consist of                
              diverse ethnic groups brought together under a strong central                  
              rule.  An archaeological case such as the Lupaqa permits one to                
              examine the interplay of central and regional forces over a long               
              period of time.
