Title       : Control of Nonstationary Systems Using Information Preserving Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1991  
File        : a9008596

Award Number: 9008596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Cooper cooper@eng2.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francesco Palmieri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,1494,
Abstract    :
              Pattern recognition based control methods can produce stable                   
              and robust performance in a range of applications and these                    
              methods can be designed such that relatively little effort or                  
              expertise is required on the part of an industrial                             
              practitioner for implementation.  Artificial neural nets                       
              (ANNs) are well suited for pattern recognition applications.                   
              A strength of ANNs are their ability to interpolate and                        
              generalize pattern classifications, consequently they hold                     
              promise as an improved framework for pattern based controller                  
              design.  For example, ANNs can be trained to learn a process                   
              input - output relationship using historical plant data, and                   
              can then be installed online in the role of the internal model                 
              of an adaptive controller.  Another example is training ANNs                   
              directly in the error feedback relationship of a process and                   
              then using the ANN as the controller itself.  To maintain an                   
              accurate description, ANN based controller architectures must                  
              provide sufficient degrees of freedom to ensure plasticity,                    
              thus permitting system behaviors never previously experienced                  
              by the controller to be properly addressed.  The research                      
              project involves the use of pattern recognition to identify                    
              and represent current process characteristics while satisfying                 
              these requirements.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The focus of this work is the study of control systems that                    
              (1) are autonomous in their decision making for design,                        
              implementation and adaptation, (2) provide stable and robust                   
              performance over a wide range of applications, and (3) succeed                 
              in dealing with nonlinear, nonstationary systems.  The PIs'                    
              method of approach is to study an architecture comprised of                    
              several ANNs that each perform specific functions and                          
              integrate them into a unified design.  These functions                         
              include:  classification of the patterns exhibited in the                      
              recent histories of the manipulated input and controlled                       
              output to form a pictorial model of the current process                        
              character,  translation of this pictorial model into                           
              appropriate algorithmic controller parameters for use in any                   
              of a number of popular on-line controller algorithms,                          
              controller performance evaluation based on the patterns                        
              exhibited in the recent history of the controller error, and                   
              use of this performance evaluation in the unsupervised                         
              training of the pictorial to algorithmic translation mentioned                 
              above to improve performance and maintain stability in                         
              nonlinear and nonstationary applications.  The controller will                 
              be tested on a range of single-input single-output process                     
              simulations.  The processes will display a range of                            
              characteristics, including variations in process order, the                    
              degree of linearity of the process gain, the variability of                    
              the dominant time constant, the size of the signal to noise                    
              ratio, and with both slowly and suddenly changing                              
              nonstationary changes in the simulated process character.
