Title       : International Geographic Linkages of Venture Capital
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1991   
File        : a9008480

Award Number: 9008480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32335              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The dramatic changes that have characterized the world's economic         
              system in recent decades have been fueled, in part, by significant             
              changes in the flows of capital across international boundaries.               
              Foreign investment in a number of forms has increased substantially.           
              One of the most important types of foreign investment has been the use         
              of venture capital to spur the development of new high technology-             
              related activities.  Geographers and other social scientists have              
              described the uneven spatial distribution of venture capital flows, and        
              they have identified many factors that seem to affect the pattern and          
              magnitude of these flows.  This project will provide a more detailed           
              analysis of investment funds in the United States and the United               
              Kingdom in order to expand knowledge about the processes, links, flows,        
              and outcomes of international venture capital activities originating in        
              these two nations.  Working collaboratively with a British geographer,         
              the American investigator will interview fund managers to identify             
              international investors and obtain more detailed descriptions of their         
              decision-making processes.  Data about venture capital flows also will         
              be examined using discriminant analysis to highlight underlying                
              influences on capital flows.                                                   
                   This project will provide a comparative test of basic models of           
              venture capital flows and will add to basic knowledge about the spatial        
              choreography of international venture-capital activity and the changes         
              to start-up investment processes that occur when operations move to an         
              international level.  The specific data gathered in this project also          
              will become a basis for these and other investigators to later test            
              other hypotheses and models about international capital movements.
