Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9008826

Award Number: 9008826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa Martin                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Susskind susskind@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Mediation is often used as a diplomatic intervention and a                     
              counterpoint to violence in the resolution of international                    
              conflicts.  However, often it is not successful.  Researchers have             
              attempted to identify the factors responsible for the difficulty               
              in resolving conflicts.  Most of the literature on negotiation and             
              mediation identifies mediator roles and describes strategies and               
              tactics that are useful at different points in a conflict, but it              
              does not systematically examine power as employed by mediators nor             
              does it recognize the importance of leverage in the mediation                  
              process.  This is partly due to the fact that most mediation theory            
              is built on the premise that mediators must be "neutral" in order              
              to be acceptable to the parties and effective in their role.                   
              Paradoxically, mediation practice frequently contradicts this                  
              axiom.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              This doctoral dissertation research will examine the relationship              
              between the types of leverage exercised by powerful mediators and              
              the responses of disputing parties that move the conflict toward               
              or away from resolution.  Using a comparative case study method,               
              a series of hypotheses will be generated about the conditions under            
              which mediators with leverage and power can be effective.  Three               
              cases form the core of the research:  The first is the mediation               
              done by the Western Contact Group (U.S., Britain, Canada, France,              
              West Germany) from 1977-81 in the dispute between South Africa and             
              Namibia over Namibian independence.  The second case is the U.S.               
              State Department mediation in the same dispute from 1981-1989.  The            
              third is the British mediation in Zimbabwe in 1979.  Data will                 
              include interviews from key negotiation participants as well as                
              primary and secondary source documents.                                        
                                                                                             
              This study will expand mediation theory to incorporate insight into            
              the "powerful mediator," asking how such mediators use their power             
              and under what conditions the violation of the axiom of non-                   
              partisan intervention is appropriate and effective.  This research             
              will have implications for theory and practice in international                
              conflicts as well as in other contexts where mediators play a role             
              in resolving disputes.  It will also add to understanding of the               
              social psychology of international relations.
