Title       : Design and Analysis Issues in Group Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1992       
File        : a9008077

Award Number: 9008077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219103             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Kenny KENNY@UCONNVM.UCONN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Research in the area of small groups is important to the complete              
              understanding of social behavior.  Currently, the study of groups              
              is limited by the lack of adequate statistical tools to describe               
              fully the ongoing processes that occur in small groups.  One of                
              the most interesting and important aspects of group research is                
              that people interact with one another in groups and, through this              
              interaction, influence one another.  Methods which are available               
              today either ignore or treat as a statistical nuisance the fact                
              that people in groups interact with one another and are,                       
              therefore, linked to one another.  Understanding the links                     
              between people in groups will help clarify the nature of social                
              interaction in small groups.  This research will investigate                   
              three different research designs.  The first design, influence                 
              networks, involves models of the extent to which people influence              
              each other in groups.  These types of models allow study of the                
              effect of different types of influence hierarchies on group                    
              productivity and group member satisfaction.  The second design is              
              the rotation design, in which people move from group to group.                 
              In the rotation design, each person participates in several                    
              groups, so that the consistency of individual behavior when a                  
              person becomes a member of a new group can be examined.  The                   
              third design is the generations design.  In this design, there is              
              a turnover in group membership.  Some group members enter the                  
              group and other members leave.  This design essentially models                 
              the birth and death cycles in families.  This design allows                    
              examination of the stability of group norms with changing                      
              members.  For each area, the research will explore design                      
              considerations and develop data analysis techniques and computer               
              software.  These methods should be of use to researchers of                    
              leadership, social influence, group socialization, productivity,               
              and personality.
