Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: The Mammalian Y Chromosome, Sex Determination and
               Evolution, A Marsupial Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1990 
File        : a9008057

Award Number: 9008057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31641              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda D. Strausbaugh strausba@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory K. Hampikian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: The Mammalian Y Chromosome, Sex                   
              Determination and Evolution, A Marsupial Approach                              
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or comple-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Linda A. Strausbaugh                
              will support a 12-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr.                     
              Gregory K. Hampikian of the University of Connecticut to work                  
              with Dr. Jennifer M. Graves of La Trobe University, Bundoora,                  
              Victoria, AusPtralia, on "Mammalian Y-Chromosome Evolution                     
              and Sex Determination:  A Marsupial Approach."  The predominant                
              theory of mammalian Y chromosome evolution predicts that the                   
              only Y genes conserved are those involved in sex determination,                
              male-specific traits, and X-Y pairing.  Marsupials (infraclass                 
              Metatheria) diverged from placental animals (infra class                       
              Eutheria) at least 130 million years ago.  The researchers                     
              propose to isolate genes conserved between the infraclasses                    
              from a marsupial Y-specific library in order to detail the                     
              general plan of mammalian sex determination and shed light on                  
              the evolution of sex chromosomes.  The marsupial Y is ideal                    
              for these comparative studies because its small size (2-3 X                    
              1,000,000 bases) facilitates library construction and its                      
              lack of an X chromosome pairing region simplifies characteri-                  
              zation.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
