Title       : Parallel Algorithms & Software for Nonlinear Problems in VLSI Circuit Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1992  
File        : a9008991

Award Number: 9008991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaodong Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to design, analyze, implement and test             
              several parallel methods for solving the nonlinear block bordered              
              equations arising in VLSI circuit simulation on parallel computers.            
              The focus will be on three important problem areas: 1) solving large           
              block bordered systems of nonlinear equations for a VLSI circuit               
              simulation, 2) VLSI circuit partitioning problem, efficiently mapping          
              a circuit network to a parallel computer system; 3) load balancing             
              problems on a distributed system, to balance the numerical computation         
              load for circuit simulation among the processors in a parallel                 
              computer.  The nonlinear block bordered equation is also one of the            
              most common types of large scale systems of nonlinear equations in             
              science and engineering applications.                                          
                                                                                             
              Effort will be devoted to develop parallel explicit, implicit, and             
              iterative methods for solving the block bordered nonlinear systems of          
              equations, including convergence analysis, perturbation methods for            
              singular or nearly singular block bordered systems, applications of            
              secant method, and the implementations of the methods on different             
              types of parallel computers.  Efficient partitioning methods will be           
              investigated in order to speed up the convergence rate of the                  
              nonlinear block bordered systems of equations, and to balance the              
              parallel load distribution statically.  The dynamic load balancing is          
              one of the most important issues for parallel computation.                     
              A load balancing scheduler will be developed on a parallel system to           
              improve the computation efficiency for solving the block bordered              
              equations in the circuit simulation.                                           
                                                                                             
              The design method is motivated by the use of parallel computers, and           
              the implementation and testing will be on parallel computers.                  
              The aim is, however, to discover new methods that efficiently solve            
              the numerical problems in VLSI circuit simulation on a parallel                
              computer.
