Title       : Urban Employment Patterns with Industrial Subcontracting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9008956

Award Number: 9008956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65056              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria A. Lawson lawson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The restructuring of industrial production in recent years                
              has given rise to new geographic patterns of economic activity.  There         
              has been a global shift of much productive activity to developing              
              countries.  In addition, there is a growing emergence of new flexible          
              forms of industrial organization at local and urban scales.  Growing           
              attention has been paid in geography, sociology, economics and other           
              disciplines to both of these processes and, in particular, to their            
              impacts on economic and social structures in developing countries.             
              This project will examine the relationship between these new flexible          
              industrial structures and the range of employment forms accompanying           
              their expansion.  Specifically, it explore the extent to which a key           
              example of flexible production, subcontracting, incorporates cheap,            
              off-premises, unprotected labor into manufacturing versus the extent to        
              which it generates secure, skilled employment in supply firms that are         
              interdependent with parent companies.  Comparative empirical research          
              conducted in Ecuador will involve in-depth field work to identify              
              systematic relationships between the structure and nature of                   
              subcontracting hierarchies and the range of employment forms they              
              generate.  The research will generate descriptive analysis employing           
              secondary data to estimate the structure of subcontracting hierarchies         
              across all enterprises in the garment and auto-assembly industries.            
              These activities will be complemented by an analysis of a sample of            
              firms representing each industry to explore the extent of and                  
              rationales for subcontracting.  Workers in these firms will be                 
              interviewed to identify the range of employment arrangements through           
              which workers are incorporated into these subcontracting hierarchies.          
              Through these empirical analyses, theoretical links between distinct           
              types of subcontracting, resultant employment forms, and their welfare         
              implications will be identified.                                               
                                                                                             
                   Subcontracting has received growing attention in the development          
              literature.  Considerable research has identified distinct types of            
              subcontracting associated with different reasons for their emergence.          
              Past research has also analyzed relationships between employment forms         
              and worker welfare, but little has been done on the connections among          
              these phenomena.  This study will advance our understanding of these           
              issues by posing questions about the theoretical linkages between these        
              two previously unconnected bodies of theory.  In addition, this project        
              will develop methods designed for comparative empirical work on                
              subcontracting hierarchies, forms, and resultant employment                    
              arrangements.  The study will provide the rigorous cross-industry              
              comparison called for in previous work, and it will shed light on the          
              organization of industrial production in a less developed setting.  The        
              analysis will contribute to our understanding of the differential              
              consequences of subcontracting arrangements for employment relations           
              and the nature of work and their implications for worker welfare.              
              Increased knowledge about this differentiation is essential to further         
              understanding of contemporary industrial restructuring.
