Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Effects of Sorption to Surfaces on Indoor
               Concentrations of Organic Vapors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1990 
File        : a9008059

Award Number: 9008059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29450              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Borrazzo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0203000   Health                                  
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1440,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Effects of Sorption to Surfaces                   
              on Indoor Concentrations of Organic Vapors                                     
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or                            
              complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions               
              in foreign countries.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This award will support an eight-month visit by Dr. John                       
              Borrazzo to Berlin, Germany, to work with Dr. Bernd Seifert                    
              at the Institute for Water, Soil, and Air Hygiene on "Effects                  
              of Sorption to Surfaces on Indoor Concentrations of Organic                    
              Vapors."  Research during the past decade indicates that                       
              indoor concentrations of organic vapors are unrelated to and                   
              often higher than outdoor concentrations for many compounds.                   
              This has important implications for public health since some                   
              of these compounds exhibit carcinogenic or mutagenic behavior                  
              in humans and/or animals.  Some of the organic compounds may                   
              also exhibit acute health effects.  For these reasons,                         
              understanding the fundamental processes which govern indoor                    
              concentrations is necessary.  Both the PI and his host have                    
              independently explored the sorption of organic compounds to                    
              indoor surfaces.  Few other data are available as this issue                   
              has only recently emerged as an important research question                    
              in the indoor air quality research community.  The PI                          
              proposes to review the unpublished data of the host, to apply                  
              models for sorption kinetics and equilibrium developed as                      
              part of his recent doctoral studies, and to conduct experiments                
              designed to resolve discrepancies between theory and the                       
              available data.  The investigators expect one product of the                   
              research to be a refined sorption model.  The collaboration                    
              should also result in broader incorporation of sorption                        
              effects in the general indoor air quality and exposure                         
              assessment models currently being developed.
