Title       : US-Belgium Cooperative Research: Formation of Gaseous Hydrocarbons as Influenced
               by Soil and Sediment Redox Chemistry Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1994  
File        : a9008671

Award Number: 9008671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8650               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald D. DeLaune RDelaune@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Patrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 5947      BELGIUM
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in physiological                
              ecology between  Drs. Ronald D. DeLaune and William H.                         
              Patrick, Center for Wetland Resources,  Louisiana State                        
              University and Dr. O. Van Cleemput, Faculty of Agricultural                    
              Sciences, University of Ghent, Belgium.   The project                          
              addresses the formation and consumption of biogenic gases in                   
              soils and seeks to define the conditions under which specific                  
              gases are formed, and the rates and conditions leading to                      
              their consumption.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The development of fully or partly anoxic conditions occurs                    
              in both waterlogged and in well drained soil conditions. A                     
              combination of high oxygen consumption through the presence                    
              of abundant, readily available carbon and limited oxygen                       
              supply induced by a high water content is the main reason for                  
              the onset of anaerobic conditions.  These conditions are                       
              responsible not only for stress to plants, but are also                        
              favorable for the formation of gaseous hydrocarbons, such as                   
              methane, ethylene, ethane, propane and butane.  These gases                    
              can have adverse effects on plants and can negatively                          
              influence the gaseous environment.  The aim of this project                    
              is to investigate to what extent soils or sediments can be a                   
              source for gaseous hydrocarbons.  Gaseous hydrocarbon                          
              production and evolution will be related to sediment Eh, pH                    
              and amendments, including different types of organic material.                 
              The investigations will be carried out in the laboratory, as                   
              well as in the field.  The results of this study are expected                  
              to provide a better understanding of the carbon cycle and to                   
              lead to added information on the composition of the gaseous                    
              environment in soils and sediment, including possible source-                  
              sink relationships with the atmosphere.                                        
              The research will benefit from the combined expertise of the                   
              US investigators in nutrient interactions and of the Belgian                   
              investigators in gaseous hydrocarbons and anaerobic soils.
