Title       : Research Initiation Awards: Forced Convection Boiling Vapor Bubble Nucleation,
               Growth, and Departure: REU Supplement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1991   
File        : a9008269

Award Number: 9008269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76879              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Klausner klaus@nersp.nerdc.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The majority of flow boiling heat transfer correlations                        
              reported in the literature utilize pool boiling correlations                   
              to model the microconvection component of heat transfer.                       
              However, there appears sufficient evidence that the physics                    
              governing the incipience, growth, and departure of vapor                       
              bubbles in flow boiling differs from that in pool boiling.                     
              Under such circumstances, the use of pool boiling correlations                 
              to model the microconvection component of flow boiling heat                    
              transfer would be questionable.                                                
                                                                                             
              The proposed investigation will consist of experimentally                      
              measuring the nucleation site density, vapor bubble growth                     
              rate, and vapor bubble departure diameter in saturated forced                  
              convection nucleate boiling.  The manner in which the liquid                   
              film thickness, mass flux, gravitational orientation, wall                     
              superheat, thermodynamic properties, and heating surface                       
              characteristics influence these parameters will be thoroughly                  
              investigated.  The local vapor volume fraction and liquid film                 
              thickness will be measured using a radiation adsorption                        
              technique.  The nucleation site density will be determined                     
              photographically in conjection with a liquid crystal                           
              visualization technique.  The vapor bubble growth rate and                     
              departure diameter will be measured using high speed                           
              cinematography.  Using the experimental data to be collected,                  
              correlations for the incipience, growth and departure of vapor                 
              bubbles in flow boiling will be developed.
