Title       : A Practical SEM-EDS for Undergraduate Education and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0088299

Award Number: 0088299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89179              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjie Blair bblair@jsucc.jsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Gryko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly D. Gregg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank A. Romano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Bowen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jacksonville State Univ
	      700 North Pelham Road
	      Jacksonville, AL  36265    256/782-5284

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
An outstanding environment for undergraduate science
              requires more than the communication of existing knowledge. It requires faculty
              to be mentors and role models in stimulating pre-college and undergraduate
              students in science to explore new frontiers and horizons through their own
              investigative studies. This project is using an analytical scanning electron
              microscopic system (SEM-EDS) in a variety of undergraduate courses and
              independent study, thus providing undergraduates with additional opportunities
              to develop their analytical skills. Use of this instrument is also engendering
              interest in science at the pre-college levels in local area schools. After
              completing a prerequisite Web-based course on microscopic theory and techniques
              that we have developed, relatively inexperienced students are able to acquire
              experimental data efficiently and effectively in many diverse and
              multidisciplinary undergraduate research projects. The project is also adapting
              the ExCEL model developed at Iowa State University. [See K.P. Constant, et.
              al., "Extended Classroom for Enhanced Learning!" at
              www.mse.iastate.edu/excel/main.html.] The value of SEM-EDS in the classroom and
              field is well documented by ExCEL and elsewhere. [For examples, see (1) K.
              Burton and D.L. Farkas, "Telemicroscopy - Net Progress," Nature, Vol. 391
              (1998) pp. 540-41; and (2) G.E. Sosinsky, T.S. Baker, G. Hand, and M.H.
              Ellisman, "The Electron Microscopy Outreach Program: A Web-Based Resource for
              Research and Education, J. Struct. Biol., Vol. 125 (1999) pp. 246-252.] Viewed
              from a broader perspective, this project builds on our established and
              successful undergraduate research program that has led to a growing number of
              student presentations at off-campus events, some student publications, and most
              importantly, to greatly enhanced opportunities for JSU graduates to pursue
              graduate study. Collaborative student/faculty research is being disseminated
              through student presentations and/or publication in recognized journals.
              Dissemination of the educational value of using a SEM is being carried out
              through several "expeditionary learning events" that include science workshops
              sponsored by the Alabama Science in Motion/Biology, and a Web page promoting
              "Scientific Inquiry Through SEM-EDS." 


