Title       : A Unified, Field Based Ecology Curriculum for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a0088626

Award Number: 0088626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Hungate Bruce.Hungate@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil S. Cobb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Whitham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
This project establishes a model for adapting and
              implementing ecological research methodologies traditionally restricted for use
              in the research laboratory to an integrated, field-based ecology curriculum.
              This new curriculum involves undergraduate students (freshman to seniors) in
              state-of-the-art research in population, community and ecosystem ecology. The
              core of this project is a new field-based quantitative laboratory course for
              General Ecology, a required course in which students conduct research along a
              3000m elevational gradient spanning desert to tundra ecosystems as a natural
              experiment. Additionally, this project enhances other introductory biology
              courses by adding field exercises along the gradient which introduce students
              to the experimental system they revisit more comprehensively in General
              Ecology. The project also adds advanced exercises involving the gradient to
              existing laboratories of a number of upper division courses in ecology
              including Entomology, Plant Physiology, Mammology, Microbial Ecology, Ecosystem
              Ecology, Stable Isotope Techniques, and Field Ecology. Thus, this project
              substantially revises and provides a unifying theme to the ecology curriculum
              in that students visit the same sites in different courses and in different
              years. Students learn how the same systems and gradients can be approached from
              different perspectives and used to address some of the major ecological,
              environmental and conservation challenges of our time. Through this project,
              equipment has been purchased and curriculum has been developed to promote
              active student involvement in integrated research in ecology. 

