Title       : Discovery-Based Science and Mathematics in an Environmental Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2000   
File        : a0088211

Award Number: 0088211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie Fitchett sfitchet@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Blake Mellor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Kirchman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mwangi Githinji  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) This project is forming the foundation for the science
              curriculum in the Honors College, a brand new liberal arts college being built
              within the larger Florida Atlantic University system. Through this project the
              College is developing a discovery-based approach to learning by introducing
              year-long student projects in first and second year biology and chemistry
              courses. It is promoting interdisciplinarity by creating educational links
              among the sciences and between mathematics and the sciences. It is bringing
              science and mathematics out of the classroom and into the community, using
              local ponds, lakes, forests and greenways as science laboratories. And for both
              faculty and students, it is integrating teaching, learning and research in a
              holistic form of scholarship. The common thread in discovery-based learning,
              interdisciplinary links, and the community laboratory is long-term
              environmental research projects in which student and faculty teams study the
              water quality in the dozens of area ponds, the diversity of wildlife in the
              more than 250 acres of preserves, and the impact of a growing population on the
              environment. Such an approach is possible because the College is located in the
              midst of the planned -- but not yet completed -- community of Abacoa, a mixed
              residential and urban center which is being built around the college campus.
              The community projects are bring supported in the laboratory through the use of
              a gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer (GC- MS), which provides a powerful means
              for detecting and identifying chemical compounds; and a geographic information
              system (GIS) lab, which provides a variety of tools for spatial analysis and
              modeling of large heterogeneous data sets. The GIS lab is also providing a
              computer classroom for team- teaching new, interdisciplinary, linked courses.
              The effort is an adaptation and expansion of NSF-funded projects that have
              focused on discovery-based learning and undergraduate research activities as a
              means of achieving interdisciplinary learning in the sciences.


