Title       : XYZ on a Chip: UV Fluorescence/Absorption Micro-Analysis System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0088198

Award Number: 0088198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $936498             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henryk Temkin htemkin@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tim Dallas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jordan M. Berg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Purnendu K. Dasgupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shubhra Gangopadhyay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Henryk Temkin

Proposal Number: 
              0088198


Abstract

This research will demonstrate a wafer based
              analytical system capable of detection and identification of a wide range of
              chemically and biologically active substances. The system will be based on
              fluorescence excitation and will integrate a number of new technologies, such
              as deep-blue and ultra-violet light-emitting diodes, advanced microfluidics,
              and liquid core waveguides. Specifically, we will demonstrate arrays of
              resonant microcavity light emitting diodes grown on silicon substrates.
              Fabrication of these devices on silicon will allow for efficient light coupling
              to the microfluidic system also prepared in a silicon substrate. Difficult
              problems of surface conditioning will be studied and resolved in order to make
              this approach feasible. A combination of these technologies will produce a
              sensitive and highly parallel system, capable of searching simultaneously for a
              number of agents of interest. The high degree of integration is expected to
              produce a reliable and easy to use device. 

Further advances in medicine and
              biological sciences depend on the availability of fast, reliable, sensitive,
              and inexpensive diagnostic systems. In order to meet these goals, such systems
              must be highly miniaturized and endowed with a considerable degree of
              intelligence. The road to such systems is through the integration of a number
              of sophisticated components; from novel light sources to advanced electronics
              to efficient data processing. To accomplish this objective, interdisciplinary
              scientific efforts are needed. This work brings together a team of scientists
              with backgrounds from electrical engineering, physics, chemistry, and
              mechanical engineering capable of producing a miniaturized micro-analysis
              system. The work will expose our undergraduate and graduate students to a
              multi-disciplinary team environment and state-of-the-art research and thus,
              will have a major, positive impact on their education.

This award is
              co-funded by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers and the Division
              of Chemical and Transport Systems.

