Title       : Excellence in Undergraduate Mathematics: Confronting Diverse Student Interests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0088794

Award Number: 0088794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $712116             (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi Fisher ndfisher@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel M. Rankin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth C. Millett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

This is a three-year project aimed at mathematical
              sciences departments to provide excellent mathematical instructions for a
              verity of students studying undergraduate mathematics. The joint project of the
              American Mathematical Society and the Mathematicians and Education Reform Forum
              is an integrated program of six national workshops, networks of mathematical
              sciences departments, programs at national meetings, and publications. Two
              workshops are held each academic year, one in the fall and the other in the
              spring. Participation in the workshops is department based with each
              participating department represented by a faculty team of 2 to 4 members.
              Workshops are held at college campuses in cooperation with the mathematical
              sciences departments. While highlighting the needs of particular student
              groups, the program also focuses on critical issues that cut across all
              institutions. The calculus reform movement provides momentum for continuing
              reform efforts throughout the undergraduate curriculum. Reform efforts are put
              in the context of the institutional role of mathematical sciences departments
              and their relationships with partner disciplines. The project builds a network
              of mathematical sciences departments, including a significant number of
              departments in doctoral granting institutions, which are building strong
              undergraduate programs for the diverse groups of students they instruct. For
              more information contact Naomi Fisher at ndfisher@uic.edu.


