Title       : Laboratory Exercises for Cognitive Science and Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0088829

Award Number: 0088829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Hoy rrh3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Cognitive (73) There has been an explosion of interest in matters
              relating cognition, brain, and behavior in the undergraduate curriculum. New
              courses in cognitive science are being introduced, while standard courses in
              neurobiology and psychology are being infused with material from cognitive
              science. Learning is most effective when students actively engage the subject.
              Thus psychology textbooks have traditionally used visual illusions to stimulate
              interest. Although compelling, such demonstrations are static and necessarily
              limited in scope. Ideally, students would not only experience illusions, but
              actively perform experiments, test modalities other than vision, and experience
              material from all areas of cognitive science. In general, it is not practical
              to provide full-fledged laboratories for large lecture courses such as
              introductory psychology, introductory neurobiology, or the emerging cognitive
              science courses. However, such courses often have discussion sections that
              would be enriched by experiments and interactive demonstrations. This project
              addresses these needs by development of a CD-ROM of experiments and
              demonstrations that can be used by students at their own computers or by
              instructors with projection equipment. Computers are now standard tools in the
              psychology research lab, and can be similarly used in teaching. Although many
              fine examples of illusions are scattered across the internet, they are heavily
              weighted toward vision, often lack explanation, and engage one only as a
              passive observer. This CD-ROM goes much further, using interactivity for
              experiments as well as demonstrations. Furthermore, it goes beyond vision to
              cover hearing, and beyond perception to allow students to replicate classic
              experiments in all areas of cognitive science. The CD-ROM covers several broad
              areas, including vision, hearing, language, learning and memory, attention,
              cognition, and practical applications. There are several modules devoted to
              each broad area. Each module generally includes (1) a demonstration of the
              phenomenon, taken from the real world where possible, (2) a demonstration with
              the salient features isolated, (3) a self-experiment to quantify the
              phenomenon, and (4) questions that stimulate students to form hypotheses and
              test them using the CD-ROM. Most modules are suitable for students at all
              levels, with introductory students simply viewing the demonstrations, and
              advanced students doing experiments and testing their own hypotheses. At all
              levels, the approach is open-ended and exploratory rather than strictly
              didactic. Faculty from Cornell's Department of Psychology and Cognitive Studies
              Program are active researchers in these fields and are available to assist us
              in choosing appropriate topics and recent experiments that are not yet covered
              in textbooks. Faculty from Cornell and elsewhere are also active in evaluating
              the CD-ROM during its development, both from their research expertise and by
              testing beta versions in their classrooms. Preliminary contacts with faculty
              from a variety of colleges and universities indicate considerable interest in
              this material. In addition, several publishers have shown interest in this
              project, making nationwide dissemination certain.
