Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a0088920

Award Number: 0088920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76560              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Hofmann hofmann@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:
In this project, we study two separate sets of problems from the
              theory of Partial Differential Equations, using the techniques of Harmonic
              Analysis. In the case of the first set of problems, which will be treated in
              collaboration with John L. Lewis and Kaj Nystrom, we will attempt to understand
              the relationship between the geometry of the boundary of a non-cylindrical
              (i.e. time-varying) domain, the regularity of parabolic measure with respect to
              a fixed point in the domain, and the boundedness, on Lebesgue spaces, of
              parabolic singular integrals defined on the "parabolic boundary." The second
              set of problems involves the study of
the square root problem of Kato, its
              ramifications, and related questions
in the perturbation theory for divergence
              form elliptic operators including those with complex coefficients. 
              Interestingly, we have recently made significant progress on the second set of
              problems, using in part some techniques from the work of Hofmann and Lewis on
              the first set. Partial differential equations of "parabolic" type, which are
              the subject of study in first set of problems mentioned above, arise in the
              mathematical theory of heat conduction, and also in
other so-called
              "diffusion" processes, including those which occur in fields
as diverse as
              economics, population biology, and the flow of ground water.
For example, in
              previous work, Hofmann and Lewis have solved a classical problem of heat
              conduction under new circumstances (which circumstances are really the crux of
              the matter in the problems under consideration in the present project). The
              problem is that of determing the temperature at any point inside an object,
              given that one can measure the temperature everywhere on the
surface of the
              object. The "new circumstance" which we consider,
is to take the realistic
              point of view that the shape of the object may change over
time.  Certainly,
              this is often the case when objects are heated
or cooled. The second set of
              problems alluded to in the first paragraph,
namely, the so-called "Kato
              problem" (or "square root" problem) and related questions, has its origins in
              two papers written by Tosio Kato in 1953 and 1961.
Kato's work concerned the
              "regularity" of solutions of certain hyperbolic (i.e., wave-like) partial
              differential equations. Roughly speaking, he was trying to
show that the
              smoothness (or regularity) of these generalized waves has a mathematical
              correlation with the smoothness of the initial disturbance which causes the
              wave. Kato observed, in his 1961 paper, that the
regularity which he sought,
              for solutions of these hyperbolic equations, could be deduced from a certain
              technical property of the ``square root" of a partial differential operator
              related to the original equation. This technical property, if true, would
              enable one to reduce matters to results which he had already obtained in his
              earlier paper. To prove that this technical property actually did hold turned
              out to be extremely difficult, and the quest to do so (for a somewhat more
              general class of operators than Kato's original wave problem actually required)
              has become known as the ``Kato Problem".




