Title       : Statistical Mechanics of Systems far from Equilibrium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0088451

Award Number: 0088451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beate Schmittmann SCHMITTM@VT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Royce K. P. Zia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1765,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0088451
Schmittmann
This grant supports theoretical research on systems far
              from thermal equilibrium.  The goal is the characterization and understanding
              of complex behavior in interacting many-particle systems, driven into steady
              states far from thermal equilibrium.  A combination of computational and
              analytical techniques, formulated on the lattice or the continuum, will be
              brought to bear on various systems, from Ising-like models to selected
              experiments.

In contrast to Gibbsean ensemble theory, there is as yet no
              fundamental theoretical framework for a comprehensive classification of
              nonequilibrium phenomena.  Even the study of nonequilibrium steady states,
              being the simplest generalizations of equilibrium states, is far from complete.
               Given the ubiquity of such states in a broad range of physical systems,
              formulating a theory with predictive power remains one of the key challenges of
              condensed matter physics.  Seeking to characterize generic large scale
              properties and universal behavior, the focus will be on minimal model systems
              of the Ising type, inspired by the successful role which the latter played in
              equilibrium statistical mechanics.  An external drive, suitably applied,
              prevents such systems from reaching equilibrium; instead, they settle into
              nonequilibrium steady states.  Energy is injected by the drive and absorbed by
              the thermal bath so that a non-trivial, steady through-flux is established. 
              Such systems display much richer phenomena than their equilibrium cousins,
              including generic long-range correlations, novel nonequilibrium phase
              transitions and unexpected ordered structures.  Significant insights have been
              gained, illustrating the key role played by global currents and basic
              symmetries, e.g., detailed balance and conservation laws.  In contrast to
              equilibrium systems, however, the dynamics inherently affects steady state
              properties, so that even minor modifications of the microscopic rules can
              affect macroscopic behavior in profound, entirely unanticipated ways.  The
              challenge is to craft a reliable theoretical picture which can serve as a guide
              from the microscopic to the macroscopic.

In the first part of the research,
              investigations will continue on collective behavior of driven lattice gases. 
              Despite their apparent simplicity, these models provide a variety of complex
              phenomena and pose new challenges.  Examples include shape-dependent
              thermodynamics, new universality classes of critical behavior, anomalous
              interfacial correlations, novel phases, and peculiar domain growth.  Further
              investigations of these simple models should furnish steps toward the
              long-range goal: a meaningful classification of macroscopic nonequilibrium
              steady states based on their underlying dynamics.  The second part of the
              research introduces three new pursuits: polymer crystallization, granular
              materials, and population dynamics.  Governed by nonequilibrium dynamics, these
              phenomena have been extensively studied experimentally.  Being physical
              systems, these are clearly much more complex than driven Ising models. 
              However, the tools used here, honed in the study of simple models, should serve
              well in analyzing experimental data and understanding the essence of these
              systems.  In both parts of the research, projects range from well-defined,
              short-term studies, for which progress is certain, to long-term ventures
              involving more fundamental and complex issues.  Although they require
              substantial thought and time, the problems in the latter category deserve
              attention, since they promise deeper insights into the general nature of
              nonequilibrium steady states.
%%%   
This grant supports theoretical research
              on systems far from thermal equilibrium.  The goal is the characterization and
              understanding of complex behavior in interacting many-particle systems, driven
              into steady states far from thermal equilibrium.  A combination of
              computational and analytical techniques, formulated on the lattice or the
              continuum, will be brought to bear on various systems, from Ising-like models
              to selected experiments.
***




