Title       : Performance Modeling of Embedded Systems for Senior Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0088688

Award Number: 0088688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Klenke rhklenke@mail1.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Electrical Engineering (55) 

The design of embedded systems is inherently
              complex. A key aspect of embedded systems is that they typically require the
              operation of numerous individual functions to complete their overall
              application. Some of these functions may be performed either in software
              executing on a dedicated microprocessor or on dedicated hardware designed
              specifically to perform the needed function. During the design process, the
              designer must decide which functions are to be implemented in software and
              which are to be implemented in hardware. In addition, embedded systems also
              must be designed to meet constraints not only in terms of performance, but also
              in terms of cost, weight, power, area, and many other factors. As might be
              imagined, designing an embedded system incorporating all of the above aspects
              is quite challenging. Numerous design alternatives must be considered in the
              design process. 

A number of successful tools and techniques for
              constructing and analyzing performance models of hardware/software components
              for embedded systems have been developed. Unfortunately, the use of performance
              modeling to analyze design alternatives for hardware/software systems has not
              been part of the standard undergraduate curriculum for computer engineering,
              where embedded systems designers are trained. This project addresses this
              problem by developing the materials necessary to teach the techniques and
              benefits of performance modeling for the exploration of design alternatives in
              a senior undergraduate course in advanced digital design. The result is that
              undergraduate computer engineering graduates are much better prepared to take
              on the challenge of designing efficient, effective solutions for the embedded
              systems applications of the future. 



