Title       : XYZ-On-A-Chip: Integration of Dissimilar Materials by Bonding and Thin-Film
               Transfer: Application to Integrated Optical Microfluidic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0088145

Award Number: 0088145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $818765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Sands   (Principal Investigator current)
              Luke P. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan W. Cheung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1468,1480,1602,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for research aimed at enhancing the functionality of
              integrated bioanalytical microsystems through the intimate assembly of
              disparate classes of materials, each chosen to provide a specific function. 
              Each materials subassembly will be prepared on a separate substrate by
              thin-film deposition processes under optimal conditions for that particular
              material.  Thin-film subassemblies, including gallium nitride heterostructures
              for blue and ultraviolet light emission, piezoelectric multilayers for
              mechanical actuation, and polymers for optical components and bio-compatible
              coatings, will then be combined by bonding and layer-transfer to micromachined
              glass, polymer and silicon substrates.  Film transfer methods utilizing
              spatially selective modification of materials by pulsed laser and ion
              irradiation will be employed and modeled with the goal of minimizing thermal
              and mechanical degradation of the least robust of the materials to be
              integrated (typically polymers).  The materials integration and
              microtabrication methods developed during the course of this project will be
              targeted toward the demonstration of fully integrated optical microfluidic
              bioanalyticai devices based on fluorescence detection. These devices combine
              the fluorescence excitation source, the aperture actuator mechanism, the
              microfluidic channel, the optical filter, and the fluorescence detector, all
              within a volume of approximately a cubic mill (meter).

If successful, this
              project will develop the materials integration processes necessary to fabricate
              complex, low-cost and portable bioassay microsystems utilizing multicolor
              arrays of fluorescence detection devices integrated directly with microchannel
              substrates.  The direct integration of the optical excitation and detection
              system eliminates the need for bulky lasers, optical filters, and
              photodetectors.  Furthermore, the potential for integrating dense linear arrays
              of these devices along microchannels could enable rapid, single-molecule
              analysis for applications in genetics and pathogen detection.

