Title       : Inquiry -based Learning through Team Projects in a Cell Biology Lab Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0088185

Award Number: 0088185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88124              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison Morrison-Shetlar aims@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine D. Thaler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) Through this project, we are implementing a new
              undergraduate laboratory course in Molecular Cell Biology (MCB). The MCB Lab is
              an upper division elective providing an intensive, inquiry-based lab. The
              inquiry-based format enables students to develop an understanding of the
              research process as a means to investigate cell structure and function. The MCB
              Lab is available to students in the Biology, Molecular Biology and
              Microbiology, and Chemistry Departments at the University of Central Florida in
              Orlando. The lab course integrates technology into the classroom through the
              use of video microscopy and modern computer imaging systems as well as the use
              of modern biochemical and molecular techniques and instrumentation. The MCB Lab
              adapts the use of green fluorescent protein (GFP) constructs to the
              undergraduate laboratory setting. The course adapts elements of the NSF project
              DUE#9952672, "Developing research-based laboratories in cell biology using
              green fluorescent protein as a unifying theme" and of the research literature
              using GFP fusion protein markers. During the semester course, students
              investigate the molecular basis of eukaryotic cell compartmentalization and
              cytoskeletal dynamics using various GFP fusion proteins as specific markers.
              This enables students to observe cellular behaviors in vivo using fluorescence
              video microscopy. GFP fusion proteins can also be detected biochemically and
              this feature enables students to integrate their view of eukaryotic cell
              structure and function by correlating microscopic localization with biochemical
              behavior of the GFP fusion proteins. The outcome of this work is a significant
              improvement in student learning through inquiry based activities and increased
              student enthusiasm and thus retention in the life sciences. This project
              addresses a local need that reflects a national concern: preparing
              undergraduates in the SMET areas for careers in the sciences, including
              professional schools, graduate programs, or research positions in academic or
              industrial settings. The MCB Lab addresses a limitation in the current
              curriculum by providing a modern inquiry based lab experience to complement
              lecture curriculum, enriching the undergraduate laboratory curriculum,
              providing a substantive undergraduate research experience, and preparing
              students for continued research in faculty research
              programs.













