Title       : General Education Environmental Science: An Interdisciplinary Laboratory Program
               for the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0088723

Award Number: 0088723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74985              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Pratte jpratte@kennesaw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail B. Schiffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marina Koether  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Laposata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kennesaw State University
	      1000 Chastain Road
	      Kennesaw, GA  301445591    404/429-2700

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) We are developing three technology-enhanced,
              textbook-independent, multi-week laboratory exercises on environmental topics
              that fit the goals and needs of a general education audience in
              Interdisciplinary Science. The laboratory exercises are grouped into modules
              that examine one environmental topic for 4-6 consecutive weeks, providing
              in-depth examinations of each topic. Each module synthesizes traditional wet
              lab exercises with computer simulations of environmental topics, online
              quizzing/communication, and computerized data laboratory
              instrumentation.

These exercises focus on environmental issues of concern to
              students and utilize real data as collected by the students themselves (e.g.,
              water quality studies), or gathered from internet-based databases (e.g., levels
              of air pollutants). This approach avoids the inherent predictability of most
              traditional laboratory exercises, which simply seek to demonstrate basic
              scientific principles through time- tested (i.e., predictable) exercises. This
              combination of original data and local issues makes the laboratory experience
              complement the course content and greatly improves student interest in the
              laboratory component of the course. Further, by emphasizing the "personalized"
              nature of these exercises (analysis of personal impacts, original data, voicing
              personal opinions on controversial issues in case studies), the laboratory
              experience is uniquely tailored to each individual student.

The modules
              contain abundant multimedia content that engages student attention with digital
              video clips in laboratory introductions, takes students on virtual field trips
              to local sites, enables students to quickly calculate and analyze their
              personal contributions to regional environmental impacts, and presents
              compelling case studies with digitized interviews. Further, igitized video
              clips demonstrating proper laboratory techniques are invaluable in
              open-scheduled laboratories, where students complete laboratory exercises at a
              time of their choosing and do not have the benefit of in-class demonstrations
              by laboratory instructors.




