Title       : A Shared Optics and Laser Facility in the College of Science and Mathematics-
               The Optical Metrology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0088042

Award Number: 0088042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59415              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Sharpe Jsharpe@calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Derek Gragson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
We are developing an undergraduate optics facility to
              serve as a center for optics instruction and promote an enhanced understanding
              of optics across several areas in the college of science and math at Cal Poly.
              The facility is being used in the teaching of upper division physics and
              chemistry courses and increasingly for student and faculty research projects.
              The theme of the laboratory is optical metrology. This ranges through
              interferometric measurement of solid body deformation, optical characterization
              of surfaces and laser spectroscopy and determination of atomic linewidths. Not
              only does this tie in with the Polytechnic nature of our university, but by
              thematically developing the facility we also demonstrate the unity and
              commonalties of optical methods. For example, the resolution of optical systems
              and the determination of object deformation by speckle interferometry are both
              essentially diffraction limited phenomena. For the laboratory we will adopt,
              modify, and develop new experiments. Experiments that will be adopted include
              plane wave interference [Catunda et. al. Am. J. Phys. 66, 548 (1998)] and
              photon counting [Kocyk et. al. Am J. Phys. 64, 240 (1996)] in physics and
              radiative properties of ruby [Shoemaker et. al. "Experiments in Physics
              Chemistry" 6th Ed., McGraw-Hill (1996)] in chemistry. Other experiments will be
              adapted and modified to suit our student body. For example, in chemistry,
              beginning with a known fluorescence quenching experiment of the uranyl ion by
              the chloride ion [Halpern "Experimental Physical Chemistry" 2nd Ed. Prentice
              Hall (1997)] this experiment will be expanded to include micellar systems
              [Almgren et. al. Langmuir 12, 3855 (1996)] which is of relevance to our
              biochemistry majors. Some well known experiments will be adapted and made more
              quantitative by the use of modern electronic cameras and computers. Thus, the
              Abbe-Porter experiment on spatial filtering [Hecht "Optics" 3rd Ed. Addison
              Wesley (1997)] will be modified so that students can acquire and measure the
              spatially filtered images. This optics laboratory will also permit us to
              develop new experiments for the physics and chemistry majors to make use of
              recent material and technical advances. For example, an experiment to study the
              modulation transfer function of a liquid crystal light valve will be developed
              which will allow students to become familiar with this important topic within
              the confines of a three-hour laboratory. Other experiments that will be
              developed within this facility include (in chemistry) vibrational modes of
              molecules which will be measured by Raman scattering and Fourier transform
              infrared spectroscopy and compared to computational models and (in physics)
              measurement of atomic hyperfine structure [Rao et. al. Am. J. Phys. 66, 702
              (1998)] and atom trapping. Because of the rapid pace of change in optical
              science and technology and the growing application of optical techniques across
              the physical and chemical sciences it is difficult to establish and maintain an
              up-to-date facility containing the instruments of modern optics. However, much
              of this instrumentation is now used in the workplace or graduate school and it
              is necessary to provide training in optics to a large number of students from
              different disciplines. With this facility we will be able to give in-depth
              training to the students in 'optics' courses (e.g. laser applications), provide
              experiments for courses with large optics components (e.g. surface science) and
              give exposure to students in other areas. By centralizing the equipment and
              flexibly scheduling use of the laboratory we will be able to maximize its
              impact on the largest number of students and facilitate the interaction of
              faculty from different disciplines. We estimate that about 200 students/year
              will directly benefit from this facility. Also, because engineering students
              frequently take upper-division physics and chemistry classes, the facility will
              have an effect well beyond the College of Science and Mathematics.


