Title       : Undergraduate VLSI Curriculum and Laboratory Emphasizing Mixed-Signal Circuit
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2000  
File        : a0088489

Award Number: 0088489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93366              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Doering edward.doering@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tina Hudson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)

During the last decade, the semiconductor
              industry has significantly increased its demand
for engineering talent, yet
              the supply of recent graduates with relevant experience has declined,
              especially in the areas of analog and mixed-signal integrated circuit design.
              This project addresses the problem by measurably increasing the number of
              undergraduates with direct experience in integrated circuit design,
              specifically in the areas of (i) digital, analog and mixed-signal circuit
              design, (ii) layout and fabrication techniques, and (iii) design for test. Key
              topics from graduate-level VLSI curricula are being adapted to form a new
              curriculum targeted towards undergraduates. Course notes and laboratory manuals
              from VLSI courses offered by Iowa State University and the University of
              Tennessee at Knoxville serve as the primary source material.
The two-course
              elective sequence focuses on digital and mixed-signal design at the circuit and
              layout levels. Laboratory experiences reinforce the course material, and
              encourage students to use commercial-grade CAD tools such as Cadence to
              implement and simulate designs, and to gain experience with mixed-signal test
              instruments including mixed-signal oscilloscopes and arbitrary waveform
              generators. VLSI chips designed by students are fabricated by the MOSIS service
              and tested in the laboratory. It is anticipated that 30% of each graduating
              class of Rose-Hulman electrical and computer engineering students will
              participate in the program. Course notes, lab manuals, and example design
              projects resulting from the curriculum development work will be disseminated
              via an Internet web server.
