Title       : Integration of NMR Spectroscopy into the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2000  
File        : a0088582

Award Number: 0088582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149501             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. D. Poulter poulter@chemistry.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Mayne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick G. West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has attained a
              preeminent position as a tool for use in chemistry and related fields, such as
              biochemistry, molecular biology, pharmaceutics, and medicinal chemistry. The
              closely related discipline of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) extends the
              reach of this technology into such fields as clinical medicine and material
              science. Thus, it is important that undergraduate students entering any of
              these fields be given a clear understanding of the principles basic to NMR. It
              is doubly important that students who go on to teach physical science at the
              secondary or post-secondary level should have a firm grounding in this
              technology. However, meeting this need for a class of several hundred sophomore
              organic chemistry students is a daunting task, Nevertheless, our Chemistry
              Department is supporting an initiative to expose all students taking chemistry
              to sophisticated equipment of the types they are likely to encounter in their
              future careers. An NMR spectrometer consisting of an existing 9.4 Tesla magnet,
              a new 400 MHz console, sample handling robot, pulsed-field-gradient system,
              pulsed-field-gradient probe, and shim system is serving as the basis for this
              initiative. The host workstation of this spectrometer is connected to the LAN
              via ethernet. Given this level of automation, a throughput of hundreds of
              samples per week is entirely realistic. The step that is not being rushed is
              the interaction of the student with the data. Each student spends as much time
              as desired processing, examining, and incorporating the data into laboratory
              reports. Appropriate NMR experiments are being modified from those available in
              the literature and are being integrated into the large sophomore organic
              chemistry course, further extending the model at Florida State University for
              using an NMR in large classes. In addition, the NMR is being used in the
              qualitative organic chemistry, advanced analytical chemistry, advanced physical
              chemistry, and biochemistry courses, and by students involved in undergraduate
              research. 

