Title       : Observational Laboratory Exercises for Introductory and Advanced Astronomy
               Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0088157

Award Number: 0088157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Niederriter CHUCK@GAC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy (11) The beginning of the new millennium is an exciting time to be
              teaching and learning Astronomy. Technological advances are allowing us to
              observe and understand more of our universe than dreamed possible even a few
              years ago. This project uses the new technology in observational astronomy,
              combined with simulations, to enhance the laboratory experience of Gustavus
              Adolphus College students. By changing the focus of the laboratory and
              observational components of our two astronomy courses, the project provides
              students with a better appreciation of the universe and of observational
              techniques, and better prepares advanced students for graduate work in physics
              and astrophysics. The observational component takes advantage of a combination
              of 10" Meade LX- 200 computer-controlled telescopes and Santa Barbara
              Instrument Group ST7E CCD cameras to provide an introduction to the visible
              universe through both eyepiece and electronic images. Introductory and advanced
              students, as well as the many visitors to the Olin Observatory, can explore the
              solar system, stars, nebulae, and galaxies. With the addition of SBIG
              spectrometers, filter wheels, and an adaptive optics attachment, the students
              can make rigorous, quantitative measurements. These measurements, combined with
              computer simulations, give them a more complete understanding of astronomical
              research. Approximately 80 students in the general education astronomy course
              make use of the combination of observation and simulation in the introductory
              astronomy course each year. About 20 additional students a year benefit when
              this combination is used at the advanced level in astrophysics in open- ended
              laboratories and in course-related and student/faculty research projects. Other
              beneficiaries include grade-school and high-school groups who visit the
              observatory for programs, as well as the general public who attend for open
              viewing.
