Title       : Creation of Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0088319

Award Number: 0088319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54620              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Chemero a_chemero@acad.fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bennett Helm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      Office of the Provost
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) Recently much of the interesting research in artificial
              intelligence has involved mobile robotics and artificial life. Whether the
              resulting "creatures" are real (as with mobile robots) or virtual (as with
              artificial life), it is becoming increasingly clear that apparently intelligent
              behavior emerges most naturally out of the interactions between a creature and
              a complex environment. Consequently, research in these areas of artificial
              intelligence draws on electrical and mechanical engineering, computer science,
              and psychology, as well as biology and philosophy. Both mobile robotics and
              artificial life have proven to be highly effective at engaging students in
              hands-on, collaborative learning about a topic that is inherently
              interdisciplinary. The use of mobile robots in classrooms includes the
              Autonomous LEGO Robotics Course at Case Western Reserve University (See
              eecs.cwru.edu/courses/lego375), an Artificial Intelligence Course at Bryn Mawr
              (see mainline.brynmawr.edu/courses/cs372/fall98), a Robotics Course at
              Swarthmore College (See palantir.swarthmore.edu/~Maxwell/classes/e28), and many
              others. Similarly, artificial life and genetic algorithms have been successful
              in undergraduate courses recently. Examples are Emergence, Evolution, and Life
              at Reed College (see reed.edu/~mab/courses/mals555), Artificial Life Course at
              Cal Tech (see krl.caltech.edu/~charles/cns175), and Topics in Genetic
              Algorithms Course at the University of New Mexico (see
              cs.unm.edu/~forrest/ga-class/syllabus.html). These topics have also been used
              successfully in classes across the Scientific and Philosophical Studies of Mind
              (SPM) curriculum at Franklin & Marshall College (F&M). This project is
              expanding the current artificial intelligence offerings by implementing, over a
              three-year period, an artificial intelligence laboratory as a crucial component
              of the SPM curriculum. The new lab is equipped with 5 iMac computers for
              running various artificial life and mobile robotics experiments; HandyBoard
              robot controllers, sensors, and Lego pieces for building 5 additional mobile
              robots; and software (StarLOGO, CodeWarrior, Brainwave, and InteractiveC) to
              compile and upload programs to the robot controllers as well as to run
              artificial life simulations. During the first year of the grant, the PIs are
              building the necessary sensors and interface boards to create 5 new robot kits
              as well as to upgrade 5 existing robot kits, and adapt artificial life
              resources developed elsewhere to the kind of non-UNIX computing environment
              available at F&M. During the second year, they will integrate mobile robotics
              with artificial life (in particular genetic algorithms) so as to enable the
              robots to learn how to respond appropriately to their environments. During the
              third year, they will refine these implementation of robot learning so as to
              devise demonstrations and experiments for upper-level artificial intelligence
              courses in the SPM curriculum. Moreover, during the second and third years, the
              PIs will reassess the lab in light of student feedback and retool it where
              necessary. The result is that activities in the lab will allow students to
              develop conceptual understanding of self-organization, emergence, evolution,
              embodiment and the neural basis of intelligence, and practical abilities in
              engineering, robotics and computer programming. Indeed, given the limited
              resources of a liberal arts college like F&M, creating opportunities for this
              kind of hands-on, engineering experience is not possible without being linked
              in this way to fundamental components of a liberal arts education like
              philosophy, psychology and biology. Moreover, the lab will foster increased
              interdisciplinary connections among the Psychology, Philosophy, Computer
              Science, and Physics Departments, both affecting faculty development and
              increasing substantially the inter-disciplinary content of relevant courses.
