Title       : Introduction of Digital Cameras in Biology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0088268

Award Number: 0088268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry N. Reinking larry.reinking@millersville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Zegers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      PO Box 1002
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3820

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
A long-standing challenge for biology students has
              been dealing with complex visual information. In research labs and a few
              advanced courses, traditional film photography has been the method of choice to
              deal with these visual images. The complexity and expense of this technique,
              however, has precluded its use in most biology course at the college and
              pre-college levels.

Recent, profound changes in CCD technology and
              improvements in computer memory storage promise to change this situation.
              Consumer digital cameras are now widely available and seem to be following the
              same evolutionary trend seen for computer scanners: increased quality
              accompanied by an enormous decline in price. The advent of the USB
              microcomputer bus, wide availability of e-mail and low-priced CD-RW drives has
              greatly improved the ability to transfer and store digital images. 

We
              predict that these technological trends will allow the routine use of digital
              cameras in biology laboratories. These devices may become as commonplace as
              student microscopes. In anticipation of this trend this project is:
1)
              investigating adapting consumer level digital cameras for use in a wide range
              of student lab activities including microscopy, anatomy, taxonomy, motion
              analysis and animal behavior, 
2) providing student laboratory groups in
              undergraduate zoology courses with digital cameras at every lab meeting, 
3)
              providing these students with the means for storing pictorial information in
              disk format or via their e-mail accounts, 
4) observing student behavior and
              their use of these cameras and, 
5) measuring changes in student attitudes and
              learning as a result of using these devices.
 
This project provides a model
              by which an existing, evolving technology can become a common part of biology
              courses at the pre-college and introductory college levels.


