Title       : Web-Based Coaching for Team Skill Development in Engineering Design Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0088580

Award Number: 0088580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74260              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila O'Connor sheila.oconnor@wichita.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don E. Malzahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)

TeamCoach is a web-based interactive coaching system
              designed specifically for engineering student design teams. TeamCoach consists
              of two components: (1) a CD-ROM designed to provide simulated scenarios of
              issues relevant to the student team's current situation allowing the student to
              model, practice and receive feedback and (2) a 'smart' internet program
              designed to record information about individual team preferences and team
              compositions in order to generate training material specific to each individual
              on a specific team at a specific stage of development. This research advances
              current training methodologies by allowing students to practice and receive
              feedback in private 'role-play' scenarios that are customized to the specific
              individual and team composition. This methodology also provides documented team
              skill acquisition for assessment purposes. TeamCoach provides diagnostic
              assessment and feedback to the teams on an ongoing basis. Summative evaluation
              questions addressed in this study are: (1) Is there a difference (pre/post) in
              the ways that students understand and value teamwork? (2) What do students
              perceive as the critical issues facing their team? (3) How effective are the
              teams in analyzing their current functioning and making appropriate
              corrections? (4) Do students demonstrate a measurable change in the identified
              skill set? 

The results from this research project are being disseminated
              through the ASEE Annual Conference, journal articles and a user's group
              web-site where results, trial training modules, ideas for potential training
              modules and additional research questions are posted.

