Title       : Developing a Technology Enhanced Guided Inquiry Workbook for General Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0088709

Award Number: 0088709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480015             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Greenbowe tgreenbo@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Hand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Andre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is creating new active-learning curricular materials, labeled
              active learning
packets (ALPs), for the topics of stoichiometry, acids and
              bases, thermochemistry, kinetics, gas-phase equilibria, acid-base equilibria,
              and electrochemistry. The motivation for the creation of the ALPs is research
              on student learning that suggests instruction utilizing only lecture,
              recitation, and laboratory experiments produces only small increases in the
              understanding of fundamental concepts in chemistry. The ALPs are incorporating
              techniques, including McDermott's guided inquiry framework, visualization and
              inquiry simulations, and writing-to-learn strategies that research has shown
              will improve conceptual learning. The active learning materials are being
              designed to both elicit common student difficulties regarding the topics under
              study and to lead students to confront these difficulties head-on with a
              tightly focused and strategically sequenced series of exploratory activities,
              questions, and exercises. For each topic, three or four discrepant events,
              phenomena that lead to an unexpected outcome and often produce conceptual
              conflict, are included. A discrepant event sufficiently surprising or contrary
              to an expected or predicted outcome captures the attention of the student and
              encourages rethinking. An integral feature of the proposed learning activity
              exercises is the requirement that students explain their reasoning process with
              written statements. In the course of working through these inquiry activities,
              students are being guided to resolve their difficulties and confusion and to
              attain a firm grasp of the targeted concepts. The activities consist of a
              tightly linked set of (1) brief textual expositions in highly "interactive"
              format, (2) concept-oriented questions for use with classroom communication
              systems in large classes, (3) a structured series of questions that lead
              students to elicit and then resolve conceptual difficulties, and (4)
              exploratory visualization and inquiry simulations and hands-on activities and
              writing-to-learn exercises to strengthen understanding. The activities are
              emphasizing qualitative understanding, reasoning, and mastery of fundamental
              concepts. They are encouraging students to develop multiple representations of
              concepts in pictorial, diagrammatic, and graphical formats and to relate these
              representations to symbolic and macroscopic representations. The effectiveness
              of the ALPs is being rigorously assessed by continual in-class use and
              redesign, in conjunction with evaluation of student learning gains.


