Title       : Digital Image Technology in Undergraduate Petrology Laboratories: A "Proof of
               Concept" Project in Siliciclastic Petrography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0088763

Award Number: 0088763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74427              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kitty L. Milliken kittym@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Earle F. McBride  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) 
The preeminence of visual content makes petrography an ideal
              subject for multimedia instructional modules. We are exploring the utility of
              digital image technology for teaching petrology, beginning with the test case
              of siliciclastic petrography at the undergraduate level. A 'virtual petrography
              tutor' is being designed to expose students to images and interpretive content
              comparable in amount to that included in traditional sedimentary petrography
              laboratory exercises. The curriculum materials differ markedly from existing
              image atlases (both paper copy and digital) in terms of the high density of
              interactive interpretive content that accompanies the images; the comprehensive
              level of treatment proposed is also a significant departure from the types of
              petrographic data currently available on the World Wide Web or on CD. Practical
              aspects of tutorial design and construction learned during this project will
              have application in all fields of petrology as well as in other fields which
              utilize data in the form of images (e.g., metallurgy, histology). Undergraduate
              and graduate students are participating in the development of the tutorial,
              allowing them to gain experience in methods of digital imaging and multi-media
              authoring. Initial application and formal assessment of the tutorial will take
              place during two semesters of an undergraduate course in sedimentary rocks
              (involving a projected 120 to 160 students). The development and assessment
              tasks proposed here are envisioned as the first step in a more ambitious
              project to create a full version of this tutorial for distribution and,
              ultimately, a digital library of petrographic images based on the large, highly
              documented, and well-maintained petrology collections at the University of
              Texas at Austin.
