Title       : The Creative Design Workshop: Proof of Concept
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2001   
File        : a0088891

Award Number: 0088891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Madara M. Ogot ogot@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56)

Operating like an engineering company, the
              Creative Design Workshop (CDW) embodies four mini-courses offered in the
              Mechanical Engineering Department. It provides students with a collaborative,
              inquiry-based learning environment of exploratory hands-on reverse engineering
              projects coupled with formal instruction in communication, teamwork, teaching
              methods, and learning styles. Participation in the CDW gives students a good
              'feel' for how mechanical devices work and the rationale behind their design.
              In addition, the formal instruction in teaching and their teaching experience
              within the CDW may increase students' level of interest in seeking a faculty
              career after graduation. Integration of technology is addressed through student
              use of computers and multimedia software as part of their reverse engineering
              projects. Formative evaluations are performed several times during the life of
              the project through focus groups and self-administered surveys. Groups of
              students not involved in the CDW, but with similar academic backgrounds, are
              used as control groups. Comparisons of evaluations between them and those
              students in the CDW provide a measure of the effectiveness of the CDW in
              meeting its stated objectives. A full description of the project and the
              materials used in each project component are available on the CDW website.
              Results from the summative evaluation at the end of the project will be made
              available through conference and journal publication.

