Title       : Adaptation of a Team-based Materials and Process Selection Course for
               Manufacturing Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2001    
File        : a0088208

Award Number: 0088208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45671              (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor S. Harding tharding@kettering.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B. Lee Tuttle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles V. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gwan-Ywan Lai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Materials Science (57) The Manufacturing Engineering program at
              Kettering University is undergoing a revamping of its curriculum to reduce the
              number of required core courses, while still providing students with
              experiential learning in materials processing and manufacturing systems. As a
              part of this restructuring of the curriculum, the program is introducing a new
              course which focuses on the selection of materials and processing routes for
              engineered products. Much of the content and pedagogy for the course is being
              adapted from successful projects at California Polytechnic University San Luis
              Obispo and at Virginia Tech. The course introduces these concepts in the
              framework of developing a manufacturing strategy for producing a real product
              in a team environment. This introduces students to concepts such as material
              selection, process selection, life- cycle engineering, economic decision
              making, risk and product liability assessment, engineering communication,
              project planning and engineering ethics. To implement this change, the faculty
              are incorporating the use of a graphical material property and processing
              selection database. The new course is being introduced over a two-year period
              to provide time for evaluation, assessment and re-design. Outside evaluators
              familiar with both the technical aspects and with pedagogical methods will
              assist in developing and implementing assessment tools to evaluate the specific
              outcomes of the course. By adapting and implementing approaches used at other
              institutions, this new course will serve as a catalyst for change in courses
              throughout the university.
