Title       : WOWBugs (Melittobia) Educational Materials Development for Undergraduaate
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a0088021

Award Number: 0088021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $476284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Matthews   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Four comprehensive, guided inquiry, investigative
              laboratory modules are being developed to address fundamental concepts in
              undergraduate biology instruction utilizing WOWBugs, Melittobia digitata, a
              harmless parasitic wasp. WOWBugs exhibit unique characteristics including
              elaborate courtship rituals, reproducible competitive behaviors, short
              generation times, easily measured heritable traits, and readily distinguishable
              morphological forms that are dependant upon on developmental conditions. These
              features make WOWBugs an effective organism for use in illustrating concepts
              fundamental to animal behavior, ecology, genetics, and developmental biology.
              Inquiry-based laboratory modules as well as instructional materials are being
              developed in each of these concept areas. The instructional materials under
              development include a book, a CD, a broadcast-quality videotape with
              accompanying teacher's guide, and a dedicated WOWBug newsletter and web support
              site. All materials are pilot tested at four diverse institutions including the
              University of Georgia, Hollins College, Morehouse College, and at local
              community colleges. The instructional materials will be disseminated at
              national meetings, in dedicated workshops, and through commercial distributors.
              In support of the curriculum development work, this project has a significant
              research component through which better and simpler growth medium is being
              developed to support classroom propagation of WOWBugs. The curricular materials
              in conjunction with a simple growth and propagation system ensure easy
              implementation into the undergraduate curriculum and provide students an
              opportunity to visualize a number of key biological phenomenon and to
              participate in a variety of innovative, inquiry-based investigations
              traditionally unavailable in the undergraduate laboratory.
