Title       : Atomic Absorption in the Undergraduate Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2000  
File        : a0088015

Award Number: 0088015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle M. Bushey mbushey@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy S. Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Kurtin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Pursell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Geology (42)
Atomic absorption (AA) spectroscopy is typically an
              integral part of undergraduate chemistry education. The processes involved with
              AA are easily understood by students. An AA spectrometer is being used as a
              vehicle to introduce sophisticated analytical ideas and interesting challenges
              into several different chemistry courses. An introductory geosciences course is
              utilizing the instrument in the study of the geochemistry of natural waters.
              Finally, the AA is serving as an interdisciplinary bridge between the
              Departments of Chemistry and Geosciences. Analytical procedures from the
              educational and research literature are being adapted in order to achieve these
              objectives. 

This project simultaneously addresses two main objectives.
              First, chemistry students have exposure to the AA instrumentation in the first
              semester, junior level analytical, and senior level instrumental analysis
              laboratories. Each exposure builds on the previous experience in a way
              otherwise not possible if students were to encounter AA only once. More
              sophistication and subtleties are then layered into the advanced labs.
              Improvements in instruction occur in a manner consistent with the philosophies
              that 'real samples' should be used when possible, interdisciplinary
              applications and opportunities should be exploited, effective communication of
              results is critical, and students should have input into experimental
              design.

Secondly, this instrumentation is serving as a bridge between the
              Departments of Chemistry and Geosciences. Including geosciences in the
              implementation of this project realizes several key advantages. The Geosciences
              curriculum is being enhanced through the addition of sophisticated
              instrumentation, typically encountered only in chemistry. For those students
              electing to major in geosciences, it emphasizes the interdisciplinary nature of
              the geosciences early in their career. By creating a link between chemistry and
              geosciences courses, both sets of students must exchange knowledge about their
              respective disciplines in order to better understand the laboratory
              assignments. Geosciences classes are typically more attractive to non-science,
              mathematics, engineering, technology (SMET), and education majors than are
              other SMET classes. Thus, the interdisciplinary link means that the Department
              of Chemistry is able to reach these students in a small but novel way. 


