Title       : XYZ on a Chip: Development and Fabrication of Three-Dimensional Microdevices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0088438

Award Number: 0088438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1486680            (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Fourkas john.fourkas@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott J. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Naughton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The use of silicon-based technology, originally developed for microelectronics
              applica-tions, in the fabrication of microelectromechanical and microfluidic
              structures has ushered
in a new era in which complex tasks can be performed by
              efficient, miniaturized devices.
However, one limitation of the current
              generation of silicon-based technologies is that it is
extraordinarily
              difficult to fabricate devices have a significant number (>4) of
              functional
layers. The number of potential applications of microdevices would
              expand geometrically
if it were possible to fabricate microdevices that were
              not constricted by the present layer-by-
layer fabrication scheme, but instead
              were truly three-dimensional.
We are proposing to develop and utilize a
              completely new set of technologies for non-silicon-based microfabrication of
              true three-dimensional devices. Our scheme takes ad-vantage
of multiphoton
              absorption (MPA) interactions that occur selectively at the tight fo-cus
of a
              laser beam to attain high three-dimensional resolution. The proposed
              technology
begins with a nanoporous matrix that is solidified and etched
              selectively in different spatial
areas, based on MPA, in order to create the
              three-dimensional template for a microdevice.
Localized MPA-driven
              photodeposition and other MPA-driven photoreactions, photo-chemical
processes
              and photophysical processes are then used to create functional
              compo-nents
within the matrix, with submicron feature sizes. Through these
              means, it will be pos-sible
to incorporate a wide variety of functionalities
              in a single, monolithic three-dimensional
device.
Over the proposed
              three-year project period, we will develop MPA-based technologies
to make a
              broad range of functional fluidic, electronic, optical and mechanical
              components.
These components will be combined to fabricate increasingly
              complex three-dimensional
microdevices that will allow for the miniaturization
              of technologically important tasks in
areas such as combinatorial synthesis
              and screening of drug candidates and low-temperature
device physics. By the
              end of the project period we expect to be able to inte-grate
such devices
              directly onto silicon-based microchips.

