Title       : Development of Research-Based Curriculum to Improve Student Learning in Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0088840

Award Number: 0088840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $632203             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillian C. McDermott lcmcd@phys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Shaffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paula R. L. Heron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stamatis Vokos  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9134,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The primary goal of the project is the improvement of learning for
              all students who take undergraduate physics. To help achieve this goal, the
              Physics Education Group will produce a suite of mutually reinforcing
              instructional materials for: (1) introductory physics courses for science and
              engineering majors (calculus-based and algebra-based), (2) lower and upper
              division courses for physics majors, (3) physics courses for future K-12
              teachers, (4) physics courses for non-science majors, and (5) courses for
              students underprepared in science and mathematics who aspire to science-related
              careers (especially those from underrepresented minority groups).

The
              project consists of three interdependent components: (a) development and
              assessment of curriculum, (b) research on the learning and teaching of physics,
              and (c) faculty development. The first component consists of the development of
              two interrelated types of instructional materials: "Tutorials in Undergraduate
              Physics" and "Physics by Inquiry." Both draw upon and expand on previous
              curriculum developed by the group that have been shown to be effective with
              different student populations in a variety of instructional settings. 

The
              project responds to the need for additional tutorials for undergraduate
              instruction in physics and modules for the preparation of K-12 teachers. The
              primary materials in the tutorial part of the project are: versions of
              "Tutorials in Introductory Physics" suitable for the algebra-based,
              calculus-based and honors physics courses; "Tutorials on Problem-solving in
              Introductory Physics;" and "Tutorials beyond Introductory Physics." The primary
              materials in the part of the project that pertains to the preparation of K-12
              teachers are based on topics in the National Science Education Standards that
              are not included in the published version of "Physics by Inquiry." The new
              modules include topics in classical physics and physical science, revisions of
              existing modules, and new modules on topics in modern physics. Secondary
              instructional materials are being developed concurrently that increase the
              adaptability of the primary materials to different student populations and
              instructional settings.

Ongoing assessment of student learning will
              characterize every stage of the curriculum development process. Results from
              research will not only inform the development of curriculum in this project but
              will also contribute to a research base that serves as a national and
              international resource. Commercial publication will ensure that the curriculum
              produced will be nationally distributed. Systematic faculty development will
              enhance dissemination of the materials and provide assistance to instructors in
              adopting the materials.


