Title       : Chemical and Biological Sensors based on Porous Silicon Photonic Micro-Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0088060

Award Number: 0088060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. Fainman fainman@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Sailor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0088060
Fainman

There is a growing demand for the miniaturization of
              chemical and biological sensors for environmental, medical and security
              applications. Of great interest for such applications are low-power, compact,
              and cost effective micro-systems that combine non-electrical sensing
              capabilities and electronic processing. The goal of the proposed work is to
              conduct basic research towards the development of high sensitivity chemical
              and/or biological sensors integrated on a monolithic Si substrate. This
              multi-disciplinary study will focus on fundamental understanding of nano-scale
              chemical, biological and near-field optical interactions, leading to the
              development of design and implementation methodologies for porous silicon
              (Psi)-based sensor micro-systems. The proposed micro-systems will use optical
              transducers based on microfabricated optical sources combined with optimized
              nanostructured resonant optical filtering devices and photodetectors, allowing
              label-free detection of analytes with significantly higher sensitivity than
              existing techniques (e.g. surface plasmon resonance or optical interferometry).
              This technique will be applicable to a variety of sensing problems in
              environmental monitoring, medical diagnostics, high-throughput screening, and
              pharmacogenomics applications. The PIs propose to study two complementary
              aspects of this emerging technology: (a) investigation of the correlation
              between the modification of the optical properties of PSi and the concentration
              of different species introduced in the pores, including nerve agents, solvents,
              or biological molecules; and (b) design, modeling, fabrication and testing of
              monolithically integrated near-field meso-optic structures built using micro-
              and nano-fabrication techniques.  

The proposed research will not only have
              a significant impact on the development of on-chip monolitically integrated
              micro-sensor systems, but also result in the development of basic science and
              technology of near-field linear and nonlinear optical phenomena in nano-scale
              and meso-scale structures. The proposed studies will also advance basic science
              and engineering in such multidisciplinary areas as vector field optical wave
              interactions in near-field nonlinear dielectric nanostructures, quantum and
              nonlinear optical processes in nanostructured composite materials, and
              fabrication of such devices using deposition, photochemistry, and ion
              implantation techniques. The proposed project will also play a unique role in
              the education and development of human resources in science and engineering at
              the graduate and undergraduate levels. 

