Title       : Development of Alaska Earth Systems Field School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0088662

Award Number: 0088662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69011              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Colt afsgc@uaa.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank A. von Hippel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Anchorage
	      3211 Providence Drive
	      Anchorage, AK  995084614    907/786-1410

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40) 

This project is responding to the needs of
              undergraduates and K-12 teachers by introducing a more hands-on, inquiry-based,
              field-oriented, interdisciplinary science courses into an Earth Systems Field
              School. This 6-week summer course in the Subarctic and Arctic environments of
              Alaska uses three two-week modules focusing on coastal, boreal, and tundra
              ecosystems in sites such as Prince William Sound, the Chugach Mountains, and
              Denali National Park. The Field School is generating new excitement about
              interdisciplinary, hands-on science and is promoting ongoing faculty teamwork
              and collaboration across science disciplines and departments. The lessons
              learned from the adaptation project are being disseminated over the internet
              and through the Project Kaleidoscope network. 

Adapting the Columbia Earth
              Systems Field School provides an exemplary, proven model of interdisciplinary,
              inquiry-based learning. This model teaches students to understand landscapes in
              an integrated fashion, by using the disciplines of ecology and geology together
              and witnessing their dependence on each other. Students build their own
              conceptual and numerical models of ecosystem processes by collecting field data
              and using it to test models. They are learning techniques for mapping,
              identification, description, and analysis, all within the context of
              understanding current environmental problems. 

The conceptual framework of
              the Earth Systems Field School is being piloted the summer of 2001. The full
              six-week program is being offered in summer 2002. The program builds on
              existing course offerings, research programs, and community partnerships. In
              addition to transporting the curriculum from desert to taiga, the project is
              vigorously adapting the curriculum to better serve K-12 teacher candidates (and
              non-science majors generally) and equipping them with transferable science
              literacy and science enthusiasm. The program is also being restructured to
              increase its accessibility to older students who make up a large proportion of
              the University of Alaska's student body and to Alaska Natives who are
              underrepresented in the preK-12 and liberal arts student populations. 


