Title       : Adding Molecular Biology to the Biochemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2000  
File        : a0088423

Award Number: 0088423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry S. Selinsky selinsky@chem.vill.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Rucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
Experiments in molecular biology are added to the students'
              biochemistry laboratory experience to reflect state-of-the-art techniques and
              procedures. In addition to protein isolation and characterization, enzyme
              kinetics, and carbohydrate or lipid isolation and characterization, emphasis is
              placed on such techniques of modern molecular biology as DNA isolation, gene
              isolation and cloning, the polymerase chain reaction, cell transfection and
              gene expression. The following molecular biology experiments are among those
              being adapted from standard literature and implemented in the Biochemistry
              laboratory. Bacteria are transformed with a plasmid including the gene for
              green fluorescent protein (GFP). The GFP is isolated using procedures from
              standard literature and characterized by electrophoresis and fluorescence
              spectroscopy. The identity of GFP is confirmed using an immunoassay with
              anti-GFP polyclonal antibodies. The plasmid with the GFP gene is isolated from
              the bacterial culture and characterized by restriction analysis. Some of the
              isolated plasmid is reserved to transform cells at the beginning of the
              semester that follows. An ultracentrifuge is used for DNA and plasmid
              isolation. A plate reader is used to read the results of the immunoassay and
              for enzyme kinetics experiments. Multipipettors are used to facilitate the
              completion of the plate assays.
