Title       : Fully Nonlinear Free Boundary Problems, Stochastic Symmetrization, and
               Asymptotic Symmetry of Parabolic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0088973

Award Number: 0088973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61530              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pei-Yong Wang pywang@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

    The principal investigator proposes to study three problems
              in
the area of partial differential equations, namely the nonlinear
two-phase
              elliptic free boundary problem, symmetrization for diffusion
equations with
              bounded measurable coefficients and symmetric behavior
of solutions of
              nonlinear parabolic equations. These problems defy 
the standard treatments
              which succeed in solving linear problems or
equations in divergence form
              because of their nonlinear or non-divergent
structural nature. Therefore,
              solution of these problems will not
only contributes knowledge about these
              partial differential equations,
but also inspires new ideas which will most
              probably prove useful 
in studying other nonlinear partial differential
              equations or
equations of other types. The suggested methods in this proposal
              
either successfully solved part of the problems or are motivated by 
the
              ideas that are most likely to lead to the solution of these problems.

   
              The study of the theory of nonlinear elliptic and parabolic
              partial
differential equations and diffusion processes becomes
              increasingly
important in the area of partial differential equations. The
              problems
studied by the principal investigator in this project motivate
              ideas
that lead to the creation of some methods that might succeed in
              
treating other partial differential equation problems as well. Solving
these
              problems gives affirmative answer to the question of the well-
posedness of
              these mathematical models which originate in physics and
other disciplines. In
              addition, the theoretical treatment of these
problems will shed light on the
              numerical solution of these and related
problems. Taking into account the
              origins of these problems, one is
liable to believe applications of the theory
              about these problems can
be sought in disciplines other than mathematics.

 
                


