Title       : Communications, Signal Processing and VLSI: Education Under a Common Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2000   
File        : a0088183

Award Number: 0088183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74939              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravi P. Ramachandran ravi@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda M. Head  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven H. Chin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Schmalzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shreekanth A. Mandayam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55) 
The Department of Electrical and Computer
              Engineering at Rowan University is configuring a novel method of teaching the
              junior level Communications (COMM), Digital Signal Processing (DSP) and Very
              Large Scale Integration (VLSI) courses under a common framework. These three
              courses are taken concurrently during the spring semester of the junior year.
              The main developed prototype is a laboratory manual. A long term goal is to use
              this prototype to develop a laboratory oriented textbook.
There has been a
              historical division and separation of the fields of Communications, DSP and
              VLSI in electrical engineering education. This separation has crept up to the
              very high professional circles in both industry and university. Engineers
              specialized in one area find it hard to collaborate with their colleagues, and
              separate cliques within the department start to form. This type of segregation
              is no longer acceptable as we must provide an integrative experience at the
              undergraduate level. This integrative experience enables the students to better
              comprehend the conceptual relationships of COMM, DSP and VLSI. This is highly
              beneficial for undergraduate students that enter industry or go on to graduate
              school.
Twelve interdisciplinary experiments that cut across individual course
              boundaries
and that integrate hands-on experience and software simulation are
              being developed. The first four experiments deal with the very basic concepts.
              The next four experiments expose the students to multimedia standards approved
              by industry. The last four experiments deal with various applications that link
              COMM, DSP and VLSI. Software is integrated with the experiments through MATLAB
              and SIMULINK, C/C++ and Mentor Graphics.
Our new laboratory is assessed by
              comparison with conventional experiments that merely demonstrate the theory
              taught in the classroom. The regional industrial partners help in assessing our
              project. The dissemination plan includes journal and conference papers, the
              creation of a new laboratory manual, use of the World Wide Web and the
              distribution of material in the form of CD-ROMs and videotapes.



