Title       : Adaptation of a Unit Operation Laboratory and Simulation Center for
               Environmental Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a0088282

Award Number: 0088282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99704              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Hand dwhand@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Robert R. Baillod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Wojick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Civil (54) 

Representatives from the environmental engineering
              profession frequently comment that university graduates entering the workforce
              understand process theory but lack the hands-on experience necessary for a
              smooth transition into the workplace. The hand-on experience they refer to is a
              basic working knowledge of the processes used in industry for pollution
              treatment. At several universities in the US, undergraduate students in
              Chemical Engineering are given the opportunity to develop a working knowledge
              of their industry in classes taught at pilot plant facilities operated by the
              university. The Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at Michigan
              Technological University is adapting this hands-on approach to Environmental
              Engineering education through the implementation of a laboratory with pilot
              scale environmental treatment systems. The project will be informed by Michigan
              Tech's own chemical engineering program as well as other programs throughout
              the country. Undergraduate students taking classes in this Environmental
              Process Simulation Laboratory (EPSC) are benefiting from this experience in
              numerous ways including: implementation of the theoretical tools the students
              learned in previous classes; a better understanding of these theoretical tools;
              a familiarity with how the real-world treatment unit functions; experience with
              industrial process controls; an increased knowledge of industrial safety
              practices; an introduction to pollution prevention strategies; and the
              experience of working in a multidisciplinary team on a common project. The end
              result will be students with advanced skills and an improved understanding of
              the theory and mechanics of treatment processes.
