Title       : Students as Laboratory and Field Physiologists: Start to Finish.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2001  
File        : a0088390

Award Number: 0088390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100228             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham A. Worthy gworthy@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lorrie D. Rea  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) To prepare undergraduate students for research in
              physiology and the sciences in general, we are providing an environment that
              simulates investigative research in a laboratory setting. Students are taking
              responsibility for the design of experiments, undertaking data collection on
              equipment that is similar to that seen in a working physiology laboratory,
              using data analysis software typically used in this area of research,
              and
learning to communicate results of research to the scientific community.
              We are adapting from models introduced with NSF support at Villanova University
              and utilizing ideas on student-initiated experimental design published in the
              physiology education literature. As students are working on these projects in
              small groups of 3 to 4 students, team building and cooperative research skills
              are being developed that are essential to all scientists entering our field
              where there is a very strong emphasis on collaborative multi-investigator and
              multi-disciplinary research. During the first part of this inquiry-based
              laboratory course students are involved in moderately structured laboratory
              exercises that allows them to become familiar with the iWORX system - a
              computer driven data acquisition and analysis station linked with on-line
              simulation and instructional support. In these introductory exercises students
              conduct a selection of 4 laboratory experiments that investigate the effect of
              body mass and temperature on metabolic rate (oxygen consumption) in fishes, the
              effect of fatigue on muscle contraction, the effect of exercise on
              cardio-respiratory physiology and the regulation of fluid balance and body
              composition in humans. During the second part of the course, students design,
              conduct, analyze and report on one group investigation based on further study
              of one of the previous laboratory experimental systems or on a comparative
              model that more closely simulates physiological research in a field setting.
              One possibility is to investigate the relationships between metabolic rate and
              diving patterns of marine turtles using indirect calorimetry (oxygen and CO2
              gas analyzers) and the most current technology available for the remote
              monitoring of diving vertebrates (time depth recorders). Alternately, blood
              chemistry changes during natural fasting of grey seal pups could be studied
              through the measurement of blood metabolites (spectrophotometric assays).
              Students are responsible for all aspects of the development of these
              investigations, from the starting hypothesis to the finishing formal conference
              style presentations of data at the end of the course. The equipment acquired to
              support this course is also increasing our ability to support motivated
              students in more intensive scientific inquiry through senior thesis research
              projects. 

