Title       : Computerizing Physics and Chemistry Laboratories for Life Science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0088496

Award Number: 0088496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292757             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Beverly nbeverly@mercynet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara T. Nash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geetha Surendran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Telitha M. Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mercy College
	      555 Broadway
	      Dobbs Ferry, NY  105221134    914/693-4500

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) Chemistry (12) Biological Sciences (61) Physics (13)
              

Essentially all the students at Mercy College who are taking physics and
              chemistry courses are preparing for medical, health, or bioscience careers. In
              this era of ever-increasing medical and biological sophistication and
              technology, these students not only need a firm foundation of physics and
              chemistry principles but need to be able to apply these principles in the
              scientific reasoning involved in making decisions and judgements about human
              and biological systems. There are no physics or chemistry majors at Mercy so we
              are in a position to devote ourselves to the needs of this particular student
              audience. 

We are incorporating computer technology into the physics and
              chemistry curriculum in a coordinated way in order to better prepare these
              students for their further coursework and their intended careers. The
              modifications in physics are based on adapting aspects of Realtime Physics,
              Workshop Physics, and Tutorials in Introductory Physics to create new
              experiments designed to provide direct relevance for students majoring in the
              life sciences. In chemistry, adaptation of computer-interfaced activities
              developed by the Middle Atlantic Discovery Chemistry Project and of several
              ChemLinks modules along with other existing laboratory experiments provide the
              basis for the new work. Through the use of laptop computers, whose portability
              allows multiple use, we are computerizing the general physics and general
              chemistry laboratory activities utilizing interface and sensor equipment. In
              doing so, we are incorporating human/biological relevance and inquiry-based
              pedagogy. The computers also are being used to computerize laboratory
              activities in the biochemistry course and in the non-science major chemistry
              course. Finally, a Science Learning Center is being established in which the
              computers are used as a networked active learning resource. This center is
              staffed by tutors who offer students support in the use of web-based and CDROM
              active learning materials, under the guidance of the science faculty. 


