Title       : A Green Program in Extraction and Separation Chemistry for Incorporation into
               the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0088314

Award Number: 0088314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67783              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Engelking engelki@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Hardwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
A sequence of laboratory experiments is being developed which
              introduce environmentally responsible techniques of chemical separations and
              extractions into the undergraduate laboratory curriculum. These laboratory
              experiments form an integral component of a green laboratory curriculum in
              chemistry being developed with advice and participation from local government
              agencies. The project adapts experiments from physical chemistry and analytical
              chemistry laboratory texts and from the Journal of Chemical Education, and
              adapts methodology being developed by Lane Regional Air Pollution Authority or
              the EPA. The goals of the new curriculum are (1) to prepare chemistry majors
              for a changing emphasis in the chemical industry in which waste management at
              the source plays an ever more important role in chemical processes and (2) to
              train chemistry students and others in the analysis of environmentally
              important field samples such as air and ground water. The laboratory course
              constitutes an essential component of the new program since it exposes
              chemistry majors to cutting edge issues in extraction and separation using
              state of the art instrumentation in an area not traditionally covered in
              undergraduate chemistry curricula. Students are introduced to green chemistry
              as they make use of (1) instrumentation to provide cutting- edge analytical
              techniques such as supercritical fluid chromatography as well as more
              conventional HPLC capability, (2) facilities for measurements of the physical
              and chemical properties of environmentally friendly solvents as they pass
              through the critical point, and (3) a GC/ MS station for use in environmental
              monitoring and organic analysis. 


