Title       : Science Education for New Civic Engagements and Responsibilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0088753

Award Number: 0088753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999912             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Burns burns@aacu.nw.dc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen K. Oates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assn. of American Colleges
	      1818 R Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20009    202/387-3760

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
The Association of American Colleges and Universities
              (AAC&U) developed the framework for this project, Science Education for New
              Civic Engagements and Responsibilities (SENCER), during 1999-2000 with partial
              support from the NSF. The framework is the product of two workshops and advice
              from hundreds of college faculty and academic leaders. To date, teams from more
              than 250 institutions of higher education have asked to be included in SENCER's
              work. SENCER is helping faculty and administrators achieve three important
              goals: (1) improve science education for non-majors, (2) connect science
              education reform to improved general education, and (3) stimulate civic
              engagement. The SENCER approach is to connect science education with civic
              engagement by teaching science through the study of complex public issues.
              SENCER models are teaching, for example, biology through the study of HIV
              disease or the Human Genome Project; physics through the study of the
              challenges of nuclear disarmament or hypotheses about the origins of the
              universe; chemistry through the study of air pollution, water quality, or
              crime; and mathematics by examining the reliability of statistics, studying
              risk/benefit analysis, or decision-making. The outcome for students is
              connected learning. 

SENCER seeks to promote large-scale reform in
              undergraduate SMET education through intensive faculty professional
              development, a strong focus on local systemic change, and the use of improved
              assessment practices. SENCER faculty are learning to use an assessment
              instrument developed with partial support from several NSF initiatives to
              improve undergraduate education. This instrument is known as Student Assessment
              of Their Learning Gains (SALG) and is freely available for public use at
              WWW.WCER.WISC.edu/NISE/CL1. There are four key pieces of the SENCER project.
              SENCER Institutes are the core activity. These are team-based residential
              institutes for faculty, administrators, and advanced graduate students planning
              to initiate SENCER approaches. SENCER Clusters are both disciplinary and
              issue-oriented groups of faculty and administrators that operate to provide
              ongoing support and sustain reform efforts arising from participation in the
              Institutes. The SENCER Virtual Community links innovators together and supports
              dissemination of resources to support reform. The SENCER Leadership Initiatives
              are focusing national attention and recognition on exemplary initiatives in
              order to build additional support for this approach. 

