Title       : Non-traditional Laboratory Experiments: Olive Oil Manufacturing and Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0088878

Award Number: 0088878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65286              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mariano J. Savelski savelski@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Hesketh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Stewart Slater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie Farrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Chemical (53) 
Chemistry - (12)
This proof-of-concept project
              is an integrated effort between the faculty of Chemical Engineering and
              Chemistry departments at Rowan University. The primary objective of this
              project is to develop new laboratory experiments that utilize a series of
              chemical processes and analytical techniques that are not traditionally covered
              in chemical engineering and/or chemistry curricula, but that are commonly
              encountered in industry. Using chemicals derived from food grade raw materials,
              intrinsically safe new laboratory experiments are being created for chemical
              engineering and chemistry courses. Laboratory modules based on each step of the
              olive oil manufacturing process are being developed. These modules range in
              complexity from fundamental engineering and science principles shown in gravity
              decantation of immiscible liquids to more complex principles required to
              describe filtration theory. Within these experiments, students are relating
              product qualities of flavor and aroma with chemical components. Advanced
              technology is being integrated into the project by using high performance
              liquid chromatography (HPLC) and gas chromatography to identify these
              compounds. The biomedical focus of these laboratories is to identify and
              quantify the presence of oleic and linoleic acids. Students conducting these
              laboratories are developing high level thinking skills by identifying the
              relationship between process variables and the resulting oil properties. 


