Title       : Using Mathematical Modeling to Improve Quantitative Skills of Geology Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a0088411

Award Number: 0088411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Savina msavina@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Bice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clinton Cowan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project adapts tools developed for use in mathematics courses (STELLA,
              Mathematica) to develop the quantitative skills of students in geology
              laboratories and courses. Students in upper-level geology courses and one
              mid-upper-level geology course are using these tools to analyze data and
              construct dynamic models. Each course emphasizes a different aspect of
              mathematical modeling: Oceans and Atmospheres (dynamic system modeling with
              STELLA and EXCEL), GIS, Remote Sensing and Spatial Modeling in Environmental
              Sciences (spatial modeling, geostatistics, decision making), Modeling in the
              Geosciences (iterative modeling, self-organized criticality, non-linear
              responses), and Hydrology (2- and 3-D models of groundwater flow, streamflow,
              and the hydrologic cycle in watersheds). Modeling projects are also being added
              to existing courses, such as Geomorphology, Paleobiology, Tectonics, and
              Structural Geology, and Introductory Geology. 

Student research projects
              (required for the geology major) are enhanced by the availability of
              sophisticated modeling tools and instruction in those tools that emphasize
              comparing models, testing them with field-collected data, and understanding
              their limitations rather than simply learning technical computer skills.
              Project results, including new teaching exercises and research, are being
              presented at professional meetings and workshops and made available on the
              Web.

Faculty are developing real-world, collaborative exercises
              incorporating mathematical modeling skills, using examples from previously
              funded NSF projects and workshops, especially the 1999 PKAL workshop on
              "Building the Quantitative Skills of Non-majors and Majors in Earth and
              Planetary Science Courses" and its follow-up publication in the Journal of
              Geoscience Education (volume 48). As part of a program of faculty development
              to support these changes, faculty are continuing to participate in on-campus
              and external training and workshops.

The primary courses are taught to
              twenty to forty students each year; the supplementary material in other courses
              reach anywhere from 90 (not including Introductory Geology) to 240 students
              each year (including Introductory Geology). Faculty in the Geology and
              Mathematics and Computer Science Departments and an external expert are
              evaluating the project.



