Title       : Equipment for an Undergraduate Microfabrication Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a0088127

Award Number: 0088127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87075              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Lawrence lawrendj@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald R. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian H. Augustine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The objective of this project is to use a multitarget sputter
              deposition system to enhance the capabilities of a Microfabrication Laboratory
              and course work. This new laboratory is used to give undergraduate students a
              fundamental understanding of the processes used in the research, development,
              and manufacture of microelectronic devices. Moreover, microfabrication
              technology is continually being adapted for other applications, such as
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), optics, biomedical devices, flat panel
              displays (FPDs), and sensors. Microfabrication, whatever the device being
              produced, integrates aspects of physics, chemistry, materials science, and
              several engineering disciplines into one readily recognized application.
              Consequently, courses and projects conducted in the Microfabrication Laboratory
              are natural forums in which to emphasize the value of multidisciplinary and
              interdisciplinary education. The courses and experiments developed at James
              Madison University, which does not offer engineering degrees, will be designed
              to insert hands- on, interdisciplinary laboratory experiences early in the
              undergraduate curriculum through the use of traditional and novel soft
              lithography techniques. The Microfabrication Laboratory is extensively used for
              upper level courses and student research projects. The goal is to expose a
              broad spectrum of undergraduate science and technology students to
              microfabrication techniques. Equally important is the emphasis on developing
              teamwork and communication skills in an interdisciplinary environment, with
              courses and projects pursued by students from multiple departments. Experience
              with microfabrication techniques at the undergraduate level helps prepare
              students for further work in this area, whether they enter industry or graduate
              school. The project also demonstrates the feasibility of implementing
              microfabrication experiments at other undergraduate institutions and extending
              them beyond the engineering curricula in which they have previously been
              incorporated. Many industries will be revolutionized by new and creative
              application of microfabrication technologies; this revolution begins by
              exposing a broader audience of students to microfabrication science and
              technology. Experiments are being adapted from the research and education
              literature in engineering, physics, chemistry, and materials science.
