Title       : Molecular Structure and Function in an Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a0088669

Award Number: 0088669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414301             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim M. Herman herman@msoe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael H. Patrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline R. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee School of Eng
	      1025 N. Broadway
	      Milwaukee, WI  532023109    414/277-7300

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
Understanding biology at the molecular level is a
              daunting challenge for many students because it is abstract and not tangible.
              They are asked to make inferences about systems with which they have no
              experience and to provide answers to questions they have never asked. We are
              developing an inquiry-driven approach to help make the molecular world real and
              relevant to students, including those whose interests and career goals may lie
              outside the sciences. Our approach is based on the integrated use of computer
              visualization software and unique, 3-dimensional physical models of proteins,
              nucleic acids, and other biomolecular structures created by state-of-the-art
              rapid prototyping technology at the Milwaukee School of Engineering. These
              physical models are used by students to make predictions about
              structure-function relationships that can then be tested experimentally. We are
              carrying out a multi-level evaluation of the synergy of physical and computer
              modeling to enhance student understanding of molecular structure/function
              relationships. This project builds upon the success of a CCLI proof-of-concept
              grant awarded to the PI and his co-workers to test this approach in a limited
              set of undergraduate biology and chemistry classrooms. We are now broadening
              the spectrum of educational settings in which this approach being field-tested,
              to include test sites that are diverse in terms of (i) institutions, ranging
              from a large research university (UW-Madison) to small liberal art colleges, a
              private engineering school, and a 2- year technical college, (ii) course
              diversity, including chemistry, biology, biochemistry, molecular biology and
              integrated science, (iii) level of instruction and diversity of student
              populations, ranging from introductory courses for majors and non-majors to
              advanced courses for biology and chemistry majors. This project also provides
              faculty development through participation in the design and construction of
              physical models specific to course needs and the sharing of their classroom
              experiences in an annual summer workshop. 

