Title       : Integrated Wireless Sensor Networks for the Control of the Indoor Environment in
               Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a0088648

Award Number: 0088648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1100637            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Rabaey jan@eecs.Berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K J. Pister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul K. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward A. Arens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1057,1602,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              With the recent progress in microelectronics and micromechanics, integrated,
              small footprint combinations of sensors, wireless transceivers, and energy
              sources are now becoming reality. This offers an unprecedented opportunity for
              such devices to be widely applied in controlling the environments in large
              buildings, and to provide tremendous improvement in how well and how
              energy-efficient buildings are operated.  First-order estimations indicate that
              an energy-conscious building management approach could reduce source energy
              consumption by 2 quads (quadrillion British Thermal Units or BTUs) in the U.S.
              alone. This project proposes to develop novel, non-traditional applications of
              chip technology that will revolutionize environmental control in the building
              industry, where chip-based devices are virtually not utilized at all today.
              
An integrated "sensor / wireless communication / energy source" node will be
              developed, that supports multiple sensoring front-ends including, but not
              restricted to, temperature, light, and localization, a seamless wireless
              network interface, and an integrated energy source, which allows the node to be
              self-contained and to operate independently for at least five years. The module
              will integrate the individual components using both single chip integration,
              and advanced packaging techniques. The node will support all the functionality
              needed to configure, operate, query, and maintain the network. The networking
              approach employed will have the capability to deal with individual node failure
              through redundancy. 
To address the multi-disciplinary nature of this
              research, the project combines the efforts of four research centers in
              Berkeley, each with a very specific area of expertise essential to the success
              of the program (1)The Berkeley Wireless Research Center (BWRC); (2) The
              Berkeley Sensor and Actuator Center (BSAC); (3) The Center for the Built
              Environment (CBE); and (4) the Integrated Manufacturing Lab (IML).  This award
              is co-funded by the Civil & Mechanical Systems Division and the Engineering
              Education and Centers Division.


