Title       : FIRST II Faculty Institutes for Reforming Science Teaching Through Field
               Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0088847

Award Number: 0088847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Hodder   (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Ebert-May  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
The Faculty Institutes for Reforming Science Teaching
              project (FIRST I) enabled 92 faculty teaching 322 courses at 27 colleges and
              universities to use active, inquiry-based science teaching, thus providing more
              opportunities for all students to gain scientific understanding. We are
              expanding FIRST I into a national dissemination project, called FIRST II, which
              provides large-scale, long-term professional development program for biology
              faculty, postdoctoral and graduate students from universities, four-year, and
              community colleges. The FIRST II project is providing widespread dissemination
              of instructional practices and materials that give faculty the ability to help
              all students learn science using active teaching methods and inquiry. The FIRST
              II project is being implemented and sustained by teams of scientists/faculty
              centered at eight biological field stations throughout the United States. The
              field station teams are working with faculty from colleges and universities in
              their region in a series of workshops that model active, inquiry-based science
              teaching both in the classroom and the field. FIRST II is also enabling faculty
              to learn and use multiple assessment strategies that provide evidence of
              student learning which their peers accept. We are exploring ways in which
              teaching can be recognized, evaluated, and rewarded within institutions. In
              FIRST II we are gathering evidence for the impact of both changes in faculty
              teaching and improvements in students' learning. The networks of faculty
              centered at each field station, and the national dissemination network hosted
              by the Long-Term Ecological Research Network office are facilitating
              collaboration among faculty about their reforms toward achieving excellence in
              science teaching, and about the emerging criteria and strategies for the
              scholarship of teaching.

