Title       : Enhancing the Biochemistry Curriculum Through Project-based Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2000  
File        : a0088702

Award Number: 0088702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123407             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Singer singer@storm.simpson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Warnet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline Brittingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Simpson College
	      701 North C Street
	      Indianola, IA  501251202    515/961-6251

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) Because of the significant advances in biology now
              being made at the biochemical level we have created a Biochemistry Major, which
              has been enhanced recently with the addition of a developmental biologist who
              studies developmentally-driven changes in gene expression. The courses within
              the biochemistry major are designed so that as students progress through the
              major they become less dependent on their textbooks and more comfortable with
              primary literature sources. Gradually, students become genuine participants,
              not just consumers, in the classroom until finally, in their capstone seminar
              course, students and faculty are cooperative learners together. This course has
              brought a new level of excitement for both students and faculty. The current
              project aims to change the laboratory design and instrumentation available to
              Biochemistry majors so that these students achieve a similar high level of
              curiosity, independence, and confidence in the laboratory. We are incorporating
              three project-based laboratory experiences that allow students to investigate
              the same questions in the laboratory that they find exciting in the classroom.
              One project extends through several courses and demonstrates how several
              disciplines collectively contribute to the understanding of a single biological
              process. Another project reveals how new biochemical tools are being employed
              to answer age-old questions in developmental biology. A third project
              demonstrates how organic chemistry has become increasingly important to our
              understanding of regulatory processes in organisms. Highly sensitive
              non-radioactive assays are being widely used in basic research. These are being
              adapted and being introduced into new areas of investigation for undergraduate
              laboratories in biochemistry. Access to state of the art research and committed
              faculty enables students to develop communication and teamwork skills that will
              be highly valued in their postgraduate careers.


