Title       : Adapting the Integration of Mathematics, Science and Technology in Theme-based
               Courses for Pre-service Elementary Education Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a0088012

Award Number: 0088012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn Maelia maelia@msmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Iris Turkenkopf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Saint Mary College
	      330 Powell Avenue
	      Newburgh, NY  125503412    914/561-0800

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) 
Students preparing to teach in elementary school do
              not receive adequate exposure to the sciences they will be expected to teach
              nor do they learn to integrate mathematical concepts with scientific
              applications. In response to this problem, the Divisions of Natural Sciences
              and Mathematics and Computer Sciences, working cooperatively with the Division
              of Education are developing several new courses integrating mathematics,
              science and technology (MST). Materials and practices will be adapted from the
              successful Integrated Mathematics and Science curriculum at La Salle
              University, which is the cornerstone of La Salle's Institute for the
              Advancement of Mathematics and Science Teaching. These courses are intended to
              promote scientific and mathematical literacy, overcome math and science
              phobias, and allow students to see the connections of these disciplines to
              their own lives. While these courses are initially targeting elementary
              education/special education pre-service teachers, when fully developed and
              evaluated, they will become the mathematics and science core required of all
              non-science students at the college. The MST courses are promoting active
              learning via proven innovative pedagogies such as inquiry-based cooperative
              learning exercises and discussions based on selected interdisciplinary themes.
              Students are designing and implementing investigations as members of
              collaborative groups and are interpreting these experiments using mathematical
              concepts and computerized research and analysis tools. They report on their
              findings in a peer-review forum orally, followed by laboratory reports that
              reflect an understanding of good scientific writing. Mathematics and science
              presented in this way, enhanced by use of computer technology and integrated in
              the college classroom, is enabling pre-service teachers to better integrate
              mathematics and science with the rest of the elementary school
              curriculum.












