Title       : Integrating Inquiry-Based Science and Education Methods Courses in a "Science
               Semester" for Future Elementary Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a0088527

Award Number: 0088527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Fifield fifield@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Madsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Danielle J. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah E. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry L. Shipman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) In this project we are adapting problem-based learning
              and other inquiry-based approaches to create a curriculum where science and
              education methods are integrated ("science semester") for elementary teacher
              education majors. Our goal is to foster integrated understandings of science
              and pedagogy that future elementary teachers
need to effectively use
              inquiry-based approaches in their classrooms. This project
responds to calls
              to improve science education for all students (AAAS, "Science for All
              Americans," 1986; "Benchmarks for Science Literacy," 1993) by making preservice
              teachers' experiences in undergraduate science courses more consistent with
              reforms at the K-12 level (NRC, "National Science Education Standards," 1996;
              NSF, "Shaping the Future: New Expectations for Undergraduate Education in
              Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology," 1996, NSF96-139).
The
              senior personnel in this proposal collectively teach three science courses
              (biology, earth science, physical science) and an elementary science education
              methods course that
are required for elementary teacher education (ETE)
              majors. A variety of active, collaborative, and inquiry-based approaches are
              used in these courses, but their collective impact is weakened by the lack of
              coordination in the students' degree programs. Presently, students take the
              courses in variable sequences and at widely scattered times. Too many students
              fail to appreciate the value of science courses to their future careers as
              teachers, and when they reach the methods course in the junior year they often
              retain little of the science content studied earlier. These episodic encounters
              with science make it difficult for students to learn the content, and to
              translate their understandings of science into effective, inquiry-based
              teaching strategies.
To encourage integrated understandings of science
              concepts and pedagogy, a coordinated set of science and methods courses are
              being designed as a junior-year science semester.
Traditional subject matter
              boundaries are being crossed to stress shared themes that
teachers must
              understand to teach standards-based elementary science. The design is adapting
              exemplary approaches that support both learning science and learning how to
              teach science. Students work collaboratively on multidisciplinary problem-based
              learning (PBL) activities that place science concepts in authentic contexts and
              build learning skills. "Lecture" meetings are large group active learning
              sessions that help students understand difficult concepts, make connections
              between class activities, and launch and wrap-up PBL problems. Investigatory
              labs include activities from elementary science kits as launching points for
              in-depth investigations that demonstrate the continuity of science concepts and
              pedagogies across age levels. In the methods
course students critically
              explore the theory and practice of elementary science
teaching, drawing on
              their shared experiences of inquiry learning in the science courses. Field
              placements in elementary classrooms are built-in to allow students to ground
              their studies of science and pedagogy in actual practice. Participating faculty
              are collaborating with external evaluators to assess the impact of this
              project. The ability to plan for and use inquiry approaches depends strongly on
              sound understandings of science concepts, so formative aspects of the
              evaluation examine students' developing science content and pedagogical
              knowledge (e.g., conceptions of inquiry teaching). The summative aspect of the
              evaluation will examine whether student teachers who completed the science
              semester teach science differently than those who complete traditional
              (stand-alone) courses in science and methods. External evaluators use
              structured interviews of supervising teachers, survey data from the student
              teachers, and classroom observations of student teachers sampled from the
              science semester and traditional groups to examine how they conceive of and use
              inquiry-based approaches in their science lessons.
