Title       : A Confocal Microscope for Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0088911

Award Number: 0088911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172444             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret S. Saha mssaha@facstaff.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane C. Shakes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric L. Bradley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul D. Heideman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lizabeth A. Allison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A laser scanning confocal microscope will significantly enhance and expand  the
              research capabilities of a group of molecular, cellular, and integrative
              biologists at the College of William and Mary. Currently, these investigators
              use conventional light and epifluorescence microscopy  which, due to certain
              inherent limitations, precludes certain types of studies.  Confocal microscopy
              can produce optical sectioning of biological specimens and this series of
              optical sections can then be tomographically assembled using computer
              reconstruction to produce extremely precise three dimensional images that could
              be optically viewed through any plane.  This allows for imaging fluorescent
              signals in both living tissues and in thick biological specimens.  Confocal
              microscopy is extremely well suited for visualizing multiple fluorescent
              signals in the same cell simultaneously and allows for an accurate quantitative
              measurement of colocalization.   The investigator can detect weak or faint
              images while dramatically increasing the resolution of the image compared to
              standard epifluorescence.  Moreover, even subcellular structures or signals can
              be localized within a cell in the context of a tissue slice or a living embryo.
               The acquisition of a confocal scope will enable these investigators to conduct
              their current research projects more efficiently and productively as well as
              extend their research in new directions. 
        This instrumentation will
              have a major impact on seven different research  projects including (1)
              understanding the molecular and cellular mechanisms governing the development
              of brain vasculature, in particular the tissue interactions and genetic
              responses that give rise to the brain vasculature ; (2) investigating
              subnuclear trafficking of nuclear hormone receptors; (3) determining the
              physiological and genetic mechanisms regulating reproductive responsiveness and
              inhibition in prairie deermice; (4) uncovering genetic variation underlying
              photoresponsiveness in the white-footed mouse; (5) investigating the metaphase
              to anaphase transition during mitosis and meiosis in C. elegans, particularly
              the role of the anaphase promoting complex; (6) analyzing the functional
              morphology of thermoregulatory neurons in the hypothalamus in order to
              understand how organisms regulate their temperature; and (7) determining the
              genetic mechanisms regulating the activity of the Pax-5 transcription factor
              during B cell development.   In addition, additional investigators from the
              Biology Department as well investigators from other disciplines including 
              BioPsychology, Kinesiology and Applied Science, will also utilize the confocal
              microscope. 
        The acquisition of this instrument will have a profound
              effect not only on the research capabilities of the investigators but will also
              have a significant educational impact at the College of William and Mary. This
              technology will be integrated into the cell biology, molecular biology, and
              neurobiology courses. A substantial number of both Master's degree students and
              undergraduates will  utilize the confocal microscope in the course of their
              research. 

