Title       : Adaptive Physics: Engaging Diverse Learning Styles in the Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0088609

Award Number: 0088609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82932              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica H. Halka   (Principal Investigator current)
              Erik Bodegom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald B. Narode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The Physics Department at Portland State University, in
              collaboration with the School of Education, is transforming its Teaching
              Methods course and General Physics laboratory courses in order to improve (1)
              student learning of physics principles and practice, (2) pedagogical
              preparation of General Physics graduate teaching assistants and lecture faculty
              and (3) recruitment of physics majors into a teaching track.

To better
              attend to Portland State's diverse urban student audience, the project
              addresses improved student learning in the labs by consolidating varied
              learning styles rather than relying solely on one method, such as the
              traditional cookbook format that has been implemented in the past. The revised
              lab courses incorporate modern instructional resources that encourage active
              exploration of physics concepts. Specifically, in the past year, the department
              has begun to include in Fall term lab the Socratic Dialogue Inducing techniques
              from Richard Hake of Indiana University and Physics by Inquiry components from
              Lillian McDermott's group at the University of Washington. These ideas are
              being be phased into the other two quarters as the project progresses. In
              addition, the project plans to incorporate Real-Time Physics lab curricula from
              David Sokoloff et al.

The environment in which these complementary elements
              are being implemented is adapted from David Gosser's Workshop Chemistry Project
              (CCNY). An integral part of that project is the weekly teaching assistant
              meeting/seminar with professor partners wherein issues such as dominant and
              passive students, weak and strong students, gender and race, and collaborative
              learning are discussed. Such discussions, along with group leadership training
              and clinical interviews, constitute the principal improvements to the Teaching
              Methods course that is currently required of all graduate teaching assistants
              who supervise lab sessions.

One of the most important efforts of the
              proposed project is fostering a closer connection between the General Physics
              lab and lecture courses by sponsoring two-day summer workshops in which lecture
              professors and teaching assistants discuss goals and teaching methods, and
              lecture professors will have the opportunity to examine the lab setups and
              experiment with them. In order to ensure continuing dialogue, similar two-hour
              meetings are arranged at least once per quarter at mid-term.

The department,
              with the strong support of all physics faculty members, has begun and plans to
              continue developing the laboratory courses along these lines in the coming
              years with the expectation that all students will begin to experience the
              excitement of science and that both students and teachers will be better
              prepared and motivated to solve world problems in a cooperative way. As a
              result of the teaching methods course that will devote special attention to
              questions of diverse learning styles, resulting in better modeling of good
              teaching by the graduate assistants, it is expected that more undergraduate
              students will be drawn to the teaching of science as a respectable and
              rewarding career.


