Title       : Spectrometer on a Chip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0088446

Award Number: 0088446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis W. Prather prather@eecis.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              



The miniaturization of devices, components, and systems represents a
              growing trend in nearly all areas of technology. In particular, this trend is
              having a significant impact in the areas of biofluidics,
imaging, and
              communications.  In this effort we focus on a technology common to each of
              these applications, namely, spectral filtering.  The spectrometers currently
              used in these applications are typically large in comparison to their companion
              system.  To this end the work addressed in this proposal is targeted at
              developing such a spectrometer, i.e., a spectrometer on a chip.  Our
              spectrometer consists of a diffractive
lenslet array fabricated on the
              micron-scale, a precision pin-hole, and a focal plane array. The idea is based
              on the fact that light of different wavelengths, when incident on a diffractive
              lens, comes to focus at different axial locations. Therefore, by placing a
              pinhole at the appropriate axial location of a particular spectral focus, one
              can effectively perform spectral filtering using a spatial filter. Thus, by
              scanning the pinhole and reading off the response electronically a complete
              spectral response, spatially registered to a detector array, can be obtained. 
              The proposed system will be realized through the design of meso-scopic
              diffractive lenses using custom electromagnetic design algorithms, they will be
              fabricated using multi-level electron beam lithography and RIE etching, and the
              pin-hole array will be fabricated in a silicon MEMS scanner. The system will be
              integrated with readout circuitry using flip-chip bonding.

