Title       : Project ChemBOND: Building Opportunities for Meaningful Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2000   
File        : a0088458

Award Number: 0088458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98819              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome E. Haky hakyj@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald M. Baird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah W. Louda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy R. Romance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Bleicher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
Faculty in the Colleges of Science and Education have been
              working collaboratively for the past three years in addressing problems of
              student performance and retention in first semester chemistry. During this
              period, faculty recognized the need to examine their own practice including
              design of course curriculum, the quality of the problem-solving, in-class
              activities for students, and the alignment of course components and the
              importance of addressing problems of achievement and retention from multiple
              solution paths. The objectives being addressed in the current project include:
              (1) revision of the course curriculum and BONDing (Building Opportunities for
              Networking and Discussion) sessions through adaptation/adoption of aspects of
              the NSF Chemistry Initiatives and the integration of technology-based
              instructional tools and models, (2) professional development of faculty in
              order to facilitate implementation of these reforms, (3) continually building a
              professional learning community. The objectives are being accomplished through
              an action plan in which a cross-disciplinary faculty team simultaneously
              addresses curriculum revision, meaningful learning, and innovative
              instructional approaches. Curriculum reform efforts, including use of
              technology, are well-established methods to improve the learning of
              under-prepared and/or diverse student populations. Mechanisms for extensive
              collaborations have been established with community colleges in the area
              through the Region V Area Center for Educational Enhancement.

