Title       : Hydrogeology Laboratory Improvement for Enhancing Undergraduate Teaching and
               Research in Water Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0088170

Award Number: 0088170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13805              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohammad Z. Iqbal m.iqbal@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) 
 This project has two objectives. One is to provide University of
              Northern Iowa students with an opportunity to learn the fundamental concepts
              that explain observed patterns of surface and subsurface water resources
              pollution. The other is to provide them with opportunities to improve their
              analytical skills by using modern laboratory equipment. The project is centered
              on the use of a new ion chromatography system. The installation of this system
              has enhanced the analytical capability of the undergraduate hydrogeology
              laboratory in the Department of Earth Science. This new ion chromatograph is
              being used to monitor water flow and quality using a newly built on-campus
              monitoring well site. A related dimension of our project is an on-going process
              of laboratory curriculum improvement. In this project we are implementing the
              recommendations of Texley and Wild, "NSTA Pathways to the Science Standards:
              Guidelines for Moving the Vision into Practice," National Science Teachers
              Association, 1997, and following the recommendations of Clough and Clark,
              "Cookbooks and Constructivism: A Better Approach to Laboratory Activities," The
              Science Teacher, Vol. 61, No. 2 (1994) pp. 34-37. New exercises are being added
              to the lab component of various courses, such as Hydrogeology, Environmental
              Hydrology, and Physical Geology. These exercises are providing the students
              with increased opportunities to develop critical thinking skills and a
              scientific attitude. Many of these exercises are field-based hands-on
              experiences designed to facilitate student understanding of the fundamentals of
              water-rock interactions in subsurface geologic systems. In the impacted
              courses, students are collecting ground water and stream water samples from
              polluted and unpolluted areas, from areas of varying land use practices, and
              from landfill sites. Students are then analyzing these samples using ion
              chromatography for their common inorganic ion content. Students are also
              studying groundwater flow by using ion tracers (bromide, chloride, and others)
              in both simulated lab systems and in the field plots. These exercises are
              teaching them the concepts of prevalent chemical characters and leachate
              migration, improving their understanding of how land use practices cause
              subsurface water pollution, and many of the derivative environmental
              consequences of subsurface water pollution. This project is making it easier
              for the students to find a link between their classroom and laboratory learning
              and the real field situation. This expansion of available laboratory exercises
              in water-related classes is giving our students more opportunities to prepare
              for employment in environmental services companies as well as for further study
              at the graduate level.

