Title       : Integrating Spatial Information Technologies into the Environmental Studies
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a0088403

Award Number: 0088403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47796              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Crawford tomato@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gettysburg College
	      North Washington Street
	      Gettysburg, PA  17325    717/337-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
This project is enhancing the Environmental Studies
              Program at Gettysburg College by introducing a Spatial Analysis Laboratory and
              associated curriculum to provide rigorous education and hands-on training in
              spatial information technologies that are critical to environmental analysis
              and problem solving. Complex environmental problems are commonly situated in
              geographic contexts. These problems can be addressed by analyzing spatially
              referenced data through the use of geographic information systems (GIS), global
              positioning systems (GPS), and remote sensing (RS). The project goal is giving
              undergraduate students a strong foundation in the fundamental concepts,
              methods, and environmental applications of these technologies so that they will
              be prepared to assume leading roles in environmental research and policy
              analysis in the private and public sectors and graduate research contexts. The
              project is adapting three successful programs to fit the needs of undergraduate
              environmental studies students: programs at Middlebury College and Mount
              Holyoke College as well as the core curriculum in GIS developed by the National
              Center for Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA). The NCGIA curriculum is
              being modified and extended by including content on GPS and RS. Three new
              courses are being implemented: (1) Introduction to Geographical Information
              Systems, (2) Environmental Applications of Spatial Information Technologies,
              and (3) Remote Sensing of the Environment. Laboratory components of the courses
              are promoting active and collaborative learning through individual and group
              projects. Students are examining environmental issues by exercising a
              student-developed and maintained (with faculty supervision) environmental
              database for the surrounding region-an innovative feature of the laboratory
              components. The project also integrates spatial information technologies into
              undergraduate thesis research. Interdisciplinary instruction and research is
              being conducted using ArcInfo, ArcView, and Idrisi GIS and image processing
              software.
