Title       : Adaptation of Materials Characterization Techniques to Collaborative
               Discovery-based Learning in the Undergraduate Packaging Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0088472

Award Number: 0088472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Kimmel kimmel@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kay D. Cooksey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Weigel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Materials Science (57) 

Five Packaging Science undergraduate
              laboratory courses that include segments concerned with packaging materials are
              being modified with the following objectives: to incorporate more science-based
              learning; to significantly increase the understanding and hands-on experience
              of undergraduate students with state-of-the-art materials science
              characterization and investigative techniques as applied to Packaging Science;
              to maximize collaborative, discovery-based learning; and to ensure that our
              sophomore, junior and senior level laboratory experiences are appropriately
              integrated and pyramided. The project is adapting collaborative learning
              strategies from Millis at the US Air Force Academy and Cottrell at Miami
              University; Johnson and Johnson at University of Minnesota; and Felder at North
              Carolina State University, among others. The project objectives are enabled by
              the acquisition of state-of-the-art materials characterization instrumentation,
              especially thermal analysis, to augment the existing, extensive gas permeation
              equipment and new physical testing capabilities. The techniques and
              interpretative skills of using this instrumentation to understand the
              inter-relationships of processing, structure and properties of the wide variety
              of materials used for packaging are well-known. Until now, their integration
              into the undergraduate Packaging Science curriculum has been rudimentary. With
              the collaboration of the Clemson Office of Teaching Effectiveness and
              Innovation, the new laboratory exercises and revised courses are being designed
              to move from individual, problem-based learning to collaborative,
              discovery-based learning. The Clemson Web-based Collaborative Learning
              Environment is being used to promote learning communities within and across
              classes. Surveys of students and alumni are providing feedback on the
              effectiveness and usefulness of the changes. The findings and results are being
              disseminated to other Packaging Science programs, to other interested educators
              within and outside of the University, and to the packaging industry. 

