Title       : Improving the Chemistry, Biology, Physics/Astronomy, and Environmental Science
               Curricula Through Implementation of UV-Vis Spectrophotometric Laboratory
               Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0088491

Award Number: 0088491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37685              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Donnelly scott.donnelly@awc.cc.az.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Sparks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stefan Dieters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona Western College
	      P O BOX 929
	      Yuma, AZ  853660929    928/344-7500

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) Chemistry (12) Physics (13) Biological Sciences (61)
              

This multidisciplinary project is improving Arizona Western College's (AWC)
              Chemistry, Biology and Physics/Astronomy laboratory curricula and the joint
              AWC/Northern Arizona University-Yuma 2+2 Environmental Science program with new
              laboratory activities that use ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis). AWC
              is designated by the Department of Education as a Hispanic Serving
              Institution.

Experiments and protocols from a wide variety of sources
              including the research and educational literature are being combined and
              adapted to create the laboratory activities. In Chemistry courses, students use
              the UV-Vis to conduct a photoassisted reaction that mineralizes an organic dye,
              analyze the campus' pool's disinfectant capacity, test for lead in Mexican
              glazed pottery, and characterize the absorption spectra of two thermochromic
              compounds. Biology students are elucidating the structure-function molecular
              motif from the absorption spectra of plant pigments chlorophyll a and b, and
              anthocyanins. Students in Physics/Astronomy are studying how particulate matter
              preferentially scatters more energetic wavelengths and how the interaction
              between matter and light helps explain red-orange sunsets and sunrises, and
              cosmological phenomena. Environmental Science students are carrying out a
              temporal and spatial water quality study of the local desert watershed
              (Colorado River, Martinez and Mittry Lakes), and analyzing for ammonia and
              phosphate in both cultivated and uncultivated soils to determine the potential
              impact for contamination of the local groundwater supply. 

The
              multidisciplinary use of the UV-Vis spectrometers: 1) allows faculty to
              incorporate new laboratory experiments into the curriculum and hence expand
              topic coverage, 2) allows faculty to teach topics that were previously
              relegated to lecture because of non-existent instrumentation capacity, 3) gives
              students hands-on experience with modern instrumentation and methodology, 4)
              shifts student focus more towards data analysis, and 5) creates undergraduate
              research opportunities for community college students. 

The successes and
              challenges of implementing the spectrophotometric lab activities into the
              curricula will be shared with the science education community at large via
              journal submissions and presentations at regional and national meetings. 


