Title       : Thematic Inquiry-Based Laboratories Across the Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0088320

Award Number: 0088320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210514             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Monroe monroejd@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Hurney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)

The Biology Department is implementing a new core
              curriculum for biology majors consisting of four laboratory courses; 1)
              Fundamental Processes of Organisms, 2) Evolution and Ecology, 3) Cell and
              Molecular Biology, and 4) Genetics and Development. These courses replace five
              required courses, two of which did not have laboratories and only one of which
              had an experimentally-based laboratory. Laboratories in the new courses include
              a combination of traditional and inquiry- based exercises. Cutting across the
              new courses are three, multi- week, thematic, inquiry- based laboratories on
              microbes, plants and animals that are based on research expertise within the
              Department. By developing a set of research themes in the core courses students
              are able to see the strong link between research and education, and are better
              prepared to conduct research in upper- level courses. Our approach in the
              inquiry- based laboratories is to have small groups of students first learn
              about an organism or a process and any technical skills associated with the
              experimental system or mode of observation. Students then develop hypotheses,
              conduct experiments or observations, and complete the scientific method
              including presentation of findings to peers via posters, oral presentations or
              the Internet. The purchase of technologically-sophisticated equipment allows us
              to fundamentally improve the content and the means of delivery of the required
              curriculum. These courses engage students in using the process of science to
              explore scientific concepts, enhance learning through collaborative
              experiences, and develop a learning community. The development of student
              skills in problem solving, analytical methods, scientific writing and the use
              of computers also better prepares them for upper- level courses and careers in
              the biological sciences.
