Title       : Biochemical, Organic, Physical, Analytical, and Inorganic Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2000   
File        : a0088307

Award Number: 0088307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92561              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Shattuck twshattu@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shari U. Dunham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradford P. Mundy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen U. Dunham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dasan M. Thamattoor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Teaching through research is a guiding principle in the
              institution's NSF-AIRE recognized program. A requested ion trap mass
              spectrometer with electrospray and atmospheric pressure chemical ionization
              interfaces (LC/MS) prepares the students at this institution to be creative,
              independent, and well-trained scientists. This instrument provides a novel
              linkage and enhancement of the full chemistry curriculum using experiments some
              of which are adapted from standard literature. Mass spectrometry is used in
              general chemistry for characterization of transition metal complexes. In
              organic chemistry students do natural products isolation and structure
              characterization. In physical chemistry proton affinities in gas phase and
              solution are studied. In Instrumental Analysis the fundamentals of the
              ionization and mass analysis processes are discussed. Biochemistry students use
              LC/MS in protein sequencing. These LC/MS-enhanced curricular components allow
              the introduction of exciting and important new approaches to chemistry,
              including combinatorial chemistry, solid-phase synthesis, and computer aided
              molecular design. The program in combinatorial chemistry links the Organic,
              Physical, Instrumental, and Biochemistry courses to map the active site of the
              proteolytic enzyme papain. Students in the Organic Chemistry course use
              solid-phase synthesis to make resin-bound combinatorial mixtures of papain
              substrates. These mixtures are analyzed in Instrumental Analysis for structure
              and purity, and in Biochemistry in a kinetic assay. The results of the papain
              assay are used for QSAR and receptor modeling studies in Physical Chemistry.
              Beyond curricular developments, the instrument is used to significantly enhance
              student/faculty research opportunities.
