Title       : Model Student Environmental Contract Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2000  
File        : a0088831

Award Number: 0088831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99709              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. D'Arcy k-darcy@govst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Yunger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph B. Addison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Governors State University
	      
	      Park Forest South, IL  60466    312/534-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
Governors State University is developing a model Student
              Environmental Contract Laboratory( SECL) to improve instruction in the
              Environmental Chemistry course. The Environmental Chemistry course is required
              in two curricula, the BS in Chemistry with a Teacher Education Certificate
              (secondary school endorsement) and the BA in Elementary Education with
              Chemistry Teaching Specialization, and also is an advanced elective in the
              American Chemical Society approved BS in Chemistry curriculum. The SECL adapts
              the curriculum developed in NSF 9750477 at Coastal Carolina University in order
              to analyze environmental samples generated by the students enrolled in the
              class and for 'clients', including GSU biology courses and local high school
              teachers and high school student projects. The SECL is equipped with a new an
              atomic absorption spectrometer with flame and graphite furnace atomization with
              autosampling automation and PC control. A block digestion system facilitates
              greater volume of student analyses. An autosampling accessory of the
              university's existing GC/ MS also equips the SECL. The students enrolled in the
              environmental chemistry course create the SECL, perform USEPA regulatory
              methods, develop appropriate QA/QC procedures, and are evaluated during a mock
              laboratory audit. Their experiences enhance student preparation for the entry
              level positions in the industrial workplace. Such preparation is critical for
              GSU students since the BS in Chemistry majors are non- traditional students
              (29.9 average age), returning to the classroom to complete professional
              education or to change careers. Over 80% of the chemistry majors attend GSU
              part-time, enrolling in the late afternoon, evening and Saturday course
              offerings. The new instrumentation also provides remote access to the
              instrumentation for operation by regional high school teachers. This remote
              access allows participating high school teachers to enhance their effectiveness
              in the classroom, with enrichment of curriculum, in extracurricular activities
              such as clubs, and in student projects and guided inquiry. The collaboration
              with high school teachers and their high school students was developed based on
              experience gained through our CCLI A&I project 99550554, "A Regional WWW-Based
              FT-NMR for Chemistry Improvements."


