Title       : Non-commutative Lp-spaces and their Connection to Probability and Operator
               Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0088928

Award Number: 0088928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87675              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marius Junge junge@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Junge

The aim of this research is the investigation of the
              following
different aspects of non-commutative spaces of p-integrable
              
functions. If p is 1 such a space is the  predual of von Neumann 
algebra
              and reflects important properties of the underlying 
operator algebra. We
              recall, that it is still open whether 
preduals of von Neumann are finitely
              represented in the space of 
trace class operators. Here, we focus on
              isometric characterization 
of finite dimensional spaces embedding into the
              predual of a von 
Neumann algebra and its connection to the theory of
              Lie-algebras 
and (non-commutative) stochastical processes. The investigation
              of 
the latter uses  martingale inequalities based on recent progress 
by
              Pisier and Xu. We are interested in the non-commutative version 
of the 
              Rosenthal/Burkholder inequality and Doob's maximal inequality. 
Maximal
              inequalities are also known as a useful tool in (stochastical) 
analysis. The
              more recent theory of operator spaces delivers the 
right framework for these
              investigations and reveals surprising 
properties of the non-commutative space
              of p-integrable functions 
associated to free groups.
              





Non-commutative probability provides  one possible framework 
for
              the probabilistic viewpoint in quantum mechanics. This theory
combines
              fundamental concepts of algebraic nature with analytic
insight and methods
              with roots in calculus. The non-commutative 
analogue for the spaces of
              p-integrable functions has a long 
tradition in the theory of operator
              algebras and provides a 
fruitful framework for understanding  classical 
              tools in 
probability. It is most challenging to reveal or overcome
              
substantial differences between the commutative and non-
commutative theory.
              This area enables the interaction between 
different streams inside  the
              mathematical community and 
mathematical physics. This kind of interaction is
              one of the most 
important resources for new development in mathematics

