Title       : Discovery-Based Lower-Division Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0088056

Award Number: 0088056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100769             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Philip Bays pbays@Saintmarys.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy M. Feigl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's College
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/284-4000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
In response to the national discussion on science pedagogy and
              a school-wide upgrade of computing facilities and networking, we have been
              carrying out a major redesign of our chemistry curriculum. In lower division
              courses, the impact of these changes has been most apparent in the so-called
              "lecture" portion of traditional lecture/laboratory sequences. This project
              facilitates a complementary development of laboratory-based segments of the
              first-year principles of chemistry course and the second-year organic chemistry
              course. We are extending to the laboratory the emphasis on discovery-based and
              collaborative learning that characterizes our classrooms. We are making
              lower-division laboratory experiences closer approximations of the real thing
              and are using the excitement of discovery as the driving force for learning
              just as it is in the general scientific enterprise. The project adapts in a
              general way the Project Kaleidoscope Plan for Strengthening Undergraduate
              Science and Mathematics, and, more specifically, modifies experiments currently
              used in undergraduate chemistry courses to a discovery format, and incorporates
              computing in pedagogy following the model of the SCALE-UP Project at North
              Carolina State University in physics. 

Incorporation of a set of
              instrumentation is enabling us to achieve these objectives through the
              introduction of modern technology that both broadens the scope of what students
              can do and, as important, frees up time and helps establish a collaboratory
              capability for thinking about and understanding what is being done. Major items
              being introduced into the courses include laptop computers with wireless
              networking capability and expanded molecular modeling support, Vernier
              instrument kits for data acquisition, fiber-optic diode-array
              ultraviolet/visible spectrophotometers, and an upgrade of our current nuclear
              magnetic resonance spectrometer. We are providing a laboratory environment that
              allows students to assume direct responsibility in a reasonably efficient way
              for the broadest range of laboratory work, with the instructor's time as a
              skilled technician minimized in order to emphasize his or her role as guide and
              mentor. We anticipate that implementation of this technology will begin to blur
              the distinction between the lecture and laboratory segments of these courses.
              

Finally, as a women's college, we have played a significant role in
              increasing the proportion of women entering the science professions. One goal
              of this project is to increase the number of our students who continue in the
              sciences beyond their first two years and, also, the proportion of women who
              elect to pursue post-graduate study in the discipline because their early
              experience of science at the college level has engaged both their minds and
              their interest. 


