Title       : An Environmentally-benign ('Green') Organic Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2001   
File        : a0088986

Award Number: 0088986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499681             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Hutchison hutch@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
As environmental awareness has grown, modern chemical research
              and development has increasingly focused on the discovery of methods for
              environmentally benign chemical synthesis and processing ("Green Chemistry").
              Through this project, educational materials are being developed which bring
              modern green chemical approaches, techniques, and thought processes to the
              large-enrollment undergraduate organic chemistry teaching laboratory. With the
              extensive involvement of undergraduate students at the University of Oregon and
              at selected institutions across the country, new experiments teaching the
              essentials of practical organic chemistry, complementing the content of typical
              organic chemistry lecture courses, and illustrating the principles of green
              chemistry, are being devised and tested. These materials will be disseminated
              internationally through a variety of vehicles, including a published green
              organic chemistry laboratory textbook, workshops for teachers from all levels
              of educational institutions (K-12, community college, four-year college, and
              university), a Web-centered database of green chemical experiments, and
              versatile complementary materials for organic chemistry lecture courses. Both
              development and evaluation of experiments, as well as evaluation of written
              pedagogical materials, are being assisted through collaborative arrangements
              with four-year colleges, community colleges, and high schools. An international
              panel has been organized to provide periodic advisory input. The project is
              funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education within the Directorate for
              Education and Human Resources, with significant co-funding from the Chemistry
              Division within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities within the Directorate for Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences. 





