Title       : Development and Implementation of a Comprehensive Evaluation Model for Science
               Teacher Preparation Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a0088046

Award Number: 0088046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicente Talanquer vicente@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra J. Tomanek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid Novodvorsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) 
This project is a collaborative effort among faculty
              members in several departments in the College of Science and in the College of
              Education of the University of Arizona. These faculty are designing a formative
              assessment process for a set of newly designed courses for pre-service
              teachers. Because there is a paucity of comprehensive models that can be used
              to assess the effectiveness of actual teacher preparation programs, the main
              goal is to develop such a comprehensive formative assessment model, by adapting
              and implementing diverse assessment instruments to evaluate five key aspects of
              the program's student learning outcomes: (1) conceptual understanding, (2)
              subject-matter "structure," (3) teaching and learning beliefs, (4)
              decision-making skills, and (5) "professional performance" during the student
              teaching period in secondary schools. These different assessment tools and
              practices are drawn from current research in science education and from recent
              work undertaken in NSF-supported projects known as Collaboratives for
              Excellence in Teacher Preparation. Through these activities the project team is
              (1) assembling a set of tested and reliable assessment instruments that will be
              made available to science and science education teachers; (2) implementing an
              ongoing evaluation process that will provide information about the
              effectiveness of the educational practices in the science education and
              subject-matter courses at the college level; and (3) reporting the evaluation
              results in a way to foster among faculty an analysis of and reflection on the
              nature and quality of the subject-matter courses for all the students.
              "Conceptual Understanding" of prospective teachers is being measured by
              developing an instrument that will draw upon research analyzed in Wandersee,
              Mintzes, and Novak, "Research in Alternative Conceptions in Science", in D. L.
              Gabel (Ed.), Handbook of research in science teaching and learning (pp.
              177-210), New York: Macmillan and the NSTA (1994), and Pfundt and Duit,
              "Bibliography: Students' Alternative Frameworks and Science Education,"
              Institute for Science Education at the University of Kiel, Germany (March,
              2000). A very well-known example of such an instrument is the Force Concept
              Inventory designed by Halloun and Hestenes in the field of physics in the
              1980s. The acquired "Subject Matter Structure" of students is a measure of the
              coherence of their understanding of science disciplines -- the ability to see
              the big picture and the place of a body of specialized knowledge in that larger
              framework. Research indicates that secondary science teachers with high scores
              on "Subject Matter Structure" have greater skill in selecting topics for
              inclusion in the secondary science curriculum. Their starting point is the work
              of G.R. Gess-Newsome and N.G. Lederman, "Preservice Biology Teachers' Knowledge
              Structures as a Function of Professional Teacher Education: A Year-Long
              Assessment, Science Education, Vol. 77, No. 1 (1993), pages 25-45. The work of
              Simmons et al., "Beginning Teachers: Beliefs and Classroom Actions," Journal of
              Research in Science Teaching, Vol. 36, No. 8. (1999), pp. 930-954, is being
              adapted to measure "teaching and learning beliefs." Some prospective teachers
              still believe that boys are better suited for science than girls, that some
              students are bound to fail, that learning is passive, that teaching is
              imparting knowledge to students, and that theory is largely not relevant to
              teaching. If these beliefs go unchallenged and future teachers are not taught
              to critically examine their own ideas, ineffective models of teaching are
              perpetuated. The work of Koballa and Tippins is being used as a starting point
              to creating instruments for measuring "decision making skills." See T.R.
              Koballa and D.J. Tippins, "Cases in Middle and Secondary Science Education,"
              (Merrill Publishers, Upper saddle River, NJ, 2000). "Professional Performance"
              is being measured by adapting James Gallagher's Secondary Teacher Analysis
              Matrix (Michigan State University, Department of Teacher Education, 1995) and
              the Arizona Collaborative for Excellence in Preparation of Teachers' "Reformed
              Teaching Observation Protocol."


