Title       : POWRE: Prosodic Influences on the Production and Comprehension of Syntactic
               Ambiguity in a Game-Based Conversation Task
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0088175

Award Number: 0088175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shari R. Speer speer@ling.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1311,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is designed to demonstrate that naive speakers in a natural
              conversational situation reliably use prosody (loosely, the 'melody in speech')
              to structure the information they provide to listeners, and that listeners in
              turn make use of this prosodic structure to facilitate accurate recovery of the
              speaker's intended meaning.  The broad objective of the research is to develop
              a psycholinguistic model of sentence comprehension in which prosody plays a
              fundamental role, often determining the syntactic and semantic interpretation
              assigned to a sentence.  Participants in these experiments will play a
              cooperative board game that elicits semi-spontaneous productions of
              syntactically ambiguous sentences.  The game involves two speakers, each with a
              game board the other cannot see, who must use to a limited set of scripted
              sentences to determine and communicate joint moves.  Key utterances contain
              syntactic ambiguities such as the ambiguous prepositional phrase attachment in
              "Move the square with the triangle," (meaning either 'push the square with the
              triangle' or 'move the house-shaped piece.') To evaluate the production of
              prosody, players' speech will be recorded digitally and submitted to phonetic
              and phonological analysis.  To evaluate the use of prosody in comprehension,
              the timing and fixation locations of players eyemovements will be recorded as
              they listen to and comprehend the conversation and implement the game moves. 
              The experiments will use head-mounted eye tracking, a relatively new technology
              recently shown to be sensitive to prosodic and syntactic factors in experiments
              with isolated spoken sentences that refer to objects in the listeners' visual
              scene.  The apparatus is ideal because it does not restrict movement, does not
              introduce an additional experimental task, and does not interrupt speaking or
              listening.  

There are two novel aspects to this research.  The first is
              that the game task focuses the participants' attention on the act of
              communication rather than on the process of reading, and can provide a more
              accurate picture of the use prosody in natural conversation between naive
              speakers.  Recent work in language production has argued that speakers use
              prosody to disambiguate syntax only when they are aware of the ambiguity and
              are given explicit instructions, implying that although listeners can use
              prosody, they may have few opportunities to do so.  However, speakers in these
              studies read sentences from notecards.  Because the pragmatic goals of a reader
              differ dramatically from those of speakers in typical conversation, such tasks
              may misrepresent the nature and extent of prosodic disambiguation.  The second
              is that the combination of the game task with head-mounted eyetracking
              technology will develop a much-needed novel method that will provide a
              temporally-precise, on-line measure of comprehension that can be used while
              comprehension is occurring as part of semi-spontaneous spoken discourse.  This
              will allow Speer to investigate the issues concerning the relative influence of
              prosodic, syntactic, and situationally-determined discourse variables over the
              time course of sentence comprehension, which form the core of current work in
              modeling human language processing. 

This POWRE grant will allow Speer to
              purchase a head-mounted system, providing her the opportunity to utilize this
              new methodology to which she currently has no access, and to conduct
              exploratory work necessary to begin a new line of inquiry.  The availability of
              such methodology will greatly enhance her ability to provide empirical data
              relevant to important theoretical questions at the most basic level of her
              research program and thus will be highly important to the advancement of her
              career.

