Title       : Adaptation and Implementation of Computer Technology into the Mathematical
               Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0088422

Award Number: 0088422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93011              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Len Miller miller@math.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane L. Harvill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael M. Neumann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Michael Pearson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 
The purpose of the project is to extend the
              curriculum reform and the use of computer technology to introductory courses
              into linear algebra, differential equations, and statistics. The curriculum
              reform involves a thorough revision and restructure of the three courses and
              includes the adaptation and implementation of appropriate material for
              computer-based instruction and extended student projects in these areas.
              Several programs are adapted and implemented into the curriculum, e.g., the
              Linear Algebra Curriculum Study Group Recommendations for the First Course in
              Linear Algebra developed by D. Carlson, C.R. Johnson, D.C. Lay and A.D. Porter,
              the ODE project developed at Boston University, and ActivStats developed by P.
              Velleman. Per year, these three courses are offered in 35 sections of about 40
              students each, with a campus-wide total enrollment of more than 1300 students.
              To serve these students, a 40-seat classroom laboratory is constructed with
              networked workstations and audiovisual equipment. About half of the time, this
              laboratory is used for in-class instruction, while, the remaining time,
              students work on computer-based projects, often in a collaborative environment.
              Graduate teaching assistants who are carefully trained in the relevant software
              and its use in the specific areas staff the laboratory. Workshops for faculty
              development and graduate student training are designed and offered on a regular
              basis. These workshops have an important impact on the mathematics education
              for pre-service and in-service teachers in the region. Materials and results
              are disseminated both electronically and through publication and presentation.
              The success of the project is monitored through a variety of fine-tuned
              evaluation and assessment instruments.

