Title       : Instability and Passivity Concepts for Fast and Safe Electrohydraulic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0088964

Award Number: 0088964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Perry Y. Li pli@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Perry Y. Li, University of Minnesota
Proposal number:
              CMS-0088964

Instability and Passivity Concepts for Fast and Safe
              Electrohydraulic Systems


Electrohydraulics play an important role in many
              industries, such as construction, material testing, robotics, aerospace. The
              market place for electrohydraulics is demanding 1) higher bandwidth, lower cost
              and better reliability, and 2) safer and better human friendliness, especially
              for applications that require interaction with the environment and direct
              operation by a human. 

This project addresses these two needs by introducing
              the concepts of instability and passivity to the design of electrohydraulic
              valves. Firstly, a new class single stage valves (which are inherently cheaper
              and more reliable than multistage valves) with improved performance will be
              developed - by making the spool unstable, so as to exploit the agility afforded
              by the unstable flow forces. Secondly, a new class of electrohydraulic valves
              that possess a passivity property will be developed. Although passivity is well
              recognized to improve safety and to enhance human friendliness, it has not been
              previously exploited in electrohydraulic systems.

Theory for the design and
              control of the new unstable valves and passive valves will be developed. The
              new valves will be prototyped. The unstable valves will be demonstrated in
              typical force and position tracking tasks. The usefulness of the passive valves
              in safety critical, human operated applications will be demonstrated in the
              context of a hydraulically actuated teleoperated surgical tool.

This
              research will enable hydraulic systems to be more cost effective, more
              reliable, have better performance, and to be safer and more user friendly.
              These advances will expand hydraulics into a larger segment of industry and to
              new applications.

