Title       : Electronic Laboratory Guide for Microbiology Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0088668

Award Number: 0088668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73286              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ethelynda E. Harding   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Candace Egan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fresno Fdn
	      4910 N. Chestnut Ave
	      Fresno, CA  93726    559/278-0840

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
Although research suggests that investigative
              laboratories are more effective in 
teaching science process skills and in
              achieving higher order learning than are traditional cookbook laboratories, and
              even though microbiology is especially suited to investigative laboratories,
              microbiology laboratory manuals are generally quite traditional. This may be
              because laboratory skill acquisition is central to the microbiology laboratory.
              We are developing a multimedia electronic laboratory guide that provides
              students with a "first exposure" to new laboratory techniques outside of class
              time. The guide is not a laboratory manual, but an integrated, hyperlinked
              presentation of essential methods and 
equipment used in microbiology
              laboratories. The guide is used to introduce new, investigative, laboratory
              activities into the courses on our campus. Video clip demonstrations of many
              basic techniques and instruments are being incorporated into a web-based
              electronic guide that contains, in addition to the videos, information about
              the theory behind basic laboratory practice and techniques, helpful hints
              related to laboratory methods, safety instructions, and questions to assess
              student readiness to perform the technique in the laboratory setting. Our
              institution is a Hispanic Serving Institution, with a majority of students of
              color and a large proportion of first generation college students. We feel that
              this application of instructional technology increases students' confidence in
              their laboratory skills, their willingness to work independently, and their
              ability to perform successfully in the laboratory setting such that they can
              focus more on the research and the data and less on the mechanics of performing
              basic laboratory techniques. 




