Title       : Inquiry-Based Plant Science Education through Hands-on Molecular Biology
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a0088013

Award Number: 0088013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Narayanaswamy Bharathan bharaths@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry L. Pickering  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Dietrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Through a major curriculum revision effort and with
              the assistance of outside consultation, the Department of Biology has
              implemented the use of current teaching methods and the constructivist learning
              method by implementing hands-on course experiences across the curriculum.
              Investment by the university in educational technology and lab instrumentation
              has moved us toward goal attainment. Through this project, the plant science
              courses in the department are being updated and revised to meet the
              institutional goal of providing students with contemporary research experiences
              in biology. Botany, Plant Physiology and Laboratory Methods in Biology and
              Biotechnology are being updated to include inquiry-based laboratory experiences
              performed by peer groups using the techniques of modern molecular biology and
              plant materials. Each course includes a semester-long project as a means of
              providing experience in "doing science" and thus enhancing the confidence of
              students in their lab skills and content mastery. In this way, we are adapting
              several research protocols, instruments, and the long-term process of discovery
              traditionally found only in research laboratories to meet the needs of
              introductory students and are implementing these student-focused experiments in
              the introductory biology classroom. These methods are further adapted to meet
              the needs of upper level students who revisit these plant-focused techniques
              while completing more complex and independent research projects in more
              advanced courses. 

