Title       : Development of an Undergraduate Materials Engineering Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a0088400

Award Number: 0088400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaretha Lam-Andersen mjlam@cooper.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jie Li  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cooper Union
	      Albert Nerken School of Engrg
	      New York, NY  100037120    212/353-4177

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Materials Science (57) 
With advances in materials in fields as
              diverse as microelectronics, mechatronics and intelligent structures, the
              current undergraduate materials science curriculum falls short of providing
              students a solid interdisciplinary platform for coping with challenges to come.
              The project is developing an innovative Materials Engineering Laboratory at
              Cooper Union to engage students in exploring scientific concepts for all
              classes of materials in this interdisciplinary field. An objective of this
              project is to improve the existing materials engineering laboratory at Cooper
              Union in conjunction with the development of a materials science laboratory
              course to meet industry's current needs for bachelor's level engineers with an
              interdisciplinary background. The equipment being adapted by this project is
              usually found in research institutions or graduate level labs; the complete set
              is not normally found in undergraduate labs. In a novel step towards
              implementing a design approach to undergraduate materials science education,
              the new lab includes a sample fabrication system and electro-mechanical
              properties testing system, where students can iteratively synthesize and
              analyze their own samples. The design of the new course promises to fully
              integrate research in materials science within undergraduate education in an
              interactive, experiential way. Adding to the traditional undergraduate
              materials science laboratory course curricula, the project is adapting and
              implementing new experiments from the Electroceramics Research Group at the
              Department of Ceramics & Materials Engineering of Rutgers University. The new
              laboratory will thus advance efforts to establish a unique materials science
              and engineering laboratory that fosters a close interaction among mechanical,
              electrical and civil engineering curricula. Students are able to explore the
              fundamentals for all types of materials including polymers, metals, ceramics
              and some specific materials used in intelligent structures such as actuators
              and sensors. Project results will be disseminated through workshops,
              presentations at conferences, and journal publications.
