Title       : BCC Geographical Information Systems Technology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0088634

Award Number: 0088634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70811              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Sexton jsexton@bcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Burlington County College
	      Pemberton Browns Mills Rd
	      Pemberton, NJ  08068    609/894-9311

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)

Burlington County College (BCC) of New Jersey is adapting,
              enhancing, implementing, and disseminating a geospatial technology program. To
              accomplish this goal, BCC is drawing upon the experiences and knowledge of
              geo-spatial technology curriculum projects at: San Mateo Community College of
              California, Lewis and Clark State College of Idaho and Brevard Community
              College of Florida. BCC is also utilizing the expertise of an Advisory Board
              and community based program partners: Burlington County Federal Soil
              Conservation District, Burlington County Data Processing Center, Rutgers
              University Geomantics Program, and Ann Johnson of ESRI.

BCC is offering the
              following:

An interdisciplinary Geospatial Technologies Associate of Applied
              Science (A.A.S.) degree program and Geospatial Technologies Certificate Program
              that consists of a sequence of introductory courses in geographic information
              systems (GIS), global positioning systems (UPS), and remote sensing (RS) at the
              two-year college level.

Interdisciplinary courses in natural resources
              management, human ecology, and statistical and
mathematical modeling that
              emphasize the application of geospatial technologies to a broad range of issues
              such as sustainable population growth, land use management, transportation
              route planning, and water-quality management.

Experiential education
              opportunities that place students in meaningful and productive roles as
              technicians and researchers within the local community as part of
              community/campus course project teams or as interns, volunteers, and
              employees.

Strategies to build faculty and staff capacity in GIS
              technology.
 
.

