Title       : Development of Laboratory Experiences in Neural Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a0088823

Award Number: 0088823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85652              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Hetling jhetli1@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Comer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61); Engineering (59)
Academic and commercial research
              teams are rapidly approaching a new generation of devices that will interact
              with, incorporate, and/or emulate living nervous systems. Neural prostheses to
              restore sight, hearing, or mobility will offer a wider range of function;
              robotic devices will become more effective with neuromorphic control systems.
              Neural Engineering is the intellectual force behind these developments,
              supported by recent advances in cellular neurobiology, microfabrication and
              neural modeling. Student training in this evolving area must emphasize the
              cellular and molecular interfaces between biological and artificial systems.
              With a growing industrial investment in Neural Engineering technologies, and
              the increasing number of Neural Engineering research centers and graduate
              programs emerging across the country, it is both appropriate and advantageous
              to now train undergraduate students in this area. Training in Neural
              Engineering at the undergraduate level has been slow to develop, impeded by the
              compartmentalization of the requisite skills in traditionally separate
              curricula (Neuroscience and Engineering). The UIC Departments of Bioengineering
              and Biological Sciences have addressed this problem in a two-year cross-college
              effort to establish one of the first undergraduate Neural Engineering programs
              in the country. In consultation with advisory committees, we have organized a
              Neural Engineering curriculum which culminates in a new capstone course
              [BioE/BioS 475]. This course was taught by the PI/CoPI as a pilot in Spring
              2000 with a minimal laboratory component. We are now adapting engineered neural
              systems and measurement techniques from contemporary research efforts for use
              in this undergraduate learning environment. This will provide hands-on
              experience and technical training exemplary of current trends in Neural
              Engineering. Specifically, we are developing two new learning modules exemplary
              of current issues in neural engineering. The course objective is to emphasize
              application-driven design of neural systems. Concordantly, the themes for each
              module are being adapted from faculty research involving: a) Neurons cultured
              on a microelectrode array, demonstrating fabrication and principles of
              biosensors and implantable neuroprosthetics, and b) Neural circuits patterned
              on an inorganic substrate, illustrating progress toward neuromorphic devices
              for biocomputation and complex hybrid prostheses. An important goal is to
              enable students to make cellular-level measurements from these engineered
              neural systems. We expect that 1/3 of bioengineering students and an equal
              number of biology students will follow the Neural Engineering course track,
              with approximately 40 students taking the capstone course during the initial
              grant period. Evaluation of pedagogy and attainment of course goals are being
              undertaken by the UIC Survey Research Laboratory. All of the training
              innovations initiated by this grant will become a permanent part of our
              curriculum, will be disseminated to other universities, and will be used to
              enhance training of secondary level science teachers through collaboration with
              the UIC Institute for Math and Science Education.



