Title       : Inquiry-Based Cellular Immunology Components Added to the Immunology Laboratory
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2000   
File        : a0088190

Award Number: 0088190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21651              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernadette C. Taylor taylor.bern@uwlax.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin La Crosse
	      1725 State Street
	      La Crosse, WI  546013742    608/785-8000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
Immunology is an exciting discipline that has been at
              the forefront of modern biological research. Twenty five Nobel Prizes have been
              awarded in Immunology in the past century which is a testament to the rapid
              rate at which our understanding of Immunology advances. Thus, immunology
              teachers must continually stay abreast of new developments and incorporate them
              into their lecture and laboratory curricula. The Immunology course at the
              University of Wisconsin-La Crosse (UW-L) contains a laboratory based primarily
              on traditional antigen-antibody interactions. The PI of this project has been
              very successful at modifying existing exercises so that they are more inquiry
              based and emphasize quantitative skills, critical thinking and student design
              of experiments. Although much of the explosive growth in knowledge and
              methodologies in immunology has been in cellular aspects of the science,
              laboratory exercises that focus on cellular immunology are lacking. The
              objectives of this project are 1) to implement a series of cellular immunology
              exercises in the UW-L Immunology course and 2) to design inquiry based
              experiments. Exercises that are being developed provide students the
              opportunity to design, carry out, and analyze experiments on T cell
              proliferation, cloning and screening of hybridomas to produce monoclonal
              antibodies, and flow cytometric analysis of cells of the immune system. These
              curricular changes are intended to enhance students' ability to design
              experiments using modern technology, enhance their quantitative and computer
              skills, and provide them with experience in methods widely used in biological
              research and medical diagnostics. The experiments also aim to enhance students'
              understanding of important concepts of cellular immunology presented in the
              lecture component of the course. The new laboratory investigations are an
              adaptation of and reflect recent trends in the clinical and research aspects of
              immunology, and are modeled pedagogically after contemporary science education
              literature . The PI has a strong track record in designing inquiry-based
              laboratory exercises, and has extensive research experience in cellular
              immunology, but requires additional equipment to accomplish these objectives.
              This project impacts a large target audience as Immunology is required by all
              Microbiology and Medical Laboratory Science majors and is a popular elective
              for Biology/Biomedical majors. It is the highest enrollment upper lever course
              in the Microbiology Department at UW-L with enrollments of 80-120 students per
              year. This projects is serving as a model for other faculty in the Department
              and University as they move toward more inquiry-based laboratories.




