Title       : Far Infrared Fourier Transform Spectrometer for Undergraduate Physics
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a0088205

Award Number: 0088205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia C. Long vclong@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The motions of atoms within a molecule or a crystal lattice
              constitute one of the most fundamental physical phenomena of multi-atom
              systems, yet few undergraduate physics curricula include experimental studies
              of vibrational properties. Modern spectrometers can measure frequencies into
              the far infrared using the Fourier Transform method and are well suited to
              operation by trained undergraduates. In this project, students are using a far
              infrared (FIR) Fourier Transform (FT) spectrometer in undergraduate physics
              experiments, so that they will become familiar with this important technique
              and see basic physics concepts brought to life. The spectrometer is being used
              to enhance the laboratory component of the Modern Physics course, to overhaul
              the Experimental Condensed Matter Physics course, to expand the number of
              student-faculty research projects, and to engage in collaborations with the
              Chemistry Department. Students are progressing from studying vibrations of
              diatomic molecules in the gas phase, to vibrations of large fullerene cages
              imbedded in a molecular solid, to phonons in simple ionic crystalline lattices.
              The second year Modern Physics laboratory is incorporating an expanded version
              of a classic experiment in rotations and vibrations of gas phase HCl. The dual
              far and middle infrared capability of the instrument allows students to observe
              excitations of pure molecular rotations at low frequency, and recognize them
              again as fine structure on top of vibrations in the middle infrared region. Two
              experiments in FIR vibrational spectroscopy are effecting a major revamping of
              the advanced Experimental Condensed Matter Physics course. The first, adapted
              from the research literature and the undergraduate work of students at the L.
              Eotvos University and the Technical University of Budapest, demonstrates the
              central role of symmetry in determining vibrational properties of pristine and
              photo-polymerized c60. The second, based on an experiment that was recently
              implemented at Reed College, connects a simple 1D lattice dynamics calculation
              to the observation of optical phonon modes in a real physical system. 


              Another goal of this project to take advantage of an opportunity to reach an
              unprecedented number of women physics majors at Colby, as indicated by
              pre-registration numbers for the fall 2000 Modern Physics course. By providing
              an exceptional undergraduate program of experimental physics, we hope to
              further the careers of these young women, inspire them to become role models
              for others, and maintain a critical mass of women in the program. Evaluations
              of the project will consider specifically their impact on female students as
              well as on student learning in general. Students will disseminate the results
              at conferences for undergraduates, and in education or research journals, as
              appropriate for the work. 


