Title       : Collaborative Research: Processes Driving Rock Uplift and Flexural Deformation
               following Convergent Tectonics: The Fluvial Terrace Record, Ebro Basin, Spain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0088714

Award Number: 0088714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99963              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia J. Lewis clewis@lanl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lewis  0088714
McDonald  0088601
Establishing dynamic links between rock
              uplift and long-term patterns and rates of fluvial incision away from plate
              margins is a major contemporary challenge in tectonic geomorphology.  We are
              engaged in a multifaceted project that addresses fundamental questions about
              how mountainous topography and fluvial systems evolve following active crustal
              shortening.  The Spanish Pyrenees and adjacent Ebro Basin comprise an
              outstanding locality for isolating processes that drive rock-uplift (or
              subsidence) in orogens where active compression and crustal thickening have
              ceased.  A marked feature of the Ebro Basin is the striking variation in stream
              incision into ~25 million year old sedimentary rocks.  Incision is minimal
              along the axis of the basin, but reaches more than 1000 m in the south-central
              Pyrenees.  Our data suggest that long-term patterns and rates of fluvial
              incision in ranges flanking the Ebro Basin are driven by intraplate phenomena,
              which form the three competing hypotheses we are testing:  Streams in this
              region incise in response to one, or more, of the following mechanisms: (1)
              rock uplift by isostatic response to removal of mass from the orogen and
              adjacent foreland basin; (2) rock uplift driven by upwelling of hot, buoyant
              asthenosphere perhaps related to adjacent, active crustal extension and
              volcanism; (3) regional base level lowering, perhaps related to the Messinian
              salinity crisis, Quaternary eustatic sea level changes, or both.  We are
              developing a precise chronostratigraphy (based on radiocarbon, luminescence,
              and cosmogenic nuclide dating and soils) of selected stream terraces in the
              Ebro Basin for which spatial and temporal rates of fluvial incision can be
              reconstructed.  Results will be used to generate a conceptual model for the
              processes that drive rock-uplift (or subsidence) in orogens where active
              crustal thickening has ceased.  Our multidisciplinary approach requires
              expertise in structural geology, soil stratigraphy, geochronology, tectonic
              geomorphology, geodynamic modeling, and regional geology.  We focus on the
              central Pyrenees for this work, but our methodology has direct application to
              both modern and ancient mountain ranges throughout the world.
