Title       : Improvement of Undergraduate Preparation in Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2000  
File        : a0088757

Award Number: 0088757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39708              (Estimated)
Investigator: LaJoyce H. Debro ldebro@jsucc.jsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jacksonville State Univ
	      700 North Pelham Road
	      Jacksonville, AL  36265    256/782-5284

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
This project is using inquiry-based cooperative
              learning and research training in a culturally diverse setting to 1) improve
              undergraduate preparation in Molecular Biology; 2) enhance application of the
              scientific method; and 3) encourage team projects that promote interactions
              among culturally diverse learners. Funds are being used to upgrade a sequence
              of two courses and undergraduate research facilities. Specifically an existing
              course in Molecular
Biology is being modified to involve students in an
              inquiry based cooperative learning project where students learn from their
              peers and the professor serves as a facilitator in the process. The effort is
              an adaptation of a laboratory manual "Unraveling DNA," developed with NSF
              support. The laboratory component of the course is being expanded to include
              subcloning and sequence analysis of the luxA gene from the Lux operon that is
              cloned in the existing course. Students, working in groups, use the polymerase
              chain reaction and DNA sequencing and analysis to study their clones. In the
              second course, Advanced Topics, cooperative learning continues as students read
              and discuss original research articles that assist them in applying the
              principles and techniques of molecular biology and the scientific method to a
              novel situation. Students develop and submit a research proposal to external
              sources or the established University student/faculty research program for
              funding consideration. Students complete the proposed research as an
              undergraduate research project and present the results at the annual student
              symposium as either a poster or an oral presentation. The goals of the project
              are consistent with the department's mission that promotes cooperative learning
              and undergraduate research as a capstone course. Funds are being used for
              instrumentation, course development and evaluation.


