Title       : Collaborative Project on Integrating Census Data Analysis into the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0088715

Award Number: 0088715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $522205             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Frey billf@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Sociology (86)
This is a collaborative project with the American Sociological
              Association (Award 0089006). This collaborative project is working with
              individual faculty and whole departments in order to introduce scientific
              reasoning systematically into the undergraduate curriculum. The project is
              pursuing the goal of improved scientific literacy among undergraduate students
              in the social sciences by providing teachers and whole departments with tools
              and expertise to integrate data analysis and analytic rigor more widely
              throughout the curriculum.
This collaboration is building upon two already
              successful approaches that complement each other. The Social Science Data
              Analysis Network (www.SSDAN.net ) project at the University of Michigan has
              worked with a nationwide network of faculty to co-produce engaging,
              wide-ranging curricular materials with US Census Bureau data. SSDAN encourages
              and facilitates individual faculty to integrate specially tailored, data
              analysis modules into substantive social science courses at all levels. The
              American Sociological Association's (ASA's) Minority Opportunities through
              Structural Transformation (MOST) Program has worked with entire departments to
              alter their curriculum in ways that ensure structural change toward improved
              research training of minorities and all students. This project is introducing
              SSDAN approaches as department-wide interventions in a critical mass of courses
              in the curriculum of 16 sociology departments. A core goal is to transform the
              curriculum and thus give students a more sequenced and pervasive exposure to
              scientific reasoning and data analytic skills. Workshops, follow-up visits,
              interactions with the Michigan and ASA staffs along with departmental websites
              are being utilized to support the full implementation and evaluation of this
              intervention. The project is also significantly revising and updating the SSDAN
              website and data analysis module creation features used by faculty across the
              social and behavioral sciences. New datasets from the US 2000 Census,
              historical censuses, CPS (Current Population Survey), and GSS (General Social
              Survey) are being added, and additional formats for analysis by SPSS, SAS,
              STATA, GIS packages, and new interactive data analysis features are also being
              provided. The project is working on a "Guide" that instructs chairs and deans
              how to implement departmental interventions across different types of
              departments and diverse disciplines. In addition, a published workbook updating
              earlier SSDAN publications and an expanded bank of downloadable datasets,
              course modules, and networking capabilities via the website is being produced.
              

