Title       : Development of Interactive Examples for Concept-Based Problem Solving in
               Introductory Undergraduate Physics Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0088734

Award Number: 0088734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary E. Gladding geg@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mats A. Selen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis J. Kane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Stelzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) Traditional introductory physics courses typically fail to
              significantly improve students' conceptual understanding of, and attitude
              towards, physics. Recently, several groups have documented significant
              improvements in these areas by applying insights from physics education
              research to improve curricular content and instructional methods for lectures,
              labs and recitation sections.

This project addresses the remaining critical
              component of undergraduate physics education-the homework problems-with a
              careful integration of technology and instruction, based on knowledge gained
              from physics education research. The primary goal of the project is to create
              instructional materials that students in introductory physics courses can use
              to develop problem-solving strategies based on conceptual analysis. In
              particular, the project is creating a complete set (about 60 total) of
              research-based "Interactive Examples" (IEs) that can be used in introductory
              calculus-based physics courses in undergraduate institutions. These IEs are
              web-based exercises that actively engage students in a Socratic dialog designed
              to help them develop a concept-based strategy to solve a homework
              problem.

The problems developed address documented student difficulties and
              are guided by collaborations with researchers at the University of
              Massachusetts and the University of Washington. These new IEs also exploit the
              lessons learned from previous successful development of IEs for introductory
              algebra-based physics courses.

Quantitative evaluation is being done of the
              effectiveness of the new IEs in improving students' functional understanding of
              basic physics principles. Initial dissemination of these IEs will be to
              community colleges and peer institutions, and further dissemination is being
              refined during the course of the project.




