Title       : The Molecules of Life: A Lecture and Laboratory Course for Non-Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a0088865

Award Number: 0088865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80727              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neville R. Kallenbach neville.kallenbach@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Trace Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
This proposal describes the development of
              instructional materials for an innovative course, entitled The Molecules of
              Life, which is aimed at undergraduate non-science majors. The project addresses
              an urgent need to improve science education for students who do not specialize
              in science but must be scientifically literate in order to make informed
              decisions as citizens in their personal lives and future careers. The target
              audience for the course includes undergraduates in the liberal arts, business
              majors, and students training to be teachers. The Molecules of Life uses modern
              topics such as protein structure, drug design, and the immune response to
              convey our understanding of biomolecular function and how this knowledge is
              applied in combating human disease. Existing resources for biochemistry
              instruction are not suitable for this course since they are designed for
              science majors or students studying for health professions. Therefore, we are
              developing three types of educational materials for The Molecules of Life:
              written instructional modules; an interactive web site incorporating molecular
              graphics exercises; and multi-week, inquiry-based laboratory projects on enzyme
              structure and function. The instructional modules are being written in
              collaboration with NYU research faculty, thereby enhancing faculty development
              and connecting research and teaching activities. Utilizing sophisticated
              graphics software in a course for non-science majors is a creative application
              of a 
technology that is currently underutilized in this context. Laboratory
              projects are being designed with the assistance of graduate students who then
              teach the laboratory sections, a combined experience that enhances their
              training as teachers. Instructional materials are evaluated by faculty both
              within and outside NYU, and the effectiveness of the course is assessed from
              student evaluations. The materials and course results are disseminated via
              commercial publication, workshops, and articles in science education journals.
              





