Title       : Project INSPIRE: Investigations in Science for Pre-service Teachers: Promoting
               and Producing Inquiry-based Relevant Exercises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a0088646

Award Number: 0088646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Jean sjean@keene.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J.Russell Harkay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keene State College
	      229 Main
	      Keene, NH  034350001    603/352-1909

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) 
In the Fall of 2001 the Division of Sciences and the
              Division of Education at Keene State College instituted a new degree program.
              This degree program, called the General Science Degree, provides approved New
              Hampshire certification in Elementary or Middle School Science. Three capstone
              courses were created for this degree: The Web of Science I, The Web of Science
              II, and Phenomenal Science. The objectives of this project are to expose K-8
              pre-service teachers to the discovery and inquiry approach of teaching science
              to elementary and middle school children. The objectives are achieved by
              adapting exemplary materials to the capstone courses. Designing Inquiry Based
              Courses in Mathematics and Physics developed by Aubretch and McEnnis at The
              Ohio State University and the Kites Project developed by Knisely and Kowalczky
              are adapted in the Phenomenal Science. Furthermore, Full Option Science Systems
              (FOSS) developed by Lowery at UC Berkley, NSRC/STC developed by Worth and
              Sandler, and Insights developed at the Educational Development Center are
              adapted in the Web of Science I and II. It is not uncommon for elementary
              teachers to avoid teaching science, a goal of the project is to help break this
              pattern and to free them from relying solely on textbooks for instruction. In
              addition to science content, these courses provide pre-service teachers with
              hands-on experience with discovery and inquiry based activities where students
              interact as "scientists" in cooperative groups. The pre-service teachers, and
              consequently their students, learn to question, share ideas, experiment,
              observe, predict, keep records, and explain ideas with evidence. Students learn
              that science is not just a collection of facts and new vocabulary, but also a
              process of inquiry and discovery. They develop productive scientific attitudes
              and scientific thinking with skills that spill over into other aspects of the
              curriculum, including reading and mathematics. After the pre-service teachers
              have internalized both the content and the pedagogy of discovery and inquiry
              based activities, they then take these adapted and modified lessons to local
              schools. 

The project directly addresses the themes of enhanced student
              learning, faculty development and integration of technology into education.
              After completing these three courses, pre-service teachers are able to plan
              effective inquiry based lessons. 

