Title       : Disseminating Successful Strategies for Implementing Field Work in Undergraduate
               Science Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0088217

Award Number: 0088217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $713803             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Haynes jhaynes@brockport.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michele M. Hluchy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brockport
	      
	      Brockport, NY  14420    716/395-2211

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) This project is focused on disseminating broadly
              successful strategies and methods for enhancing undergraduate interest in
              science through stressed stream analysis. Twenty workshops are being conducted
              for science and engineering faculty who are interested in learning how to
              design new courses or integrate into existing courses environmental analysis
              concepts and state-of-the-art techniques (e.g. biotic indices, electrophoresis,
              geographic information systems, automated water quality analysis, toxic organic
              chemical detection in environmental samples, and spreadsheet modeling).
              Admission to these workshops is based on participants plans for incorporating
              workshop materials into courses and curricula at their home institutions.
              Participants pay their own travel expenses and the workshops pay all other
              expenses. These 3-day workshops are teaching faculty how to organize student
              teams for collecting data needed to prepare environmental impact statements for
              real, local problems. Participants receive fully documented course materials
              with easily adaptable sample exercises, work with regional faculty workshop
              leaders to modify courses and curriculum at their own institutions, and learn
              how to sustain this process. The workshop activities are also supported by
              ample opportunities for follow up with faculty leaders and other participants.
              Fifteen of the workshops are being conducted at regional sites at the rate of 3
              per year, and five are being conducted at the national meetings of different
              scientific societies, at the rate of 1 per year, including at least one
              national meeting of an organization of minority scientists. The project leaders
              are offering full travel allowances for underrepresented minority faculty. 

