Title       : Topics in Dynamical Systems: Attractors, Dimension, Lattice Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0088971

Award Number: 0088971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yakov B. Pesin pesin@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract.

The project outlines  scientific activity in three directions. The
              first 
is the theory of coupled map lattices (CML) where research is focused
              
on the thermodynamical limit for infinite-dimensional SRB measures 
(in the
              sense of Sinai); stability of traveling wave solutions, and 
transition from
              CMLs to PDEs via traveling waves.
It also includes the study of some
              well-known PDEs (for example, 
Swift-Hohenberg equation which is of great
              interest in neurobiology).  
The second direction is concerned with the
              dimension theory of dynamical 
systems and includes the multifractal analysis
              of Birkhoff averages 
with applications to some problems in number theory as
              well as
the multifractal rigidity phenomenon for conformal expanding maps.
              
The third direction of research deals with some recent advantages 
in smooth
              ergodic theory. In particular, it is proposed to construct 
some new examples
              of volume preserving diffeomorphisms
with non-zero Lyapunov exponents (on any
              Riemannian manifold and 
with countable number of ergodic components). It is
              also proposed 
to effect a multifractal formalism for two-dimensional
              hyperbolic 
measures.

The main goal of the proposed research is to develop
              further the 
mathematical theory of chaos.  It deals with various aspects of
              
this theory including the appearance of chaotic motions in dynamical
              
systems (which are mathematical models of various phenomena in 
physics,
              biology, economics, etc. ) and the interplay between chaotic 
regimes and
              fractal geometric structure of the space. It is proposed 
to study some
              macro-characteristics of chaotic behavior (such as 
entropy and Lyapunov
              exponents) and relate them to fractal dimension 
of the space. It is also
              proposed to construct some new examples of 
chaotic systems both conservative
              and dissipative, finite-dimensional 
as well as infinite-dimensional. These
              examples may serve as models 
of such extremely complicated phenomena as
              turbulence in hydrodynamics, 
neuron and memory activity in neuroscience,
              plant growth in plant biology, etc.  



