Title       : Enhancing Chemistry Curricula through Molecular Modeling: A Multi-Campus
               Consortium Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0088882

Award Number: 0088882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88850              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Keller ffjwk@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Kennish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rudy J. Candler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Stekoll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
This project is a joint effort by four chemistry departments in
              the University of Alaska system to improve the access of UA chemistry students
              to modern computational chemistry tools. Chemistry faculty at these sites,
              which include UA campuses at Fairbanks, Anchorage, Juneau, and the
              Matanuska-Susitna Valley, do have some experience using molecular modeling
              software. However, most of these small chemistry departments by themselves lack
              experience using molecular modeling in the teaching setting, they lack
              colleagues within their sub-disciplines to discuss specific molecular modeling
              issues, and they lack the financial resources and technical background to
              install the necessary hardware and software on a department-wide scale. Thus
              the UA consortium was formed to provide mutual technical support concerning how
              to solve specific molecular modeling problems, to exchange ideas and methods
              for incorporating molecular modeling in the chemistry curriculum, and to choose
              the best hardware and software for installation in undergraduate computer labs.
              The PIs settled on a common hardware standard and the HyperChem molecular
              modeling system to facilitate communication throughout the UA system.
              Communication also is fostered by setting up a Web site (www.hyperalaska.edu)
              as a centralized information exchange site for Alaska chemistry faculty, or
              others nationwide, regarding teaching or research applications of molecular
              modeling. UA chemistry faculty are adapting molecular modeling methods in their
              curricula in various ways. These are designed to: (1) enhance the mental
              picture of molecularity among introductory level students (Jones, ChemConf 96),
              (2) create unifying cross-disciplinary connections among upper division
              students enrolled in discipline-specific chemistry and (in some cases) biology
              classes (Martin, J. Chem. Ed., 75, 241, 1998), and (3) critically benchmark
              computational chemistry results against experimental results, such as those
              obtained in NMR, IR, thermochemical, chromatographic, kinetic or other
              experiments (Yarger, J. Chem. Ed., 74, 243, 1997; Wolfson, J. Chem. Ed. 73,
              1026, 1996). The across-the-board implementation of molecular modeling
              described here is expected to significantly strengthen chemistry learning by
              providing new motivation for students to undertake learning, a new conceptual
              route to learning, and significant and interesting learning goals for both
              students and teachers.

