Title       : Renormalization in Dynamical Systems and Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0088935

Award Number: 0088935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans A. Koch koch@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Koch   is investigating  critical  behavior  in  Hamiltonian
systems
              and models from statistical  mechanics.  Such behavior appears
to be 
              attributed not  to  individual  systems,  but to  manifolds  of
systems.  In 
              the renormalization group   approach to these phenomena,
one attempts to
              identify these manifolds as the invariant manifolds of
a transformation acting
               on the space of  systems  considered.  Such a
"renormalization group  
              transformation", acting on  Hamiltonians, was
introduced in a previous
              project.  It is expected to have a nontrivial
fixed point,  whose stable
              manifold describes  the critical breakup of
certain invariant   tori.  One  of
               the  main goals  is  to  prove the
existence of such a fixed point.  The
              proposed method involves the use
of a computer, to carry out the large number
              of estimates that will be
needed.  Another goal is to use the known or
              anticipated properties of
the  fixed  point in order to   describe  critical
              invariant  tori and
nearby periodic orbits.  Extensions  of renormalization
              group  methods
to  other  (problems in) Hamiltonian systems   will be
              investigated as
well.   Some interesting formal connections  with quantum
              field theory
and statistical mechanics  also suggest new   ways of approaching
               old
problems in these areas.  One  of the long term  goals in this area
              is
to gain a better understanding of the critical  behavior of Ising
              type
models.  The approach here is to  find and study suitable
              improvements
of the corresponding hierarchical  model.  Other interesting
              questions
concern  the hierarchical model  itself, and two  fixed point
              problems
relevant to disordered media. 

Much  of this   project  is related
               to  the question  of stability in
classical   Hamiltonian systems.   
              Examples are  coupled oscillators,
certain  plasma beams, and models   from
              celestial mechanics.  In  the
case  of two degrees  of freedom, quasiperiodic 
              orbits that trace out
smooth invariant tori divide phase space into regions
              from which other
trajectories cannot   escape, thus  adding  to   the
              stability  of the
system.  The breakup of such tori, as system parameter are
              varied, can
cause the  dynamics to become locally  unstable or chaotic. 
              Numerical
studies  reveal that this   happens  in a highly  universal  way,
              with
certain measurable quantities taking exactly the same values, within
              a
large class of systems.  The standard explanation of these findings
              is
based  on  the assumption that  there  exists a nontrivial
              Hamiltonian
system  that is  invariant  under a  suitable  "renormalization 
              group
transformation".  The goal  here is to  prove that this assumption 
              is
correct.  Part of the proof will  be carried out by  a computer. 
              This
work  should  yield valuable  insight into   the  mechanism behind
              the
observed phenomena, and at the same time, advance the state of the art
in
              computer-assisted proofs -- a  technique that will undoubtedly play
an 
              important role in  the  future of mathematical research.  
              Similar
universality  phenomena  are  associated   with  phase transitions 
              in
condensed matter  physics,  and  models from  several  other  areas
              in
mathematics and physics.  A more  general form  of universality --
              the
fact  that macroscopic   descriptions are possible   without the
              exact
knowledge  of  microscopic details   -- is in   fact  at the  heart
              of
physics and other sciences.  The projects under investigation are part
of
              a long  term effort to understand such  phenomena, and  to describe
them
              mathematically.  A correct  mathematical  description can also be
expected  to
              lead to significant improvements in numerical algorithms.


