Title       : Implementing Studio and Cooperative Learning Models in Mathematics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2000  
File        : a0088236

Award Number: 0088236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monty Taylor taylor@panam.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Bernard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Knobel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Watkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Pan American
	      1201 West University Dr
	      Edinburg, TX  785412999    956/381-2011

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Mathematical Sciences (21) 

The objective of this project is to reform
              mathematics instruction at UTPA by adapting cooperative learning models with
              technology in a studio classroom environment similar to the ones used at
              California Polytechnic State for Statistics, and at Dickinson College and
              Kansas State for physics. Mathematics and its Application in Engineering and
              Science developed at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, The Linear Algebra
              Modules Project developed by Herman, King, Moore, and Pepe, and the Geometry
              Teachers Activities Kit developed by J. A. Muschla and G. R. Muschla, are
              implemented in calculus, linear algebra, and geometry respectively. The
              equipping of two classrooms with computers, software, and other support
              materials enables faculty to provide a learning environment that emphasizes
              learning via discovery, exploration of concepts, and visualization. By
              implementing studio instruction in the gateway courses of calculus, linear
              algebra, and geometry, the education of pre-service secondary mathematics
              teachers, mathematics majors and minors, and engineering and science students
              is effected. Several outcomes are achieved from studio instruction. First there
              is increased confidence of pre-service mathematics teachers in their use of
              technology in secondary school classroom instruction. Also, the engineering and
              science major's ability to apply their mathematics training in their subsequent
              education is reinforced. And finally, students' understanding of geometric
              concepts in linear algebra and the ties between linear algebra and geometry are
              improved.

