Title       : Implementation of a New Interdisciplinary Environmental Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0088287

Award Number: 0088287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95157              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Orvos dorvos@sbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda S. Fink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sweet Briar College
	      
	      Sweet Briar, VA  24595    804/381-6100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) Sweet Briar College (SBC) is implementing a new
              curriculum leading to the B.S. in Environmental Science (ES). SBC is located on
              3,300 acres of diversely used land giving us the potential to develop an
              extraordinary environmental program. The SBC ES major has depth and breadth in
              both the life sciences and the physical sciences, requiring intermediate-level
              courses in biology, chemistry, and mathematics and upper-level courses in
              environmental science plus at least one other science. Students choose to focus
              in one of four concentrations. This new curriculum is being adapted from
              efforts at the Richard Stockton College of New Jersey, Middlebury College,
              Brown University, and Rollins College, and has features adapted from strong
              environmental programs at other institutions as well.

Four integrated
              courses are being implemented. These include three new environmental science
              courses (Advanced Laboratory in Environmental Science, Senior Research in
              Environmental Science, and Environmental Risk Assessment) and one existing
              biology course (General Ecology). ES majors are required to take General
              Ecology and the Advanced Laboratory in Environmental Science, typically in
              successive years. Risk Assessment and Senior Research in Environmental Science
              are usually taken during the senior year. This progression gives us an
              excellent opportunity to coordinate our courses and build on concepts and
              acquired skills from course to course. Modifications to the General Ecology
              laboratory: 1) focus on three field systems, each of which illustrates
              important ecological principles and environmental concepts; 2) introduce
              long-term field research; and 3) introduce GIS/GPS and weather monitoring
              technologies. The Advanced Environmental Science Laboratory is an intensive
              6-hours-per-week laboratory experience intended to further expose ES majors to
              hypothesis formulation and testing, data analysis, team-oriented problem
              solving, and oral and written presentation of results. Students use the sites
              studied previously during General Ecology along with the terrestrial and
              aquatic resources of the SBC campus as well as the surrounding central Virginia
              area.

After completing these courses, ES students are prepared to conduct
              research as part of Senior Research in Environmental Science, a semester-long
              independent project culminating in the preparation of a paper, a presentation
              at a college research symposium and, if appropriate, a presentation at a local
              or regional scientific meeting. Projects are chosen that explore environmental
              problems using the knowledge and skills acquired from previous coursework. The
              Environmental Risk Assessment course is a highly-recommended senior elective
              that shares a philosophy, a focus on technology, and a case history approach
              with General Ecology and the Advanced Environmental Science Laboratory.
              Environmental Risk Assessment extensively utilizes the concepts and practical
              skills emphasized during these two earlier courses and is intended to introduce
              the student to the practice of risk assessment. The incorporation of advanced
              technology into this course as a result of this project significantly changes
              how our undergraduates learn the science and art of assessing risk. This is
              imperative as environmental risk assessment is increasingly being used in the
              private and public sectors for decision making and resource allocation.
              Evaluation of both the courses and the overall curriculum is being conducted.

