Title       : Bridging the Vector Calculus Gap
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0088901

Award Number: 0088901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tevian Dray tevian@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Corinne A. Manogue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 
Physics (13)

There is a "vector calculus gap"
              between the way vector calculus is usually taught by 
mathematicians and the
              way it is used by other scientists. This material is essential for physicists
              and some engineers due to its central role in the description of electricity
              and magnetism. But the traditional language used by mathematicians to teach
              this material is so different from the way it is used in applications that
              students are often unable to translate. A major part of the problem is the
              traditional mathematics emphasis on Cartesian coordinates to describe vectors
              as triples of numbers, rather than emphasizing that vectors are arrows in
              space. This leads to the dot and cross products being memorized as algebraic
              formulas, rather than statements about projections and areas, respectively. The
              traditional approach has the one big advantage of providing a single framework
              for handling quite general problems. But most practical applications, including
              virtually all at the undergraduate level, fall into a small number of special
              cases, such as those with spherical or cylindrical symmetry. Problems with a
              high degree of symmetry become much more intuitive when the computations are
              done in appropriate coordinates, using a vector basis adapted to those
              coordinates. This emphasizes the geometry of the problem, rather than a brute
              force algebraic computation.

This project is developing supplemental
              materials, especially small group activities, which emphasize the geometry of
              highly symmetric situations, some of which are intended for use with an
              otherwise traditional vector calculus course, and some of which are intended
              for use in a new, upper-division physics course on related material. Such
              activities introduce students to the types of problems and methods of solution
              which they encounter in their chosen specialization, while at the same time
              increasing their understanding of traditional vector calculus and its
              applications, thus bridging the vector calculus gap.

