Title       : Integrating Laboratory Practices and Undergraduate Research to the Power
               Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2000  
File        : a0088619

Award Number: 0088619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81451              (Estimated)
Investigator: Efrain O'Neill-Carrillo oneill@ece.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lionel R. Orama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miguel Velez-Reyes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 9001, Mayaguez,P.R.00681
	      Mayaguez, PR  00681    787/834-7620

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55) 
The Power Engineering Group at the University of
              Puerto Rico is integrating laboratory practices within courses in order to
              illustrate fundamental concepts of the course, and is increasing opportunities
              for undergraduate research in power engineering to spark student interest and
              desire for scientific exploration. The effort draws substantially on successful
              learning tools developed at other power engineering programs, and adapts these
              tools to tailor a program based on learn-by-doing and cooperative learning
              concepts. Notably, the PowerLearn multimedia modules for power system
              education, as showcased at a 1999 NSF Workshop, are utilized. These experiences
              are improving student learning and ensure that there will be qualified
              professionals to meet the ever-growing energy demands of the U.S. and Puerto
              Rico. 
New instrumentation for the study of power system components is being
              used to implement these strategies, and is combined with the Electric Machines
              laboratory to form the new Energy Systems Instrumentation Laboratory (ESIL).
              The ESIL provides both students and professors an environment to explore
              engineering ideas and concepts, fundamental principles as well as current
              issues and new research areas in power engineering. Activities and resources at
              ESIL motivate students to learn more about energy principles, cultivating a
              desire for life-long learning. Professors are able to combine teaching and
              research, and develop new teaching methods for the improvement of undergraduate
              education.
Activities at ESIL include traditional laboratory practices,
              laboratory practices
integrated within courses, undergraduate research
              projects, demonstrations, seminars and short-courses. The use of technology and
              collaborative/cooperative learning techniques is a key element at ESIL.

