Title       : Additive Patterning of Integrated Functional Materials on a Chip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0088206

Award Number: 0088206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy R. Sottos n-sottos@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Payne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1602,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Nancy R. Sottos and David A. Payne, University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign
Proposal Number #0088206
Additive Patterning of Integrated
              Functional Materials on a Chip

	A critical issue for the future engineering
              of microsystems on a chip is the ability to rapidly pattern dissimilar
              materials in complex integrated systems.  A novel, additive method of
              patterning is proposed that will enable integration of functional materials
              (e.g., electrical, mechanical, optical, etc.) on a chip, rather than as a
              discrete component added into the circuit and system.  Specifically, an
              interdisciplinary investigation is planned to examine additive patterning of
              integrated electroceramic thin film devices and to develop a better
              understanding of the complex residual stress development in the films during
              this process.  Integration of electroceramic thin films is a key technology for
              the realization of future micro electromechanical (MEM) device applications
              such as miniaturized sensors and actuators, ultrasonic motors and optical
              elements as well as nonvolatile memory elements and switching capacitors for
              integrated circuitry.   In order to advance this technology for the next
              generation of electromechanical devices, it is essential to develop a
              fundamental understanding of the residual stresses generated in the films
              during patterning, the effects of these stresses on film properties and how to
              tailor these stresses for optimal device performance.  Specific goals of this
              interdisciplinary investigation include: (i) development of new protocols to
              pattern thicker electroceramic films and multilayer devices where residual
              stresses are most critical, (ii) in-situ measurement of residual stress
              development during patterning, (iii) development of analytical models to
              understand the role of the substrate, film adhesion, and processing conditions
              on residual stress, (iv) characterization of the electromechanical properties
              of patterned films and assess the effects of residual stress on performance,
              and (v) development of a strategy for tailoring the residual stress state for
              optimal performance and reliability of the device. 

