Title       : Curriculum Integration Through The Virtual Enterprise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a0088816

Award Number: 0088816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74699              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Stanfield stanfiel@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bala Ram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eui H. Park  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjiv Sarin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59) 
The environment and expectations facing graduating
              engineers have changed dramatically in the past decade. Graduate engineers are
              expected to contribute immediately in competitive environments with system
              engineering skills, information technology skills, and soft skills in addition
              to traditional engineering fundamentals. The ability of engineering education
              to produce graduates meeting these market demands will dictate its prominence
              and viability in the increasingly competitive technical education market, as
              well as directly impact our long term influence as a nation. 
This
              proof-of-concept project is addressing the growing and preeminent need for
              engineering capability in two areas: Systems Engineering and Information
              Technology (SE/IT). The project is focused on the design, implementation, and
              evaluation of part of an engineering curriculum integrated through a virtual
              enterprise. The virtual enterprise is a full scale manufacturing supply chain,
              integrated using information technology, and producing actual product.
              Departmental laboratories are organized as business departments. The
              virtual
enterprise is supported by the institution with required hardware
              funded and purchased. The project uses this virtual enterprise as a practical
              and consistent means of developing systems engineering, information technology,
              and soft skills in engineering students. The primary outcome of the proposed
              project will be two modules: one in manufacturing processes and one in
              manufacturing execution systems. Benefits to this approach include the
              broadening of engineering education to appeal to a larger population, including
              minorities that are severely underrepresented in engineering.



