Title       : A Scaleable Multicast Protocol to Enable Future-Generation Large Scale
               Multimedia Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0088026

Award Number: 0088026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kien A. Hua kienhua@cs.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A picture is worth a thousand words, and the addition of sound and motion can
              breathe life into a picture.
As a result, the use of video in all kinds of
              multimedia applications has become an important development
in the 1990s. In
              particular, Video on demand (VOD) is a core technology for many important
              applications
such as digital libraries, distance learning, electronic
              commerce, entertainment, public information
systems, etc.
The simplest video
              delivery technique employs a dedicated stream for each service request.
              Obviously,
this scheme is too expensive and has been shown to have little
              scalability. To vastly reduce this cost, one
can leverage multicast technology
              to allow multiple clients to share a video stream. Unfortunately,
              today's
multicast technology was developed in the 80's, and was not optimized
              for such applications. Missing a
multicast could mean a long wait until the
              next multicast. This limitation has recently led to a large body
of research
              looking for remedies at the application level.
Application-level solutions,
              however, cannot address all the drawbacks, particularly traffic
              congestion
caused by too many multicasts. In fact, this proposal is motivated
              by application-level work done by
the investigator in his last NSF project
              (from 1998 to 2000). The achievements of that project, though
significant,
              were constrained by the limitation of standard multicast. Minimizing the
              multicast frequency
is crucial for any multicast-based applications,
              particularly those running on a public network such as the
Internet. Attaining
              this goal requires a fundamental change in the multicast concept. The
              investigator
proposes enabling the multicast tree to deliver the entire video
              to all the receivers who may subscribe to
the multicast at different times.
              This new capability would significantly reduce the number of
              multicasts
necessary, and therefore lower the network resource requirements.
              At first sight, this seems like a mission
impossible. But on the contrary,
              this can be achieved by allowing the routers on the multicast tree
              to
intercept and cache a video stream passing through. The data can be relayed
              to subsequent subscribers to
further extend the multicast tree. In this
              project, the investigator proposes to develop a suite of techniques
to make
              such an environment practical for future-generation large-scale multimedia
              applications.
To assess the potential of the proposed idea, the investigator
              has designed an initial version of his
Caching Multicast Protocol (CMP). The
              preliminary study indicates that this approach has the potential
to
              revolutionize the way in which multimedia information is disseminated. This
              scheme is much more
scalable and less expensive than application-level
              solutions. The new communication paradigm, however,
demands new research at
              the network level. In this project, the investigator proposes to study issues
              such
as cache organization, cache replacement policies, multicast routing
              algorithms, congestion control, client
and server protocols, etc. In addition,
              he will implement a prototype, consisting of CMP-capable
              routers,
CMP-compliant servers (sources) and CMP-compliant clients
              (destinations) to examine the practicality of
the proposed techniques.
The
              significance of this project is in advancing multicast technology to enable
              large-scale deployment
of multimedia applications. Although many great
              advances have been made in the field of information
technology, none have had
              as great and direct an impact on the daily lives of ordinary citizens as
              multime-dia
information systems. As such, the benefits of this research will
              reach many people in society. In terms
of education, this project will help to
              support three doctoral students. The investigator has a good record
of using
              NSF projects to train students for teaching careers. After these students
              graduate, they can help
to spread the CMP expertise developed from this
              project to their new institutions. Other graduate students
taking our advanced
              databases course can also benefit from this work by experimenting with various
              new
multicast applications on the CMP testbed. To reach out to members of
              communities, materials resulting
from this research will be disseminated on
              the investigator's research group website.
