Title       : Theoretical Study of Ultra-Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collisions at RHIC and Isospin
               Physics with Radioactive Beams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0088934

Award Number: 0088934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bao-An Li bali@astate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AR State U Main Campus
	      P O Box 790
	      State University, AR  724670790    501/972-2100

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0088934
LI
	Research in two areas of nuclear theory will be carried out to
              study
properties of nuclear matter at extremely high temperatures, densities
              and 
neutron to proton ratios. The first area concerns the study of a new
              
form of strongly interacting matter, the Quark-Gluon-Plasma (QGP).
              
Knowledge about this matter is crucial for our understanding about 
the
              evolution of the early universe and the mechanism of supernova 
explosions.
              Collisions between two heavy nuclei at ultra-relativistic 
energies are
              predicted to produce in the laboratory the QGP. 
Dedicated experiments
              searching for evidence of the QGP formation 
will soon be carried out at the
              Brookhaven National Laboratory's 
Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC). I
              shall further develop a 
multi-phase transport model for ultra-relativistic
              heavy-ion 
collisions. The model will be useful for interpreting experimental
              
data from RHIC, testing signatures of the QGP formation, and 
extracting
              properties of the QGP. The second area of my research 
concerns the study of
              neutron-rich matter by using nuclear reactions 
induced by radioactive beams
              having large neutron to proton ratios. I 
shall investigate several novel
              properties of the neutron-rich 
matter. In particular, the isospin-dependence
              of the nuclear equation 
of state (IEOS). Knowledge about the IEOS is relevant
              to type II 
supernova explosions, to neutron star mergers, to the cooling rate
              of 
protoneutron stars, and to the stability of neutron stars. Results of 
my
              research in this area can also be tested at several  available 
radioactive
              beam facilities and the proposed Rare Isotope Accelerator 
(RIA). 


