Title       : Incorporating Model Experiments and Interactive Software into Freshman Biology
               Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a0088506

Award Number: 0088506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90178              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl S. Luciano luciano@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Pistole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) As part of a comprehensive reform to create a
              student-centered natural sciences learning community, we have implemented a new
              curriculum for Biology majors that stresses hands-on, experiential learning and
              provides progressively greater opportunities for semi-independent student
              research. In particular, our introductory biology course utilizes many
              approaches to assist Freshman students in transitioning to an active learning
              environment. First, to encourage students to embrace active learning, we have
              integrated an interactive, Web-based teaching strategy called Just-in-Time
              Teaching into the lecture component of the Principles of Biology I course. This
              strategy uses the rapid communication made possible by the Internet to keep
              students actively involved in the course and to allow the instructor to adjust
              lessons rapidly in response to student needs. Second, we utilize a
              desensitization strategy to address our students' unfamiliarity with the role
              of technology in research. By introducing two new experimental packages
              (instruments and organisms) into the laboratory component of the course in a
              two-week format, we are able to reduce student anxiety and foster mentoring.
              These two new experimental packages are based on adaptations of a gene
              structure and genetic homology laboratory developed at Davidson College and a
              Sea Anemone energetics laboratory developed at Hood College. Pre-service
              teachers are involved in all aspects of the projects as Freshman students
              enrolled in the course and later on as graduate assistants. Saturday morning
              workshops provide additional exposure to hands-on learning activities for both
              pre-service and in-service teachers. The combination of active and interactive
              teaching strategies have particularly positive effects on learning.

