Title       : Integration of Student-Designed Laboratories in Cell and Tissue Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2001  
File        : a0088113

Award Number: 0088113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58083              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin D. Aronson aronson@uor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Blauth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Blauth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Redlands
	      1200 East Colton Avenue
	      Redlands, CA  923743755    714/793-2121

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
Completion of a new science facility and the
              addition of new biology faculty provide the opportunity to evaluate and improve
              the curriculum of the University of Redlands Biology Department. This
              assessment has led to the articulation of two goals: (1) to maintain and expand
              opportunities for students to gain experience with the scientific method
              through student-designed laboratory projects, (2) to expand coverage of central
              themes in cell and tissue biology by the addition of new upper-level courses.
              To meet these objectives, this project is adapting the successful project
              developed by Dr. Diana Darnell at Lake Forest College (DUE-9952472) in which
              students gain experience designing a semester-long project. Using Dr. Darnell's
              project as a model, this adaptation is incorporating multiple-week,
              student-designed projects into laboratory sessions of four courses with cell
              and tissue biology themes. Students are responsible for designing experiments,
              collecting and analyzing data, and communicating their results to others. These
              student-designed projects are being incorporated into a current course (Cell
              Biology) and into three courses that are being implemented as a result of this
              curriculum reform (Immunology, Plant Physiology and Advanced Topics in Cell and
              Molecular Biology). An added benefit of this reform will be the better
              preparation of students for their year-long senior research requirement.
              Equipment such as compound fluorescence microscopes, a sterile hood, incubators
              with lighting and CO2 control, and a high-speed centrifuge allow the
              development of projects involving subcellular localization, cell and tissue
              culture and cellular fractionation. This equipment is also being used by
              students with interests in cell and tissue biology to conduct their senior
              research requirement.
