Title       : EPSCoR: A 600 Megahertz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for the
               University of Kansas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a0088931

Award Number: 0088931
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Urbauer jurbauer@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Richter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Squier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia K. Larive  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teruna J. Siahaan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The 600 MHz NMR will be used by many researchers at the University of Kansas and
              neighboring institutions for a wide variety of studies.  Researchers in the
              Department of Chemistry will use the instrumentation to characterize humic
              substances, and to analyze the speciation, metabolism, and fate of herbicides
              in the environment.  Structural studies of designed hemoprotein models and
              studies of novel transition metal catalyzed methods to complex phosphorous and
              sulfur compounds are also planned.  Researchers in structural biology, in the
              Department of Molecular Biosciences and the Department of Pharmaceutical
              Chemistry, will use the instrumentation for studies of biomolecules and
              interactions of biomolecules.  Planned studies include the study of the
              structure and dynamics of proteins and protein complexes involved in
              transcription initiation, studies of the proteins comprising intercellular
              junctions, studies of the structural and functional aspects of protein
              oxidation, studies of proteins involved in bacterial secretory systems, and
              studies of ATPase protein subunits.
The instrumentation will include an
              actively shielded Oxford 600 MHz magnet and state-of-the-art Varian INOVA
              electronics console and peripherals.  This will include 4 radio frequency
              channels, complete waveform generation capabilities on all channels, triple
              axis pulsed field gradient capabilities and deuterium decoupling capability. 
              The shielded magnet will allow the system to be housed in newly renovated space
              with a new 500 MHz instrument.
A major benefit of the instrumentation will be
              the direct enhancement of graduate and postdoctoral study in the chemical and
              biochemical sciences at the University of Kansas, as the research programs of
              many of these young scientists are dependent on such instrumentation, as does
              their education.  Undergraduate research and training will likewise be enhanced
              significantly, as many undergraduate students, including the numerous student
              fellows in the very active summer research programs, are involved directly in
              research which will utilize the instrumentation.  Furthermore, the University
              of Kansas is committed to fostering an environment that encourages diversity
              and the education of under-represented groups, particularly in the sciences,
              and this instrumentation will have a significant impact on this commitment. 
              The undergraduate teaching mission of the University will also be impacted
              through integration of results of research utilizing the instrumentation into
              classroom discussion and problem solving.  Finally, the instrumentation will
              have a significant impact on faculty recruitment and retention, and the ability
              of faculty to compete effectively for extramural support.

