Title       : Utilizing Geoscience Field Data and Modern Technology to Enhance Learning
               Outcomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0088576

Award Number: 0088576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75064              (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Montgomery wmontgomery@njcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Jersey City University
	      2039 Kennedy Boulevard
	      Jersey City, NJ  073051527    201/547-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) 
The Geoscience/Geography Department at New Jersey City
              University, an urban, culturally diverse, Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI),
              is modernizing its field data acquisition and interpretation capability and
              utilizing this to improve the quality of science education in undergraduate
              courses and research projects. Students are now able to use modern technology
              when they acquire map data and interpret field data. The implementation of this
              capability is promoting higher levels of experiential learning and fostering
              the development of creativity, resourcefulness, and critical thinking, all
              traits that are indispensable for survival and success in the modern workplace.
              While the quality and relevance of SMET education is improved for all students
              taking geoscience courses, future science teachers and science majors in
              particular are benefiting from derivative curricular modernization. Students
              are developing hands-on expertise with equipment and technology that they will
              be expected to use professionally. The equipment acquired in this project
              includes six new computers equipped with GIS software (for GIS lab expansion
              from 6 to 12 seats); three pieces of digital spatial positioning equipment (2
              GPS receivers and one total station); and one digital ground penetrating radar
              system that is being leveraged to gain access to a full range of geophysical
              instruments. 

This new equipment has provided the basis for adapting
              successful exercises and projects that have been developed elsewhere for
              student use. Exercises and projects from Houston Community College (GPS and
              GIS), Western Michigan University (field geophysics), and the New Jersey
              Geological Survey are being adapted to suit our learning needs (in coursework
              and in undergraduate research) and physical limitations (geography, geology,
              and hydrogeology). Field and lab exercises utilizing GPS and GIS are
              incorporated into a number of courses, including GIS (2 courses), Structural
              Geology, Stratigraphy, Field Methods, and Geophysics. Field geophysics
              exercises are being incorporated into the NJCU curriculum as part of an
              expanded Geophysics two-course sequence, inserted into our Hydrogeology
              two-course sequence, and utilized in Field Methods. These exercises and
              projects also serve as catalysts for new single- and multi-discipline
              undergraduate research projects that are developed in geography, geology,
              hydrogeology, geophysics, biology, chemistry, and physics. 






