Title       : XYZ (Chip): Patterning Flow at the Microscale: Open Architecture Design for
               Integrated Fluidic Chips
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0088774

Award Number: 0088774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1231876            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra M. Troian stroian@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Car  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sigurd Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0088774
Sandra Troian
Princeton University

Initiatives to
              miniaturize and integrate multiple functionalities for chemical analysis and
              synthesis into a hand held device have generated a quest for efficient methods
              to transport ultra small volumes of liquid through networked arrays.  We
              recently discovered a non-electronic phenomenon that ideally lends itself to
              the construction of a complete chemical reactor on the surface of an integrated
              circuit (IC).  The open architecture design uses a thermally based process for
              routing and reacting nanoliter to picoliter volumes of liquid along selected
              pathways of a chemically micropattern surface.  The pathways and reaction sites
              can be actively addressed from an underlying integrated chip whose design is
              well matched in size and output voltage.  The phenomenon relies on
              thermocapillary transport of liquid on a surface of structured wettability
              produced by micropatterning a self-assembled  monolayer.  Not only does this
              design couple the benefits of microelectronic circuitry functionality on a
              single chip.  The goal is to use on-chip active matrix circuits to switch
              subsurface heating elements on and off by addressing individual pixels.  This
              proposed technology for routing and reacting microvolumes of liquid is low
              voltage, low-current and has no moving parts.

Such a reactor design will
              find a multitude of users ranging from automated studies of fluid flow in
              digitally reconfigurable surface channels to the identification of complex
              mixtures in learnable reaction sequences - all on a single chip.  The
              configuration allows for the eventual development of wristwatch mounted devices
              for rapid sensing and analysis of bodily fluids or airborne chemical agents. 
              The development and design of this integrated "wet" chip requires a high degree
              of fundamental understanding of the fluidic transport and wafer integration. 
              The program combines complementary skills form several groups to build a strong
              experimental and theoretical effort.

Experimental techniques for
              manipulating rectilinear, bent and split streams as well as discrete
              droplets.

Integration of microelectronic circuitry with open architecture
              microfluidic.

Theoretical understanding of the capabilities of
              thermocapillary transport from a continuum and molecular viewpoint.


The
              collaboration includes investigators from chemical and electrical engineering,
              chemistry and physics.  The principal investigators have a strong record in
              attracting and advising a diverse group of graduate students at all levels,
              many of whom have won departmental and school-wide awards for their research
              projects.  These investigators are also well situated in an area of New Jersey
              in which there are many industries specifically focused on emerging biofluidic
              technologies.  Several companies have already requested samples of the proposed
              chip for tests of biological assays. 

