Title       : Multi-Media Fluid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0088833

Award Number: 0088833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $609998             (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Homsy bud@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59) 

In this project we are developing, producing,
              evaluating and disseminating a series of interactive modules for the teaching
              and learning of fluid mechanics for undergraduates in science and engineering.
              The modules focus on fundamentals and have impact across the curricula of
              Chemical, Mechanical, Petroleum, Aeronautical, Civil and Environmental
              Engineering, Oceanography, Meteorology, Geophysics, Applied Mathematics and
              Applied Physics. The primary objectives are to enhance student learning in the
              areas of (i) problem solving, (ii) intuition about complex flow phenomena, and
              (iii) retention of knowledge. These objectives are met by providing
              experimental visualizations and computational simulations of fluid flow
              phenomena in an interactive medium. An extensive set of experimental and
              computational facilities has been used to produce videos, simulations, and
              applications programs to demonstrate fluid phenomena.

The format,
              navigation, and multimedia environment closely resembles that used in our
              previous NSF/DUE-sponsored project, Multi-Media Fluid Mechanics (MMFM I),
              recently published by Cambridge University Press, but takes advantage of new
              technologies in programming environments, data compression, digitization, and
              applications software. In the current project (MMFM II) we are producing
              modules on the topics of Control Volume Balances, Similarity and Scaling,
              Interfacial Flows and Phenomena, and Turbulence. 



