Title       : Enhancement of a Molecular Biology/Bioinformatics Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a0088089

Award Number: 0088089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne Q. Pham daphne.pham@uwp.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Higgs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin-Parkside
	      900 Wood Road
	      Kenosha, WI  53141    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) Today's biologists need powerful computer applications
              to tackle the molecular haystacks of information. To prepare biology students
              for this challenge, the Department of Biological Sciences at the University of
              Wisconsin- Parkside (UWP) is further developing an innovative,
              multidisciplinary undergraduate curriculum in Molecular Biology &
              Bioinformatics (MBB). The objective of the MBB program is to give our students
              hands-on facility with molecular biology laboratory techniques, a grasp of
              mathematical and physical concepts underlying MBB and the ability to apply
              them, and a proficiency with computational tools and skills of bioinformatics.
              The effort is an adaptation of problem-based learning pioneered by the BioQuest
              group centered at Beloit College. To accomplish these tasks, we are expanding
              and improving our department's expertise through faculty development,
              redesigning our curriculum, and improving the infrastructure of the department.
              New equipment and software essential for the development of our program is
              being acquired to keep our program at the cutting edge. We are also expanding
              our faculty development program in the area of bioinformatics.
