Title       : An Active Learning Environment for Introductory Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0088328

Award Number: 0088328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55140              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laird H. Kramer Laird.Kramer@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Bone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yesim N. Darici  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephan L. Mintz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The Physics Department is restructuring its introductory physics
              classes. This Interactive Physics Classroom Project promotes conceptual
              understanding through enhanced student interaction within the traditional
              laboratory and lecture structure by adapting and implementing three
              nationally-recognized educational practices that have been demonstrated to be
              more effective than traditional instructional strategies. (1) The project is
              integrating Sokoloff, Laws, and Thornton's RealTime Physics into the
              introductory algebra- and calculus-based laboratories to create inquiry-based
              Microcomputer-Based Laboratories (MBL)s. (2) MBLs are also being integrated
              into the lectures, adapting Thornton and Sokolov's Interactive Lecture
              Demonstrations to provide a bridge to the laboratory work. (3) Our current
              implementation of Mazur's Peer Instruction is being expanded to additional
              class sections and enhanced with a ClassTalk-style response system. These
              improvements provide a broad range of science students (approximately 1,800 per
              year) with a rich learning environment based on active peer-based engagement.
              These advances are extremely well suited for helping students to adapt to the
              increasingly technology- oriented world. 

 Evaluation of the program is
              being done throughout the project period using standard testing instruments,
              surveys, and interviews. Results are providing on-going feedback for the
              program participants and are also being disseminated to the general physics and
              education communities through publications, conferences, and the web.
              Additionally, to have the broadest impact on the diverse South Florida
              community, several workshops per year are being held to describe the
              techniques. Participants are from the local university and community college
              faculty, as well as high school physics teachers who are in the position to
              influence potential college students. 

