Title       : An Enhancement of WebWork - a Web-Based Homework Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2000   
File        : a0088212

Award Number: 0088212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139921             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Ziemer ziemer@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Wheeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 

This project is focusing on the adoption and
              enhancement of WeBWork, an internet- based system developed at the University
              of Rochester for generating and delivering homework problems to students. The
              project is adapting WeBWork to several areas of the mathematics curriculum,
              especially at the elementary level. It is also investigating its applications
              in other disciplines, particularly physics and economics. Once the project
              enhances WeBWork to a level that will make it easily adaptable and usable in a
              variety of environments, it will serve as a resource to other clients,
              including other departments at the university, other universities and several
              high schools in the state. 

The project is modifying the interface of
              WeBWork so that a faculty member with minimal computer skills can manage an
              entire course independently. It is also developing a default set of homework
              problems which an instructor can change or select by accessing a database of
              linked problems. WeBWork now provides only answers to problems. As a much
              needed aid to the students, this project is developing complete solutions to
              problems and creating a database, that would be separate from the homework
              exercises, consisting of "tutorials" that would provide meaningful hints and
              step-by-step solutions to problems. Students have indicated a great interest in
              such a bank of "practice problems." 

At the present time, WeBWork is
              structured to accommodate only pre-calculus and calculus. Thsi project is
              adapting it to Finite Mathematics, which covers topics from sets, probability,
              linear systems, matrices, linear programming and applications to problems from
              business and the social sciences. WeBWork has many possible applications to
              courses of this type, but at present it cannot accommodate linear analysis,
              particularly matrix manipulation. This project is utilizing Maple within
              WeBWork to analyze and process student answers for this course. This takes
              WeBWork in a significantly new direction. 

Overall the project's objective
              is to make WeBWork easy-to-use, complete and sufficiently flexible to be
              employed in a variety of environments. To assist in making WeBWork more easily
              adapted, workshops are being held during the academic year and during the
              summer months so that potential instructors can more easily see how the program
              can be implemented and customized for their own particular use.
