Title       : Emphasizing Connections Between Gene Sequences and Protein Structure and
               Function: Linking Molecular Biology and Biochemistry Laboratory Explorations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0088436

Award Number: 0088436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62586              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Goodman mgoodman@wittenberg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amil G. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wittenberg University
	      PO BOX 720
	      Springfield, OH  455010720    513/327-6231

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) Student learning can be enhanced by engaging the
              student and by providing an appropriate context for learning. This can be
              accomplished by developing investigative exercises that require student
              participation in experimental design and provide realistic research experience.
              An inquiry-based approach also moves away from the once-standard "cookbook"
              approach to teaching experimental protocols. If the student must plan the
              course of the experiment, s/he is required to think about individual steps
              rather than simply following directions. This project is carrying the
              investigative approach one step further: linking investigative activities in
              the laboratory sessions for two courses frequently taken by the same students,
              Molecular Biology and Biochemistry. These courses form the core of the
              Biochemistry and Molecular Biology major and minor at Wittenberg University.
              Co-ordination of the laboratory exercises of these two courses is centered on
              an investigation of the relationships among gene sequence, protein sequence,
              protein structure, and protein stability using Staphylococcal nuclease, a small
              compact, well-defined protein, as a model system. Students identify appropriate
              regions of Staphylococcal nuclease for mutagenesis, complete mutagenesis and
              sequence determination of the variants, and sub-clone the variant sequences
              into an expression vector in the Molecular Biology laboratory. They continue
              their investigation in the Biochemistry laboratory through protein purification
              and analysis of the purified mutant protein to determine both activity and
              stability. Students are given the opportunity to master experimental design,
              implementation, and data interpretation in a realistic research context. They
              have the opportunity to develop and then test their own theories of protein
              structure and learn techniques in the context of a research program. The
              project is an adaptation of Darwin 2000, using this example as a model for
              nuclease analysis.

