Title       : Bringing Chromatography and Spectroscopy into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0088517

Award Number: 0088517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23879              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Logan blogan@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) Chemistry (12)
Science faculty at Bowdoin College
              strive to optimize undergraduate learning by incorporating modern analytical
              techniques into inquiry-based laboratory exercises that allow for meaningful
              intellectual and creative input from students, and through their oversight of
              undergraduate-led research projects. Currently, Bowdoin undergraduates majoring
              in biology, biochemistry and environmental studies receive little exposure to
              the essential modern techniques of chromatography and spectroscopy. Chemistry
              majors, although grounded in the principles of these methods, generally do not
              gain experience with them in the context of complex analytical problems. This
              project introduces undergraduates to the principles and applications of
              chromatography and spectroscopy via high performance liquid chromatography
              (HPLC). The project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves undergraduates
              and faculty from all of the above-mentioned departments. The specific goals of
              the project are to 1) enable Bowdoin undergraduates across departments to learn
              the principles, techniques and applications of chromatography and spectroscopy
              via the use of an HPLC with diode array detection, 2) develop course
              laboratories designed to convey deep understanding of these modern techniques
              and also to facilitate inquiry-based learning by enabling students to pursue
              hypotheses of their own creation in self-designed laboratory projects, 3)
              foster the use of chromatography and spectroscopy in undergraduate-led
              research, 4) create informed lesson plans centered on HPLC technology for
              dissemination among science faculty. Chromatography and spectroscopy are being
              incorporated into the laboratory portions of five core and upper-division
              courses, as well as into undergraduate-led research. Experiments are being
              adapted from the educational and research literature. For example, in the Plant
              Physiology course, experiments developed at the University of Colorado to
              expose students to photosynthesis and energy dissipation are being modified to
              use HPLC instead of TLC for the analysis. Overall, the project is broadening
              and enhancing the background of Bowdoin undergraduates and is providing those
              students with first-hand experience with the practice of science. 


