Title       : Integration of GC-MS into the Chemistry and Environmental Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a0088502

Award Number: 0088502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43851              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel W. Gohdes gohdes_j@fortlewis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ron C. Estler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Lewis College
	      
	      Durango, CO  81301    303/247-7661

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
A GC-MS is being incorporated throughout the chemistry
              curriculum. By adapting published experiments from the research or chemical
              education literature to the unique challenges and opportunities of our
              institution, we are developing novel pedagogical materials in both our majors
              courses as well as our non-majors courses. The GC-MS is having a major impact
              on our analytical/instrumental chemistry courses and on an environmental
              chemistry course for non-science majors. Additional classes that are using the
              instrument include organic chemistry, natural products chemistry, synthesis
              techniques and introduction to chemical research. A major theme of this
              curriculum change is project-based investigations of complex samples that
              directly engage the students in scientific thinking. Use of the GC-MS allows us
              to continue a recent change in direction of our analytical program towards the
              analysis of complex, "real world" samples. Experiments in the non-majors course
              are designed with a focus on local environmental concerns such as how the air
              quality is affected by a local coal-powered steam train. Such hands-on
              experience is critical in effectively engaging minority groups and prospective
              K-12 teachers. An additional outcome of this project is that all biology and
              chemistry students are being exposed to modern analytical instrumentation that
              enhances their interest in molecular structural and dynamic studies. Research
              students have access to state-of-the-art instrumental methods, which is
              strengthening their preparation for graduate studies and industrial laboratory
              positions and inevitably improving the publication rate of undergraduate majors
              at our institution. The impact of this instrument improvement project will be
              felt by more than 800 students over the next five years, including
              approximately 150 Native American and Hispanic students in our program. 


