Title       : Laboratory Instruction in Flow Cytometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0088141

Award Number: 0088141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199826             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Boothby   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth A. Kibler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
The study of the basic unit of life, the cell, in
              undergraduate education is limited to microscopic or population based
              observations. The flow cytometer, an instrument that rapidly generates an
              'optical fingerprint' of each cell within a population, provides a powerful new
              approach to the study of cells. This proposal establishes a flow cytometry
              teaching laboratory, provides faculty development and creates and disseminates
              inquiry-based curricula for a wide range of instructional environments through
              the training of university, community college, and present and prospective high
              school science teachers. In workshops, instructors will develop inquiry-based
              curricula and interactive workbooks to incorporate hands-on flow cytometry
              exercises into biology laboratories. Three levels of flow cytometry laboratory
              instruction are described: 1) basic cell biology and microbiology laboratories
              that address the principles of flow cytometry through the manipulation of cells
              and their environment by the students; 2) advanced biology laboratories where
              students will use molecular probes, cell preparation protocols, flow cytometry
              instrumentation and software analysis; and 3) individualized hands-on
              instruction and independent research projects. The high instrument cost and
              extensive training required in flow cytometry have limited its use in
              undergraduate teaching. These problems are addressed in this proposal and
              solved through the use of shared instrumentation, the distribution of
              experimental results over the Internet and training workshops. Financial
              responsibility is shared through collaboration between San Jose State
              University, BD Biosciences, the California State University Program for
              Education and Research in Biotechnology and the National Science Foundation.
              Programmatic evaluations are intended to refine flow cytometry workbooks and
              instruction over the funding period, and dissemination of results and materials
              through electronic and print media, professional meetings and workshops will
              lead to widespread inquiry-based instructional activities in flow cytometry. 

