Title       : CRCD: A Cryptography Center for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a0088063

Award Number: 0088063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $437349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel Boston   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shanghua Teng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Blahut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1709      CISE EDUCAT RES & CURRIC DEVEL
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 9218,9299,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0088063
Boston, Nigel
University of Illinois at Urbana

CRCD:  A
              Cryptography Center for Research and Education

This project is concerned
              with the field of cryptography. This university is establishing the Illinois
              Center for Cryptography and Information Protection (ICCIP), a multidisciplinary
              center focused on research and education in fields that influence information
              protection and are influenced by information protection techniques. This CRCD
              project lays the groundwork for the educational and curricular aspects of the
              center. Multidisciplinary groups of upper-level undergraduate students and
              graduate students (from engineering, computer science and mathematics) are
              organized into teams attacking problems in modern cryptography. This project
              also addresses the development of cryptography related courses that are
              cross-listed in mathematics, engineering, and computer science. The project
              involves industrial partners who contribute practical problems and interact
              with teams. Industry, government, and academe need employees with a broad range
              of skills who can work in this field in inter/multidisciplinary teams. For
              example, attacks on current crypto-systems can be sophisticated mathematical
              ones or direct physical ones. To counter such attacks takes concerted efforts
              from team members having different expertise in mathematics, engineering, and
              computing. The same holds true for the creation of new information protection
              schemes. Computing and engineering practitioners are faced with physical
              limitations of circuits, software, and devices in implementing mathematical
              solutions to information protection. This curriculum produces individuals with
              broad backgrounds and experience in working in teams on realistic problems in
              cryptography and the creation of novel collaborations that will advance
              technological developments much quicker than has historically been the case.

