Title       : Online Experiments for Multidisciplinary Instruction in Environmental and
               Ecological Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0088788

Award Number: 0088788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwight Krehbiel krehbiel@bethelks.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon K. Piper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Zerger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bethel College
	      
	      North Newton, KS  67117    316/283-2500

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) The World Wide Web has become a major medium for distance
              learning. Web technologies are now being extended into laboratory science by
              making instruments accessible via the Web and even controllable remotely.
              Science students can thereby use instruments that would be otherwise
              unavailable or of much more limited availability. These technologies have been
              developed for undergraduate science instruction in the physical sciences and
              engineering but have been relatively little used in other scientific
              disciplines. The best known examples of these efforts have involved teams of
              scientists and programmers with considerable technical expertise.
This project
              is extending the range of disciplines in which these technologies are being
              used. We are teaching environmental and ecological science to chemistry,
              biology, and psychology students using instruments that are accessible and
              controllable with a Web browser. We are broadening the types of experiments
              that students can do by using computers to automate data acquisition,
              especially to investigate phenomena that occur over a period of time that is
              much longer than a standard laboratory session. Making these instruments
              accessible on the Web allows regular monitoring of experiments without being in
              the laboratory. Students both on and off campus are able take advantage of
              these capabilities, thus widening the audience for laboratory instruction in
              these areas.
We are using LabVIEW and AppletVIEW software to make our
              instruments available 
on the Web. We find these software packages relatively
              easy to use for both science students and faculty with little formal training
              in computer science. Hence, we can accomplish our goals without additional
              highly trained personnel. Web-accessible instruments are being used in
              environmental chemistry to measure the changes involved in the natural
              regulation of pH in fresh waters. Environmental science students are measuring
              the biological health of aquatic systems (monitoring dissolved oxygen, nitrate,
              carbon dioxide, etc.) after perturbations for which humans are often
              responsible, such as temperature elevations, addition of nutrients, or
              contamination with pollutants. Students studying animal behavior are monitoring
              the allocation of effort among various behavioral alternatives for obtaining
              food, thus measuring choice and its role in the efficiency of foraging over
              time. Students in all these courses are actively involved in the design of
              experiments and use computers to analyze and graph the resulting
              data.
Advanced undergraduates are being used to assist in programming and
              supervising these
experiments. Because high school students, recruited through
              a collaborative arrangement
with an education service center, are also taking
              these courses, these advanced undergraduates are engaged in teaching roles that
              will give them valuable pre-service
teaching experience. They also have
              opportunities to interact with high school science teachers. Interactions among
              students at a variety of levels of education are creating numerous
              opportunities for students to teach each other and, thereby, to enhance their
              own learning. While they are learning the subject matter of science, students
              at all levels are also appreciating the remarkable possibilities in
              contemporary technologies of computerized data acquisition and remote access to
              instruments.
