Title       : Teaching Nanoscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0088990

Award Number: 0088990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Salamo salamo@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) Nearly forty years ago Richard Feynman issued an invitation to
              students of science and engineering to enter a new field called nanotechnology.
              The mission of this new field was the study of nanometer-sized materials, with
              the long-term goal of establishing the technology needed for future electronic
              and optoelectronic devices. The new field would enable lighter, stronger,
              faster, smarter, cheaper, and cleaner products. Today we can see that many
              students in the different disciplines of both science and
engineering have
              accepted Feynman's invitation. University research in the field of
              nanotechnology is on an exponential rise. There is little doubt of either the
              beckoning need to successfully compete internationally or the exciting
              contribution this field will make in the years ahead. It is possible for us to
              envision a new generation of materials that will result in lighter
              transportation vehicles, surgical instruments that could operate on cells, tiny
              nanometer-size machines and faster, smaller computers. Despite the early
              pervasiveness of this field little has been done to "bridge" the educational
              experience that we offer to our students, to this new dynamic science. This is
              unfortunate, since the study of nanostructures is a beautiful way to learn many
              old and new concepts in bulk and surface material science. As teachers, we are
              moved when we see the gleam in a student's eye while controlling and observing
              structure on a nanoscale. This project helps to build this "bridge" as a new
              educational approach to teaching the science of materials. Students are
              participating in an educational experience built around a new molecular beam
              epitaxy -scanning tunneling microscope facility at the University of Arkansas.
              The goal is to educate undergraduates who are prepared to contribute to the
              advancement of nanostructures and their applications as the next generation of
              electronic and photonic devices.



