Title       : Development of a Discrete Event Dynamic Systems Curriculum Using a Web-Based
               'Real-Time' Simulated Factory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0088073

Award Number: 0088073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499678             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pirooz Vakili vakili@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jian-Qiang Hu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christos G. Cassandras  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding for support of a three year Combined
              Research-Curriculum Development program entitled, "Development of a Discrete
              Event Dynamic Systems Curriculum using a Web-Based "Real-Time" Simulated
              Factory," at Boston University, under the direction of Dr. Pirooz Vakili.  The
              curriculum development component of the proposed project aims at an integrative
              and innovative approach to curriculum development that departs significantly
              from the current methods of teaching engineering methodology courses.  A course
              with a focus on manufacturing systems, a prime example of a Discrete Event
              System (DES), will be developed.  Two key innovations will be introduced: (a)
              the course will have a problem driven focus where industrial case studies will
              be the basis for the introduction of problems, key concepts, and solution
              methodologies, and (b) a web-based "real-time" simulated factory will be used
              that will serve as an interactive laboratory where students or teams of
              students will be managing the factory during the semester.  These innovations
              are intended to achieve the following pedagogical objectives: (i) motivate and
              engage the students from the outset, (ii) introduce a quantum leap in the
              degree to which students participate actively in the learning process, (iii)
              introduce team activity, (iv) break out of the limitations of "text book" and
              "classroom" examples, and (v) introduce research results and approaches in a
              context where their significance and contributions can be best appreciated. 
              The key project outcome will be to create a new model of curriculum development
              for DES courses.  Other outcomes  will include research results, development
              and integration of a new course in the curriculum of the Manufacturing
              Engineering Department at Boston University, and involvement of graduate
              students in research and curriculum development. 
