Title       : Interactive Organic Chemistry Learning on the World Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0088876

Award Number: 0088876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478579             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen S. Hixson lillya@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly P. Woolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C Peter Lillya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Vining  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marietta Haeg-Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)  The proposed project has three goals: (1) to increase the
              retention rate for students in basic organic chemistry courses, (2) to enhance
              the ability of students in these courses to use scientific reasoning, and (3)
              to drive innovation in the teaching of organic chemistry. These are
              accomplished by creating interactive learning software delivered to students
              over the web by a versatile platform called OWL developed at the institution
              and now used in general chemistry. The software consists of guided discovery
              modules and intelligent tutors. Using guided discovery modules, students run
              virtual experiments, interpret data, and then form, test, and revise
              hypotheses. The students' scientific reasoning ability is enhanced while
              gaining an appreciation for the experimental basis for the organic chemistry
              they are learning. Using intelligent tutors, students explore topics like SN1,
              SN2, E1, & E2 reactivity and synthesis. Students receive immediate feedback,
              tuned to each individual's level of mastery. Combined with regular electronic
              homework, also delivered by OWL, students are prompted to keep current in their
              courses by participating actively in their own learning. Student participation
              in all components of this system, called "Organic OWL," is encouraged by
              allotment of credit for passed homework and completed modules and tutors. The
              learning power of the software will be enhanced significantly by a provision
              for students to draw and to submit their own structures using the ChemDraw and
              ChemFinder programs, in cooperation with CambridgeSoft Inc., Cambridge, MA. The
              materials are text-independent, and the OWL delivery platform are to be
              available commercially within one year of the start of the project. 




