Title       : Multidisciplinary Dynamic Systems Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a0088378

Award Number: 0088378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90453              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Cameron tmcamero@saturn.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary S. Huvard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rosalyn S. Hobson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59) 


The goal of this program is to unify the dynamic
              systems and controls courses of chemical, electrical and mechanical engineering
              while still allowing some discipline- specific specialization. The project
              seeks to create a modern integrated curriculum and laboratory learning
              environment that promotes critical reasoning and problem solving skills, and
              applies them to the modeling, analysis, design, measurement, control and
              management of complex dynamic systems. In developing this curriculum the
              investigators are seeking to adapt and implement concepts and practices from
              NSF- supported coalitions, particularly the Foundations and Synthesis
              Coalitions, as well as other NSF funded CCLI grants. The specific focus of the
              program is on the development of a common required course, Process & Systems
              Dynamics, for chemical, electrical and mechanical engineering students, and
              three discipline- specific laboratory courses. The discipline- specific
              required courses -- Unit Operations Laboratory for chemical engineering,
              Automatic Controls for electrical engineering, and Engineering Synthesis
              Laboratory for mechanical engineering -- allow specialization at the advanced
              level, but preserve an interdisciplinary perspective by sharing experiments and
              projects. Students should emerge from the sequence with a firm understanding of
              the physical principles underlying engineering processes, and practical
              experience in the design, fabrication and testing of tangible products that
              synthesize multidisciplinary features. 

