Title       : Dynamics of Molecules in Complex Molecular Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a0088942

Award Number: 0088942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $594000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Fayer fayer@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to investigate the dynamics and intermolecular
              interactions in complex condensed matter molecular systems.   A wide variety of
              materials will be studied, including glasses, supercooled liquids, liquid
              crystals, hydrogen bonded clusters, micelles, reverse micelles, polymers, and
              polymer micelles.  Cynamics in complex molecular systems can span a wide range
              of time scales.  Therefore, the experiments ae directed toward observations
              over a sufficiently wide range of times to provide a detailed picture of the
              dynamics.  Ultrafast infrared vibrational echo experiments combined with
              infrared pump-probe experiments will be used to study vibrational dynamics
              which reflect the dynamics of the medium in which the vibrational oscillator is
              embedded and the nature of the intermolecular interactions that couple
              dephasing dynamics to be extracted from systems that are inhomogeneous, and,
              therefore, cannot be studied with convention linear spectroscopy.  The
              vibrational echo studies will be extended to include other vibrational
              coherence experiments including stimulated vibrational echoes and various types
              of two dimensional vibrational echo experiments.  Stimulated vibrational echoes
              will provide information on longer time scale dynamics, i.e., vibrational
              spectral diffusion.  The first tow-dimensional vibrational echo experiments,
              Vibrational Echo Spectroscopy, was demonstrated in the previous grant period. 
              This technique, which provides a method for the suppression of unwanted
              background absorptions in a vibrational spectrum, will be developed further. 
              Two time 2D experiments that probe the coupling between different mechanical
              degrees of freedom will also be developed.  Vibrational echo experiments, and
              the related non-linear vibrational coherence experiments, will be used to study
              dynamics in high temperature glass, supercooled liquids, water in the core of
              reverse micelles, hydrogen bonded clusters of water and alcohols in solvents,
              pure liquids, and proteins.  Transient grating optical Kerr effect experiments,
              heterodyne amplified optical Kerr effect experiments, and a new method, density
              induced heterodyne amplified rotational dynamics, will be applied to the study
              of dynamics in complex molecular systems over vast ranges of time, from tens of
              femtoseconds to milliseconds and longer,  Work during the current grant period
              has shown that a combination of these techniques, which provide tremendous
              dynamic range in signal and time, can provide fundamentally new information
              about the nature of complex systems.  The techniques will be applied to
              supercooled liquids, micelles, polymer micelles, polymers, and liquids
              crystals.

The emphasis in this study is on complex condensed matter systems
              such as supercooled liquids, micelles, polymer micelles, polymers, and liquids
              crystals and on the optimization of materials processing for applications such
              as optical flat panel desplay devices and structural materials.

