Title       : Integration of Design and Manufacturing in Undergraduate Engineering Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0088315

Award Number: 0088315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96962              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Taggart taggart@egr.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Palm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brent E. Stucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56) 

In this project, concepts of engineering
              graphics, mechanical design, numerical simulation, rapid prototyping and
              product testing are integrated in project experiences performed by
              interdepartmental teams of sophomores, juniors and seniors. The project also
              provides faculty development in the area of interdisciplinary teaming leading
              to improved integration of engineering courses. The project includes
              acquisition and installation of an abrasive waterjet machine tool and a three
              dimensional printer, both of which can easily import CAD designs for the
              manufacture of prototype parts. The use of these systems is integrated into
              interdepartmental team projects in several courses in Mechanical and
              Industrial/Manufacturing Engineering. This project represents an adaptation of
              several recent NSF supported projects investigating the use of rapid
              prototyping technologies in undergraduate courses. By integrating the use of
              these technologies with multidisciplinary team projects involving prototype
              design, analysis, manufacturing and testing, students experience concurrent
              engineering and the product realization process.

 The project assessment is
              performed by a committee of administrators, faculty, students and industrial
              representatives who review the project assignments, samples of student work,
              results of student questionnaires and feedback from course instructors. Several
              documents are being developed including an overview of project activities,
              examples of assignments, tutorials for the use of the prototyping software and
              hardware, and examples of student work. Internal dissemination includes sharing
              of course materials, faculty development enrichment seminars and laboratory
              demonstrations. Dissemination to other institutions includes distribution of
              project documents via a project web page, presentations at conferences, and
              publications in educational journals.
