Title       : Incorporation of Computer Modernized Cary-14 UV/Vis Spectrophotometer in the
               Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2000   
File        : a0088518

Award Number: 0088518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81501              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison Hyslop hyslopa@stjohns.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Enju Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elise G. Megehee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Rosso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neil D. Jespersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint John's University
	      8000 Utopia Parkway
	      Jamaica, NY  11439    718/990-6236

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

This project seeks to enhance the undergraduate chemistry
              curriculum at the institution by incorporating high resolution,
              computer-controlled ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-Vis-NIR) spectroscopy
              into three upper-level laboratory courses: Instrumental Analysis, Inorganic
              Synthesis, and Experimental Physical Chemistry. This is accomplished by
              adapting several new or classic laboratory experiments from the chemical
              education literature for use with the computerized Cary-14 and implementing
              them into the three formal laboratory courses currently taught by the Chemistry
              Department. The proposed experiments and instrumentation enhance the students'
              critical thinking skills, increase their familiarity with a wide variety of
              computerized equipment, and expose them to the scientific process of inquiry
              through investigation. As a result of this formal change in curricula, the
              students are better prepared to participate in independent research. The
              institution is a comprehensive, urban, commuter campus with an ethnically
              diverse student population and the chemistry department reflects that
              diversity. 

Funding provides an Aviv Instruments modernization of the
              current Cary-14 spectrophotometer including a thermoelectrically cooled heater
              in the cell housing, and release time for the PI and co-PIs to implement and
              adapt experiments for the Cary-14 and our laboratory courses. This project is
              for a duration of 33 months, as much of the first year is devoted to the
              instrument modernization and initial development of the laboratory experiments.
              These experiments are introduced into the formal laboratory courses in the
              second year of the grant, then evaluated, revised and reintroduced in the final
              year. The anticipated outcomes of this proposal include: 1) improved
              undergraduate laboratory experiments; 2) decreased time for data acquisition;
              3) increased time for data interpretation and analysis; 4) increased
              understanding of digital data acquisition; 5) increased variety and quality of
              laboratory experiments; 6) increased hands-on-time for each student; and 7)
              integration of digital methods-instrumental output as well as Microsoft Excel,
              Word, and PowerPoint-into the reporting of experimental results. This project
              significantly improves the preparedness of our majors for research and future
              employment in academics and industry. Dissemination of results is accomplished
              through a web site linked to the chemistry department home page, publication in
              referred chemical education journals, and presentation at regional and national
              meetings.
