Title       : The Ecology of Global Change: A New Ecology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0088245

Award Number: 0088245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81399              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Camill pcamill@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
Anticipating society's need for broadly trained
              global change scientists and ecologists, the Biology Department at Carleton
              College has initiated a new multidisciplinary, collaborative ecology curriculum
              that examines the relationship between organisms and their abiotic environment.
              Three new laboratory courses in ecosystem ecology, plant physiological ecology,
              paleoecology, and a nonmajors course in global change biology are being offered
              to complement existing strengths in population ecology and evolutionary
              biology. Ecology courses at Carleton place strong emphasis on learning science
              by doing science. Lectures are supplemented with small-group,
              collaborative-learning case studies based on primary literature. These case
              studies focus on exciting and controversial issues in ecology, such as
              clearcutting, rising CO2 and carbon sinks, the effects of climate warming on
              vegetation, and the effects of biodiversity on ecosystem function. Two of the
              lab courses, Ecosystem Ecology and Plant Physiological Ecology, emphasize
              common themes of carbon cycling, nutrient cycling, and vegetation response to
              global change. Because ecosystem ecology and plant physiological ecology offer
              an excellent opportunity for examining these themes at different levels of
              biological organization, a few key pieces of equipment support both courses and
              provide Carleton undergraduates with advanced training. Using sophisticated
              instruments, students practice the scientific method while learning about the
              importance of ecology and developing an understanding of the issues
              professional ecologists. Course materials are disseminated through professional
              journals, at scientific meetings, on Carleton's website and the Case Studies in
              Science website at SUNY Buffalo. 




