Title       : Effective Practices in Electrical Engineering Service Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2000  
File        : a0088904

Award Number: 0088904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Wheeler edward.d.wheeler@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford Grigg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55) 

The objective of this project is to produce
              educational materials for an electrical engineering service course that
              motivates mechanical engineering students by presenting the content of
              electrical systems in the context of mechanical engineering. 

Motivating
              students and engaging their interest is the one element vital for the success
              of any course and is, unfortunately, the element too often lacking in such
              service courses. This problem is addressed by presenting topics in electrical
              systems from the viewpoint and in the context of the discipline being served.
              The study of electrical systems is embedded into major components of mechanical
              engineering, thus allowing students to construct a knowledge of electrical
              systems that is well integrated with their existing base of knowledge. This
              approach can be extended to other engineering disciplines that need knowledge
              of electrical systems.

Delivery features include studio format, a variety of
              active learning strategies, and Web-based learning and assessment tools
              including Just-in-Time Teaching (JiTT), ConcepTests, multimedia simulations,
              and hypertext informational documents. Throughout the project, a review board
              of nationally-recognized experts in engineering education and assessment is
              evaluating the educational materials developed, providing information for
              continuous improvement, and assuring that the materials developed can serve as
              a model for the development of service courses in electrical systems.
              Dissemination will be through a published textbook, journal articles,
              conference presentations, and faculty workshops. 




