Title       : Function and Chemical Nature of Ice-Active Substances Associated with Antarctic
               Sea Ice Diatoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a0088000

Award Number: 0088000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157812             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Raymond raymond@nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Function and chemical nature of ice-active substances associated with sea ice
              diatoms

Sea ice diatoms of McMurdo Sound, Antarctica, have been previously
              shown to be associated with extracellular ice-active substances (IASs) that are
              present both in the ice platelet layer and congelation ice in which diatoms are
              found. These molecules have large molecular weights and appear to be
              glycoproteins. Similar molecules have not been found in temperate water
              diatoms, and so it appears that they have a function related to cold or icy
              environments. Previous studies have shown that they are widely distributed in
              the Southern Ocean, occur in both summer and winter sea ice and are associated
              with many if not all sea ice diatoms. The research will examine additional
              questions about the function and chemical nature of these unusual substances.
              Preliminary evidence suggests the IASs have cryoprotective properties. One goal
              is to explore this possibility using several approaches, including the IASs'
              ability to prevent freeze-thaw damage in a test enzyme (LDH) as well as whole
              cells, and their ability to inhibit the recrystallization of ice, which is a
              common measure of antifreeze activity in plant studies. The IASs are known to
              bind to ice crystals, and so to better understand the binding mechanism
              additional studies will attempt to determine the specific crystal faces to
              which they bind. A third part of the study will try to better characterize the
              chemical nature of the carbohydrate and protein moieties of the IASs, using
              mass spectrometry, amino acid sequencing and other techniques. Finally, initial
              attempts will be made to raise antibodies against the IASs, as these will have
              several uses in determining the origin, seasonality, relatedness and possibly
              the function of these molecules.  The IASs represent a novel type of
              ice-binding molecule that is distinct from protein and glycoprotein fish
              antifreezes. Because of their ubiquity in the Antarctic sea ice communities and
              their absence in warmer regions, they appear to have an important role in these
              communities. These studies should answer some of the main questions about the
              nature of these molecules. In addition, the IASs share some properties with
              fish antifreezes, and so understanding their ice binding properties and
              chemical structure will make it possible to better understand how this family
              of molecules interact with ice. Finally, the IASs, unlike the fish antifreezes,
              are produced in large quantities in Nature, and this may make it feasible for
              them to be used in other applications.


