Title       : Incorporating Exemplary Practices into an Interdisciplinary Environmental
               Science Course for Non-Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a0088365

Award Number: 0088365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57633              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra J. DeBano   (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura P. Eisen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      Franklin & Mich Ave N E
	      Washington, DC  20017    202/939-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) 
This project is developing a new, two-semester course
              intended to serve as a foundation for a new environmental literacy minor and a
              new interdisciplinary environmental studies major at Trinity College. This
              course, The Science of Environmental Change in the 21st Century, is being
              designed to become a science laboratory course for many of our pre-service
              teachers. The goal of this course is to provide non-science majors with the
              basic interdisciplinary science background needed to understand both global,
              regional, and local environmental problems. To accomplish this we are adapting
              and using components of problem-based learning (PBL), discovery-based learning
              (DBL), and undergraduate research that have been successfully employed at other
              institutions.
	We are incorporating cooperative, student-based learning (one
              component of PBL) by emulating the approach used at the University of Delaware,
              where Dr. Harold White uses cooperative learning in chemistry and Dr. Deborah
              Allen uses peer-tutoring in biology. Another component of PBL is using relevant
              issues to introduce non-science majors to the scientific method and content. To
              accomplish this, we are adapting the model used in the American Chemical
              Society textbook, Chemistry in Context, by using current environmental issues
              as vehicles for students to learn important concepts in biology, chemistry, and
              physics. In addition, we are adapting examples of issues in environmental
              justice used Dr. Janan Hayes of Merced College, Dr. Patricia Perez of Mount San
              Antonio College, and Dr. Barbara Tewksbury of Hamilton College who report that
              these are of particular interest to women and minority students.
	We also are
              adapting and implementing DBL as practiced by Drs. Richard Moog and James
              Spencer at Franklin and Marshall College where students learn chemistry through
              guided research or experimentation instead of through transmittal by textbooks
              or class lectures. We are creating a series of discovery-based lesson plans
              that include guided discovery worksheets that help students formulate their own
              questions, identify information they need to answer those questions, and make
              conclusions based on evidence they obtain.
	Finally, we are incorporating
              undergraduate research in our course following a model used at the College of
              New Jersey. Faculty there have developed a Faculty Student Research Course that
              focuses on involving undergraduate students in research with well-developed,
              rigorous curricular objectives. Using this model, we plan to engage students in
              two types of research projects in our course: carefully controlled
              mini-projects conducted in the laboratory, and more complex, community-based
              research activities in the field.

