Title       : Collaborative Research: Developing and Implementing Just-in-Time-Teaching (JiTT)
               Techniques in the Principles of Economics Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a0088303

Award Number: 0088303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Simkins simkinss@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Economics (82)  In recent years there has been growing concern that economics
              is lagging behind other disciplines in implementing instructional innovations
              that actively engage students in the learning process. In response, this
              project is adapting Just- in- Time Teaching (JiTT) techniques originally
              developed for physics education for use in introductory economics courses. JiTT
              techniques combine the use of Web- based exercises with active- learning
              pedagogy to provide a dynamic learning environment that makes students
              collaborators in the learning process. [See Gregor Novak, E. Patterson, A.
              Gavrin, and W. Christian, "Just-in-Time Teaching: Blending Active Learning with
              Web Technology," Prentice Hall, 1999.] Students complete exercises on the Web
              and turn them in a few hours before class; faculty then organize the classroom
              session around students' responses just prior to class. Excerpts from students'
              submissions are presented during the class as the basis for lecture topics and
              are also used to develop collaborative exercises that teams of students work on
              during classroom sessions. This two- pronged approach leads to better student
              preparation for class, greater participation in classroom discussion,
              instantaneous feedback for instructors, and improved student study habits. We
              are building a model for JiTT application in a traditional Principles of
              Economics sequence that features 25 modules of lecture/ discussion topics,
              warm- up exercises, economic puzzles, and collaborative in- class activities.
              By implementing JiTT techniques in introductory economics courses we hope to
              achieve four related objectives: (1) improving learning in undergraduate
              economics courses through increased emphasis on active- student learning
              activities, (2) developing effective strategies for integrating use of the Web
              in an active- student learning environment, (3) increasing the academic success
              of minority students in economics, and (4) fostering changes in teaching
              practices in economics. The development, implementation, evaluation, and
              dissemination of JiTT materials for introductory economics courses is being
              carried out by experienced faculty members at Glendale Community College (GCC)
              and North Carolina A&T State University (NCAT), institutions serving unique
              educational missions and diverse student populations. In addition to developing
              JiTT materials for classroom use and testing the effectiveness of JiTT
              techniques in our classes, we are in the process of developing a JiTT in
              Economics Web site at NCAT. The Web site will eventually include a description
              of the JiTT strategy, links to JiTT use elsewhere, a complete compilation of
              the 25 modules we develop, workshop presentations, and our research findings
              and recommendations. To encourage broader adoption of JiTT strategies in
              economics, we are publicizing the materials on this Web site and presenting our
              findings through presentations at workshops and professional meetings, as well
              as through economic education listservs to which we belong.
