Title       : The Distribution of Values of Mahler
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0088915

Award Number: 0088915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Vaaler vaaler@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for proposal 0088915

The primary objective of this research is to
              develop a new analytic method for investigating certain types of height
              functions.  The main height function considered by the principal investigator
              is the Mahler measure.  Traditionally, the Mahler measure of a monic polynomial
              with complex coefficients is the product of the absolute values of those roots
              of the polynomial which occur outside the closed unit disk.  In the present
              context, however, it is convenient to regard the Mahler measure as a distance
              function on a real or complex Euclidean space.  More precisely, a vector in
              Euclidean space is identified with the vector of coefficients of a polynomial
              and so the Mahler measure of the vector is simply the Mahler measure of the
              corresponding polynomial.  Viewed in this way the Mahler measure is a
              continuous function and homogeneous of degree 1.  That is, the Mahler measure
              is a distance function in the sense of the geometry of numbers.  Also, the
              Lebesgue measure of the set of points in Euclidean space where the Mahler
              measure is less than a real parameter, is a distribution function of the
              parameter.  This  distribution function is then subject to analysis by means of
              the Mellin (or Fourier) transform.  Although the Mahler measure is a very
              complicated function of the coordinates of a vector, the distribution function
              is shown to be surprisingly simple.  In particular, the principal investigator
              observes several unexpected arithmetical properties of natural geometric
              objects associated to the Mahler measure.  For example, the volume of the unit
              ball with respect to the Mahler measure is a rational number.  And the surface
              of the unit ball can be parameterized by polynomial maps with integer
              coefficients.  The principal investigator hopes to attack the well known
              conjecture of D.H. Lehmer concerning small values of Mahler's measure by a
              modification of the methods described here.  A further project is to discover
              analogous results for the elliptic Mahler measure.

The Mahler measure is a
              technical tool used in a variety of investigations in analytic and algebraic
              number theory.  And it has practical importance in certain computer algorithms
              for factoring large polynomials.  This is because the Mahler measure of a
              polynomial gives information about the number of irreducible factors of the
              polynomial, and so immediately provides a limit to the complexity of any
              factoring algorithm.  Polynomials form a very basic and important class of 
              mathematical objects which appear in a wide variety of applications.  The
              Mahler measure of a polynomial gives useful information about the polynomial,
              but its precise usefulness depends on the particular application.  For example,
              the Mahler measure can be used to determine the entropy (a rough measure of
              complicatedness) of certain dynamical systems.  The research of the principal
              investigator is motivated by a desire to better understand the Mahler measure
              and also to seek new applications in number theory and in applied
              mathematics.


