Title       : Investigative Science Learning Environment: Science and Cognition Combined
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0088906

Award Number: 0088906
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495304             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Van Heuvelen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Xueli Zou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugenia Etkina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne M. Brahmia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) This project is developing and testing for large enrollment
              introductory physics courses a unique multifaceted epistemological learning
              system-Investigative Science Learning Environment (ISLE) - that replicates
              systematic discovery methods used by practicing scientists. The goal of this
              system is to bring "a scientific way of knowing" into the process of learning
              physics. A complete set of curriculum materials (published innovative textbook,
              student study guide, and instructor's guide including suggestions for
              experiments) is being developed for the algebra-based physics course taken
              primarily by biology majors and pre-medical students. In addition, resource
              materials, feedback formative assessment instruments, and recommendations on
              practical implementation of the ISLE are being prepared as supplements for this
              course and for the calculus-based introductory physics courses in which
              traditional physics texts are used. ISLE is being tested in algebra-based
              physics courses, in a bridging course for under prepared engineering students,
              and in regular and honors calculus-based physics for engineering students. The
              ISLE is based on research in physics education, cognitive science, and
              learning-outcome requests from the 21st century workplace. It is being used in
              several institutions-Ohio State University, Rutgers University, Chico State
              University and a two-year college. Students can be active learners rather than
              objects of teaching. Students construct the understanding of physics themselves
              following the same general pattern for each concept-devising and experimentally
              testing qualitative and quantitative explanations of the phenomena that they
              observe. Various proven thinking and learning strategies-multiple exposures,
              multiple representations, and multimedia-enhanced learning-are used. Students
              are active participants in all parts of the course, and they solve complex
              problems and apply their knowledge for practical purposes.
After taking the
              Investigative Science Learning Environment (ISLE) physics course, students
              should be better skilled in the techniques of scientific investigation,
              experienced in designing their own investigations and in decision making, able
              to construct their understanding of new concepts, and used to working
              collaboratively in groups to solve complex real life problems. They leave
              instruction with conceptual knowledge and procedural knowledge structures.

