Title       : Subsurface Archaeogeophysical Survey and Mapping Curriculum and Laboratory
               Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2001   
File        : a0088017

Award Number: 0088017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa E. Park lepark@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda R. Barrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Matney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
Subsurface archaeo-geophysical survey techniques are
              being used increasingly in archaeological fieldwork to map ancient remains
              without excavation. The growth in use is facilitated by the availability of
              commercial data collectors tailored to archaeological needs. This project is
              adapting these techniques to create an integrated interdisciplinary curriculum
              to provide undergraduates with (1) a competent theoretical understanding of
              basic geophysical processes underlying the survey techniques, (2) some
              knowledge of the implications of subsurface archaeo-geophysical technologies
              for research design and methodology, and (3) a working knowledge of appropriate
              mapping and imaging theory and technology. The project is developing a new
              interdisciplinary course, upgrading an existing Archaeology Laboratory for
              subsurface archaeo-geophysical survey, and modifying existing courses offered
              by the departments of Geology, Archaeology, and Geography to accomplish these
              objectives. This project is also supporting faculty and student research
              projects and invigorating a community-based research program at the University
              of Akron. 
The project is adapting a design of Web-based instructional modules
              derived from Geographer Kenneth Foote's "Virtual Geography Department," an
              NSF-supported workshop. It is also adapting field techniques taught at a "Field
              Institutes for Reforming Science Teaching" (FIRST) workshop conducted by
              Biologists Diane Ebert-May and Janet Hodder -- also NSF supported. Both of
              these adaptations are being used for their skill in supporting active learning
              by students. The content of the new course and course modifications is being
              adapted from courses using geophysical methods for subsurface mapping developed
              and offered to undergraduates at three other institutions. These were a course
              in Archaeological Field Methods, including subsurface surveying at Vassar
              College, developed by Lucy Johnson; the archaeological field school at Notre
              Dame University, which offers courses in geophysical remote sensing techniques;
              and a series of three courses at Boston University related to archaeological
              geophysical surveying. 

