Title       : Renewing the Undergraduate Archaeology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0088692

Award Number: 0088692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499845             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Anne Pyburn   (Principal Investigator current)
              George Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc For Amer Archaeology
	      900 2nd St. NE #12
	      Washington, DC  200023557    202/232-8800

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Anthropology (81)
The Society for American Archaeology (SAA), the Society for
              Historical Archaeology (SHA), the American Anthropological Association (AAA),
              and the Archaeological Institute of American (AIA) have acknowledged a crisis
              in current approaches to the training of undergraduate archaeology students.
              Funding shortages and shifts from academic to private sources, dramatic
              increases in site destruction and looting worldwide, emerging political
              activism among descendant and local communities, complex new government
              oversight and regulation, technological innovations, and dramatic increases in
              the scientific knowledge base have outpaced the ability of educators to
              accommodate these changes with their teaching strategies. [See K. A. Pyburn,
              "Altered States: Archaeologists under Siege in Academe" in "Teaching
              Archaeology in the 21st Century," Edited by S. J. Bender and G. S. Smith, SAA,
              2000.] To address this issue the SAA established an inter-societal Task Force
              on Curriculum, and provided support for a workshop made up of a diverse and
              committed set of educators from across the nation. This Task Force produced a
              set of core principles and guidelines for teaching archaeology that are crucial
              to the survival of the discipline of archaeology into the 21st century. The
              Task Force is working with the SAA, the SHA, the AAA, and the AIA to initiate
              implementation of these guidelines across the discipline with renovated
              curricula as rapidly as possible. Smith and Bender (2000) summarized these
              principles as Stewardship, Diversity, Social Relevance, Ethics and Values,
              Communication, Critical Skills, and Social Science Problem Solving.
This is a
              three-year project encompassing the design, testing, and evaluation of core
              aspects of a new curriculum based on these principles at eight academic
              institutions across the United States. It is engaged in producing a complete
              set of flexible course materials suitable to replace or redesign extant
              curricula in any higher educational setting. The project goal is to make
              recommended course content and proven teaching techniques available as
              efficiently as possible without cost to the broadest possible audience of
              educators.
Participants on the development team were chosen from faculty who
              have demonstrated a commitment to both education and research. Further, there
              were selected to be representatives of particular fields of expertise
              foregrounded by the principles, to represent a variety of institution types
              (community colleges, public four year programs with and without graduate
              programs, and private colleges), and to provide regional diversity. (The
              institutions are located in eight different states.) These faculty developers
              are being assisted by three education experts. In addition, an Advisory Board
              of eight archaeologists, each specializing in a separate area of the seven
              principles, are assisting with course development and assessment. Student
              evaluators are also participating in crucial stages of the project.
Each
              participant is first developing two separate courses at their home institution
              in collaboration with nationally recognized specialists and technical
              consultants. Overall, 16 different courses are being designed, taught, and
              evaluated. We have estimated that this project will impact some 700-1200
              students in the participating institutions over the three-year course of this
              project. In addition, course materials are being made available to the 340
              existing undergraduate programs in the U.S. offering undergraduate majors or
              minors in anthropology or coursework in archaeology. Beyond the 3-year grant
              period, this project has the potential to impact all 30,000 declared
              undergraduate anthropology majors nationwide, and an estimated 500,000 -
              600,000 students who enroll in undergraduate anthropology classes yearly as
              electives. 

