Title       : Student Stewardship of Laboratory Learning: Implementing Inquiry-Based Imaging
               Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2001   
File        : a0088638

Award Number: 0088638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99949              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Staub staub@gonzaga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Pauw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gonzaga University
	      502 East Boone Avenue
	      Spokane, WA  992580087    509/323-6102

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
 
In an effort to engage students in critical
              thinking and to encourage them to act as independent investigative scientists,
              the department of biology has increased the amount of laboratory time devoted
              to investigative work and interpretive data analysis across the curriculum. A
              series of investigative labs with a particular focus on digital data collection
              are being developed and implemented in a number of biology courses including
              cell biology, organismal biology, histology, introductory biology and ecology.
              The long-term process of data collection, photodocumentation and on-going data
              analysis common to the research environment is being adapted to the needs of
              inexperienced undergraduates and implemented across the biology curriculum.
              Eight digital imaging workstations have been purchased and are being utilized
              by students to collect static and moving images and to facilitate complex data
              analysis. In addition, students use these workstations to create and maintain
              digital and print portfolios which reflect the student's undergraduate
              laboratory experiences and summarize connections between the student's
              experiences in a variety of courses. The portfolio enhances student ownership
              of the laboratory experience and increases retention of material from one
              course to the next. Senior portfolios are evaluated by a committee and five
              portfolios are selected each year for posting on the World Wide Web. In
              addition to serving biology majors, this project serves pre-service teachers
              and in-service teachers through workshops that model inquiry-based instruction,
              enhance faculty skill in microscopy and image capturing, and integrate the use
              of technology in education. Partnerships with Native American K-12 students,
              in-service teachers, and pre-service teachers are centered around the
              development of pictorial field guides of indigenous plant and animal species
              thus demonstrating the use of technology in education. 


