Title       : High Resolution Radar Profiling of the Snow and Ice Stratigraphy beneath the
               ITASE Traverses, West Antarctic Ice Sheet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0088035

Award Number: 0088035
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Arcone sarcone@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0088035		
Arcone

This award supports continued acquisition of high
              resolution, radar reflection profiles of the snow and ice stratigraphy between
              core sites planned along traverse routes of the U.S. component of the
              International
Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (U.S.-ITASE).  The purpose
              is to use the profiles to establish the structure and continuity of firn
              stratigraphic horizons over hundreds of kilometers and to
              quantitatively
assess topographic and ice movement effects upon snow
              deposition.  Other objectives are to establish the climatic extent that a
              single site represents and to investigate the cause of firn reflections.  The
              radar
will also be used to identify crevasses ahead of the traverse vehicles 
              in order to protect the safety of the scientists and support personnel on the
              traverse.  Collaboration with other ITASE investigators will use the radar
              horizons  as continuous isochronic references fixed by the core dating to
              calculate historical snow accumulation rates.  The primary radar system uses
              400-MHz (center frequency) short-pulse antennas, which (with processing) gives
              the penetration of 50-70 meters.  This is the depth which is required to exceed
              the 200-year deposition horizon along the traverse routes.  Profiles at 200 MHz
              will also be recorded if depths greater than 70 meters are of interest. 
              Processing will be accomplished by data compression (stacking) to reveal long
              distance stratigraphic deformation, range gain corrections to give proper
              weight to signal amplitudes, and GPS corrections to adjust the records for the
              present ice sheet topography.  Near surface stratigraphy will allow topographic
              and ice movement effects to be separated.  This work is critical to the success
              of the U.S.-ITASE program. 


