Title       : Engineering Laboratory Accessible Via the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0088775

Award Number: 0088775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor A. Skormin vskormin@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)
 Engineering education is closely linked to
              advances in Internet, global communication systems, computers, etc. There is
              one area in engineering education, however, that is still dominated by
              classical teaching/learning methodology: the laboratory. The purpose of an
              engineering laboratory course is to teach future engineers to interact with the
              "real hardware"in all its imperfection. Any attempt to replace the "real
              hardware" in a student laboratory with the most elaborate simulation software
              results in the loss of realism and prevents students from gaining important
              practical skills and experiences. 
 The technology in this project utilizes
              advanced space-qualified laser positioning hardware equipped with computer
              interfaces facilitating remote operation and status display of its components.
              All aspects of operation of this hardware are controlled by a designated
              computer through a number of actuators and extensive monitoring/data
              acquisition. We gain global accessibility of the "real hardware" via the
              Internet thus allowing remote users nationwide to perform any experiments in
              real-time and collect feedback information representing properties of the
              actual devices. This brings to a student laboratory the most valuable aspects
              of the "real hardware"-based experiments. The choice of laboratory, laser
              steering and position control systems for space communication make it
              attractive to many engineering programs. Successful implementation of this
              technology can upgrade engineering laboratories nationwide to the level of
              leading engineering schools and result in significant improvement of the
              quality of engineering education and reduce variability between universities.
              
 SUNY Binghamton has a well-established record of successful research in the
              area of pedagogy of university education. Its distance learning facility,
              Enginet, operates within a network made up of a consortium of five State
              University of New York campuses. These resources are utilized for effective
              dissemination of the results of this project. Being prompted by revolutionary
              changes in information technology, this project is realizing the integration of
              this technology in education. Implementation of the Internet-accessible
              laboratory will not only give students access to the most advanced hardware,
              but provide them with an additional opportunity to utilize Internet, computer
              graphics, and digital imaging, thus preparing them for the challenges of their
              profession. 




