Title       : Web-Based, Out-of-Class Learning of Conceptual Physics: A Kinematics and
               Dynamics Prototype
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0088695

Award Number: 0088695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Greene rgreene@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) Physics education research has shown that many students are leaving
              their introductory college- and university-level physics courses with little
              understanding of the fundamental concepts of physics. Whereas much of the
              research has studied in-class methods of alleviating the problem, this project
              focuses on students' out-of-class activities as a complementary means of
              improving learning. The goal of this project is to develop and test a prototype
              of freely available, Internet-accessible instructional software for algebra-
              and calculus-based introductory physics - software focusing on students'
              out-of-class learning that can be used by instructors (through homework
              assignments) or by students (through self-study) to supplement in-class or
              textbook discussion of basic physics concepts.

The principal investigator
              has created a limited set of explanatory/exploratory/assessment Java applets
              for introductory kinematics and dynamics. Preliminary surveys and experiments
              indicate that even in its present form the software is well received by and
              helpful to students in learning physics. This project is developing a more
              complete prototype including: 

Additional applets to provide more complete
              coverage for the kinematics and dynamics prototype;
System CGI software to
              simplify the administrative details of student logins and recording of scores,
              and to allow students to check their scores on-line;
An instructor's guide
              describing the prototype and providing assignment suggestions;
Independent,
              formal assessment of the software by faculty other than the author.

This
              project should provide a clear picture of the effectiveness of this means of
              complementing in-class instruction with out-of-class learning activities. This
              information can then be used to determine the desirability of developing a full
              version of the software.



