Title       : Enhancing the Scientific Awareness (Literacy) of Non-science Majors via an
               Interdisciplinary Physical Science Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a0088355

Award Number: 0088355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel W. Russell russell@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dagmar R. Cronn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly K. Berger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      520 O'Dowd Hall
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    248/370-4924

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) 
Chemistry, physics, and education faculty are engaged
              in designing, developing, and pilot testing a physical science course that is
              designed to enhance the scientific awareness of nonscience majors. This is
              being done in a three cycle iterative process where each cycle ends with
              assessment leading to subsequent improvements. Currently the university
              required curriculum for non-science majors does not provide direct experiences
              with the methods and processes of science. This developing course is providing
              an undergraduate science experience that is inquiry-based and content-relevant
              to students' personal experiences. This is being accomplished by including
              materials that are contextually familiar and potentially interesting to
              Michigan students. Students taking the new course are learning the scientific
              approach to problem solving -- a process that requires basing opinions on facts
              and observable evidence. Use of peer learning groups in active-learning
              classroom activities and computer laboratory study are part of the course
              design. We expect this pedagogical design will prove effective in improving
              critical thinking and communication skills. The course is also teaching methods
              for locating information on scientific topics and for understanding and
              interpreting scientific data. The course is constructed around three modules --
              the science of everyday life, science of the microscopic world, and the earth
              and beyond. These choices are making extensive use of modules developed by two
              NSF Chemistry Initiatives known as Modular Chemistry and ChemLinks. Each module
              area is being developed with some flexibility. Eventually there will be a
              minimum of two alternative module implementations developed in each module area
              to provide flexibility of choice for the many faculty who are (or soon will be)
              teaching it. This project is also adapting materials from the textbook
              "Physical Science" by J. Faughn, R. Chang, and J. Turk (Fort Worth, Texas:
              Saunders College Publishing, 1995), from "Workshop Science: Exploring Nature
              Through Active Learning," by S. Franklin, D. Jackson, and P. Laws, AAPT Spring
              Meeting, Lincoln, NE (1998), the Integrated Science Program at Cal State -
              Chico (R. Lederer, "A Problem Solving, Simulation, and Teamwork Approach to
              Teaching Integrated Science, being developed under a 1997 NSF grant), and the
              general education program at UCLA (www.college.ucla.edu/ge/). A systematic
              effort will be made to identify and recruit future secondary science teachers
              from students entering the university, particularly those who enter with an
              undecided career. Project products will include modified ChemLinks/ ModularChem
              modules, assessment tools to measuring levels of scientific awareness, and a
              workshop for training faculty and teaching assistants in the teaching and
              assessment methodologies used in this course. 

