Title       : Real Chemical Reactions Vertically Integrated Throughout the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a0088501

Award Number: 0088501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Hesketh hesketh@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. Dahm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mariano J. Savelski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Stewart Slater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie Farrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Chemical (53) 

The pedagogy of teaching chemical reaction
              engineering is continually advancing through the use of new computational tools
              such as POLYMATH and MATLAB; interactive computer applications; and a new
              emphasis in textbooks on relating theory to industrially relevant chemical
              reactions. What is currently lacking in this area are chemical reaction
              engineering experiments that employ realistic reaction engineering systems.
              Nearly all of the reaction engineering experiments reported in the literature
              employ simple experiments that can be described using a single overall
              reaction. In addition, most laboratory experiments do not examine the process
              fluid mechanics of the reactor and how this effects the product distribution.
              As a result, students only visualize reactors through theory and do not
              experience realistic reactor systems in their undergraduate courses. This lack
              of experience eliminates a major engineering challenge in designing and
              troubleshooting a reactor in which the yield and selectivity are optimized
              along with the process economics. 

This project is developing several
              experiments that employ the following features currently not being addressed in
              published reaction engineering experiments: 1) byproduct formation, 2) green
              engineering, 3) scale-up fluid mechanics and 4) equilibrium limited reactions.
              A series of experiments is being adapted from the research and educational
              literature using two chemical and one biological reacting systems. Specific
              adaptations are based on experiments developed by Wang at the University of
              Maryland, Bourne at the University of Birmingham, and Keyes at the University
              of Illinois, among others. These experiments are being vertically integrated
              through the following series of courses: chemistry, organic chemistry, process
              fluid transport, chemical reaction engineering, industrial process pathways,
              biochemical engineering, and unit operations.
