Title       : Time-Resolved Investigations of Photo-Physical Processes in Dendrimer
               Macromolecular and Nano-Composite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  2000   
File        : a0088044

Award Number: 0088044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore Goodson tgoodson@chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this research, the photo-physical properties of novel organic dendrimers and
              metal dendritic nano-composite systems will be investigated.  Measurements that
              probe the dynamics of fundamental excitation decay processes in organic
              dendrimers will be carried out with ultra-fast time-resolved luminescence
              spectroscopy.  These measurements will compare the dynamics of the excitation
              decay in homgenous (where core groups are the same as the dendrons) and
              inhomogeneous (where core groups are different from the dendrons) dendrimer
              systems.  The ultra-fast anisotropic decay of these systems will also be
              investigated to probe possible energy transfer mechanisms.  Time-resolved
              measurements will be carried out with novel silver(Ag) and gold(Au) dendrimer
              nano-composites.  The decays of the metal clusters and the dendrimer host can
              be separated and the associated mechanisms of relaxation can be ascribed.  The
              dependence of the metal particle configuration on the emission dynamics of the
              dendrimer nanocomposite system will be investigated.  Dynamics measurements as
              a function of dendrimer generation number will also be carried out.  These
              studies will probe the fundamental mechanism of emission decay in synthetic
              dendrimers and give new insights into the interaction of synthetic dendrimers
              and metal nano-particles when fabricated in a nano-composite structure. 
              
%%%
Organic macromolecules with important structural properties will play a
              critical role in future development of optical and electronic devices.  Organic
              dendrimers and metal dendrimer nano-composites are examples of such promising
              macromolecular architectures.  They have potential applications as light
              emitters, optical limiters, and drug release and delivery systems.

