Title       : Core Model Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0088948

Award Number: 0088948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest Schimmerling eschimme@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

Core models are generalizations of Godel's Constructible
              Universe.
Jensen's pioneering work on the fine structure of core models and
              on
techniques for constructing core models with large cardinals has led
              to
many applications in diverse parts of set theory.  More recently,
              Martin,
Mitchell, Steel, and others have extended earlier work on core models
              to
the level of Woodin cardinals.  The investigator's questions concern
              1)
the combinatorial structure of core models, 2) the application of
              core
model techniques in determining the large cardinal consistency strength
              of
various set theoretic statements, 3) the application of core
              model
techniques in descriptive set theory, 4) problems in
              infinitary
combinatorics, forcing, and model theory that were in part inspired
              by his
earlier work on core models.

The most widely accepted theory (system
              of axioms) of sets is known as
ZFC.  Kurt Godel is famous for having shown
              that if ZFC is consistent,
then ZFC is incomplete in the sense that there are
              statements which are
neither provable nor refutable in ZFC.  This is
              particularly striking
since all of mathematics can be expressed in the
              language of sets and most
mathematicians work exclusively within ZFC.  There
              are important open
questions that are not decided by ZFC.  The most famous
              example is Georg
Cantor's Continuum Problem, which Godel showed cannot be
              answered
negatively in ZFC and Paul Cohen showed cannot be answered positively
              in
ZFC.  (Cohen received a Fields Medal for this work.) There are
              many
interesting extensions of ZFC and the relationships between them are
              quite
complicated.  The investigator's project has to do with a
              natural
hierarchy of axioms known as the ``large cardinals''.  Many
              beautiful
results, including some longstanding conjectures, were proved by a
              number
of researchers using ZFC and large cardinals in the 1980's and 90's; 
              
further success is anticipated.  And, also, details of how the
              various
theories of sets are related have been discovered by comparing
              these
theories with the large cardinal hierarchy.

