Title       : Mathematical Aspects of Einstein's Theory of General relativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0088951

Award Number: 0088951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sidney A. Coon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ezra T. Newman newman@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recently, we have developed a new point of view towards general relativity,
              where the analogy with electro-magnetic fields completely breaks down. The
              primary variables are no longer conventional fields but are instead non-local
              structures; in particular, they are three dimensional surfaces in space-time
              with the special property that light can travel along these surfaces, the
              surfaces are referred to as null  or characteristic surfaces.  It has been
              possible (though it was not at all obvious how to do so) to give a formulation
              of GR where the basic equations are for the determination of these surfaces. 
              In turn, when these surfaces are determined the geometry of the space-time
              turns out to be identical with the conventional view derived from Einstein's
              general relativity. In other words, general relativity has been reformulated as
              a theory of three dimensional surfaces. We plan to continue working on the
              elucidation of these ideas and in particular to develop an approximation scheme
              to examine the differential equations defining these surfaces.

An additional
              project ? closely related but distinctly different from the theory of surfaces
              - is the application of GR to the astrophysically important subject of
              gravitational lensing. Almost always GR has been applied to lensing via a
              rather radical simplifying approximation - the so-called thin lens
              approximation using linear theory on a simple background.  We have developed an
              exact formulation of lensing with an associated perturbation theory that is an
              improvement over the thin lens version.  We strongly believe that there will be
              observationally relevant corrections to the thin lens predictions both in
              intergalactic lensing and in galactic microlensing. Preliminary papers on this
              have already been accepted for publication.  In the context of the exact
              approach to lensing we also plan to study image distortion by lenses in a
              nonperturbative fashion.

Both our two projects, the reformulation of GR as a
              theory of 3-surfaces in four space and the theory of gravitational lensing rely
              heavily on the study of properties of null geodesics.  This in turn has led us,
              in a peripheral project, to study and work on Penrose's Theory of Twistors and
              their application to GR.

