Title       : Illumination Engineering Systems: A Laboratory-Based Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0088360

Award Number: 0088360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hofu Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin C. Abrams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)

The prototype product of this project is a
              pilot course that integrates lighting design software simulations with
              qualitative photometric measurement experiments. The course includes a
              self-consistent data base of computer simulation software, photometric
              measurement & data evaluation capability, and associated instruction. The
              course material is formatted so that other educational institutions can
              remotely access, via the Internet, the physical execution of the experiments
              and interact in real time as an integral extension of the Cal Poly Pomona
              laboratories.

The pedagogical benefit is two fold. First, any educational
              institution at any location is potentially capable, through conventional
              internet access, to offer lighting courses that include the latest
              comprehensive laboratory capabilities without having to invest in creating
              their own facilities. Second, there is an expanding trend in education to
              emphasize computer simulations with diminished attention on physical experience
              and qualitative verification of actual applications. However, in fields of
              engineering and science one must ultimately know how to physically construct,
              test, and use a real product. This course provides an example of the use of
              computer software while demonstrating its appropriate integration with physical
              reality.

The effectiveness of the approach and format developed for offering
              this course is assessed by a formal proofing and upgrading process conducted by
              participating faculty both at Cal Poly Pomona and pier faculty at other
              schools. Cal Poly Pomona has an established working relationship with several
              other schools that have varying types of lighting education programs. A
              designated committee of faculty from these schools are identified to
              participate in the program. As material is developed it will be distributed to
              them for critique and recommendations, as well as soliciting their
              contributions to the material development. 


