Title       : An Integrated Approach to Educating a Diverse Population on Environmental
               Management Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a0088903

Award Number: 0088903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74806              (Estimated)
Investigator: Murali Krishnamurthi mkrishna@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip J. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) 
This proof-of-concept project is designing an
              interdisciplinary curriculum to educate students from diverse disciplines about
              environmental management systems (EMS). The primary goal is to help students
              understand the importance of environmental issues through an integrated
              approach drawing on science, business/economic, legal, social, and engineering
              concepts. EMS are "next generation" responses to pollution prevention that go
              beyond environmental regulatory compliance by integrating science, quality
              management and systems engineering practices to improve environmental
              performance. As such, the project applies selected science, business and
              engineering applications to an issue of broad public interest and concern. The
              first core activity of the project is the development of a model curriculum so
              that students can better understand the benefits of environmental management in
              real-world settings by interacting with faculty from diverse disciplines and
              with professionals from engineering, sciences, and business. Working with a
              group of universities and companies, the project team is designing and testing
              interdisciplinary learning modules on EMS. These learning modules are being
              designed for face-to-face as well as web-based delivery and include a variety
              of active learning strategies such as class discussions, case studies, and
              internships. The project advisory group, composed of faculty from academic
              institutions, and business and environmental practitioners, play a central role
              in the design, evaluation, and dissemination of the materials. The project is
              engaged in both formative and summative evaluation activities, including
              evaluations by the advisory group, students, practitioners, project evaluators,
              and participating partners. A second core activity is designing outreach
              efforts to diverse student populations. To facilitate outreach, project
              deliverables are being disseminated through a variety of means including the
              project website, presentations, publications, advisory group follow-up, and
              informational sources. 







