Title       : Collaborative Research -- Visualizing and Exploring United States Urban and
               Rural Social Change, 1790 - 2000 -- Interactive Multimedia and Web Based Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a0088704

Award Number: 0088704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Beveridge andy@troll.soc.qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Sociology (86) 
This is collaborative project at CUNY-Queens and UCLA. It is
              developing multimedia and web-based visual and map enabled software tools that
              will depict the growth and change in two major metropolitan areas in the United
              States, New York and Los Angeles. It builds upon a project that created
              web-based map enabled tools to examine change in New York City from 1910 using
              Census and other data, in a way that eases faculty creation of curricular
              exercises and experiences for students and others. The web component is being
              augmented by multi-media tools developed at UCLA that allow the visualization
              of virtual neighborhoods, as well as easy access to text, pictures, and video
              images to illustrate a variety of important sociological concepts and themes.
              These virtual neighborhoods make it possible to incorporate 3-D animation with
              realistic environments creating an interactive urban context composed of
              representative buildings, landmarks, and neighborhoods of the geographic area.
              The current neighborhood is simulated, and then it is recreated for several
              earlier periods. The students are able to "visit" and explore these
              neighborhoods and, using the mapping software, understand how these specific
              neighborhoods "fit" into the wider area of New York or Los Angeles, while
              exploring transportation or ethnic and racial change, for example.
CUNY and
              UCLA are developing these complementary tools in common and distributing them
              widely over the web, by CD-ROM, and in unison with an undergraduate textbook we
              are publishing: "New York and Los Angeles: Politics Society and Culture,"
              forthcoming from the University of Chicago Press in mid to late 2002. Students
              and others can use these materials to examine and understand the dramatic
              changes in population, race, ethnic ancestry, family status, housing and living
              conditions, and income and wealth that have occurred in these two major
              metropolises. Related exercises that are being developed allow students to
              compare and contrast the growth of the two regions, to explore the changing
              patterns of economic and ethnic inequality, and to study the immigration
              history of New York and Los Angeles and the migration paths of recent immigrant
              groups in the cities and the suburbs. Other exercises are focusing on
              occupational structure, educational systems, social welfare, riots, and the
              location and situation of those in the artistic fields in the two regions. (We
              are also exploring how to generalize these tools to other locales.) 
The
              materials are being pilot tested at the PI's home campuses and in courses at a
              variety of other colleges and universities in the United States. Workshops
              scheduled at professional meetings and at CUNY and UCLA are assisting faculty
              at other institutions in using these materials.
