Title       : Molecular Technology Laboratory, An Undergraduate Course To Modernize the
               Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2001   
File        : a0088295

Award Number: 0088295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99236              (Estimated)
Investigator: Selene S. Nikaido ssn8704@cmsu2.cmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay Raveill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven H. Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Missouri St Univ
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Warrensburg, MO  64093    660/543-4264

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) An understanding of the methods used in molecular
              biology and their application to other areas of biology is critical to the
              student graduating with a biology degree. Field biology, population biology,
              evolutionary and organismal biology, physiology and cellular biology all use
              molecular techniques. The Biology Department has recognized the need to
              modernize its curriculum, which traditionally has emphasized field and
              organismal biology, but lacked instruction focusing on molecular biology.
              Recently the biology department hired new faculty to fill this void in their
              curriculum. As a result, two new courses dedicated to molecular technology, a
              molecular biology lecture course and a molecular laboratory course, are now
              offered. The Molecular Technology Laboratory course adapts the methods
              presented in "Unraveling DNA: Molecular Biology for the Laboratory" to the
              current needs of this open-ended, inquiry based investigative laboratory. The
              first seven weeks of instruction is devoted to the introduction of standard
              methods in molecular technology. The remainder of the course is devoted to a
              project involving the cloning of a gene. Working in teams of 3 or 4, students
              design and carry out experiments to clone the gene, and then demonstrate that
              the correct gene has been cloned. At the end of the semester, both written and
              oral reports are presented. This part of the course is designed to engage
              students to develop and use problem solving and critical thinking skills. In
              addition to the revised Molecular Biology curriculum, this project has also
              lead to the infusion of molecular biology across the curriculum such that
              students are now introduced to the basic laboratory and molecular biological
              research techniques as Freshmen and Sophomores that are revisited in Genetics
              laboratory and ultimately in the Molecular Biology course. Consequently, the
              introduction of molecular techniques across the curriculum and the development
              of a sophisticated dedicated molecular biology laboratory has strengthen the
              whole biology curriculum and improved student performance as they transition to
              graduate school, professional programs or employment.
