Title       : Increasing Student and Faculty Participation in GIS Education: Envisioning
               Spatial Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a0088594

Award Number: 0088594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166766             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Cromartie jamie.cromartie@stockton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Weihong Fan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Ashton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis N. Thomson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R Stockton Coll of NJ
	      PO Box 195
	      Pomona, NJ  08240    609/652-1776

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) This project increases awareness of, interest in and
              competence at applying Geographic Information Systems (GIS) across a range of
              disciplines at Richard Stockton College. It addresses a growing need for
              college graduates who can apply GIS technology to diverse fields. To bring more
              students to GIS education, we are: 1) increasing awareness among faculty and
              students of the general and discipline-specific capabilities of GIS and the
              opportunities in their fields, 2) training faculty to use GIS in their own
              teaching and 3) teaching students basic geographic and spatial concepts needed
              to understand GIS and its applications in their particular fields. 

We are
              educating the college community about GIS via a demonstration-workshop series
              to introduce students and faculty at the College to the ways in which spatial
              data and information contribute to understanding the world and to diverse
              academic disciplines. We are training faculty via faculty workshops which
              include a basic introduction to GIS, followed by an individual project in the
              faculty member's discipline. GIS-trained student mentors assist faculty with
              projects. Students from many disciplines need an introduction to basic spatial
              and geographic concepts before beginning GIS. We are developing a
              laboratory-based, self-paced gateway course in Stockton's General Studies
              program adapting courses from other institutions and from Stockton, following
              guidelines of the National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis
              (NCGIA). 

Evaluation and dissemination are key at each stage of the project,
              highlighted by several visits by outside consultants and by development of the
              demonstration- workshops as a distance-learning course. This project addresses
              diversity issues by appealing to non-traditional students. It includes teacher
              education as one of the key disciplinary areas. Close ties to Stockton's GIS
              center allows students to become involved in research and independent projects
              and to pursue advanced certification in GIS. 

