Title       : Integrating Exemplary Physical Science Teacher Enhancement Materials with
               Mathematics for Preservice Middle School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0088818

Award Number: 0088818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199914             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Adams padams@fhsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Germaine L. Taggart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Hays State Univ
	      600 Park Street
	      Hays, KS  676014009    785/628-4000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)

This project is developing a two-course sequence of
              integrated physical science and mathematics to prepare preservice elementary
              and secondary teachers to teach at the middle school level. Students tend to
              lose interest in mathematics and science at the middle school level, a loss
              often attributed to ill-prepared teachers. The lack of preparation is two-fold:
              elementary teachers teaching at the middle school lack content in the physical
              sciences, while secondary teachers lack appropriate pedagogical models for
              teaching at the middle school level. Realizing that teachers teach as they were
              taught, this two-course sequence is designed to develop pedagogical models
              embedded in content knowledge development of preservice teachers. The
              objectives of the project are to: 1) Develop comprehensive knowledge of the
              physical sciences and applications of mathematics in the study of science in
              preservice middle school teachers; 2) Develop a core of university faculty who
              have facility in modeling teaching styles appropriate for the preservice middle
              school teachers; 3) Develop a curriculum package that can be adapted by other
              universities for the instruction of preservice middle school teachers. The
              objectives are being achieved by having a team of four science and one
              education faculty adapt proven teacher-enhancement materials in the physical
              science and middle school curriculum into a two-course sequence. Key elements
              of this adaptation are the integration of mathematics, and a research
              investigation that extends throughout the course so that students develop a
              sense of doing "real science." The project is adapting materials from Operation
              Physics, Operation Chemistry, Project Astro, Project Earth Science, Powerful
              Ideas in Physical Science, and Mission Mathematics: Linking Aerospace and the
              NCTM Standards. These materials are being modified by including explicit
              mathematical applications within the science materials as has been done within
              Mission Mathematics. The faculty are receiving training on teaching with the
              learning cycle, cooperative learning, and community building. Participation in
              this two-course sequence provides a model for future teachers to adapt to their
              classrooms. Students enrolling in these courses are at the junior level and
              have completed the general education science and mathematics courses: one
              laboratory course from any science, statistics, college algebra, and two other
              courses selected from biology, chemistry, geosciences, mathematics and computer
              science, or physics. Special efforts are being made to recruit women, minority,
              and non-traditional students from rural western Kansas into the new course
              sequence. 






