Title       : Guided Discovery and Intelligent Tutoring Materials for Calculus and their
               Electronic Delivery on the World Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  2000  
File        : a0088758

Award Number: 0088758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349830             (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Knightly knightly@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thurlow Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly P. Woolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murray Eisenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 

This project adapts a proven online Web-based
              learning system for the mathematics curriculum and develops curricular
              materials for the first calculus course. The system provides electronic
              homework, allowing instructors to easily create assignments that help students
              understand and master the material covered in class. It has already been
              extended in chemistry to support more interactive learning activities such as
              guided discovery and intelligent tutoring. The products of this project include
              a suite of basic online homework activities that cover the curricula of the
              first semester of the calculus course sequence, interactive guided discovery
              modules focused on topics and concepts where animation and simulation can be
              employed to support learning, and intelligent tutors that focus on difficult
              but key concepts in the curriculum and adaptively assist students in developing
              their understanding of them. All interactive activities are integrated into the
              basic online system, which records student progress for instructor review. A
              computer laboratory is created to support students doing online learning
              activities. Math faculty will create content for the homework system and
              interactive activities. Project staff modify the system to better support
              mathematics, train instructors in system use, help design interactive
              activities, and implement many of these activities. This project addresses a
              critical national need to improve the mathematical preparation of
              undergraduates from a wide variety of disciplines. 





