Title       : Equivariant Tamagawa Numbers/Deformation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0088930

Award Number: 0088930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102363             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthias Flach flach@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a project in Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry comprising
two parts. The
              first part deals with the study of values of L-functions
of varieties
              (motives) over number fields. In previous work the investigator
and his
              collaborator have extended the conjectures of Bloch
Kato, Fontaine,
              Perrin-Riou to motives with (possibly noncommutative)
coefficients. At the
              same time they have established a precise link
between these conjectures and
              classical Galois module theory, thereby
generalizing various conjectures and
              theorems in this latter area to
arbitrary motives. With the conjectural
              picture firmly in place, the
main task now is to prove more cases. What seems
              within reach of
current techniques are Tate motives over number fields, CM
              elliptic
curves (with CM by non-maximal orders) and the adjoint of a
              modular
form (with action of the integral Hecke algebra). The last two
              are
currently looked into by students of the investigator. Equally
              within
reach seems to be a proof of the compatibility of the equivariant
              special
value conjectures with the functional equation of the L-function.
The
              second part of the project is a rather concrete question in deformation
theory
              (of schemes, vector bundles or representations of profinite
groups). Using the
              theory of the cotangent complex one can define
higher Kodaira Spencer maps and
              the investigator proposes to study
the injectivity of these maps. In degree 1
              this is known and leads to a
criterion for smoothness of the deformation ring.
              The case of most
interest is degree 2 where a similar injectivity would lead
              to a simple
criterion for the deformation ring to be a local complete
              intersection.


This is a project in number theory which has been part of
              the mathematical
heritage ever since the Babylonians discovered that there can
              be triangles
with all sides of integer length and one angle of ninety degrees.
              By the
theorem of Pythagoras this gives integer solutions of an algebraic
              equation.
Modern number theory still looks for integer solutions of algebraic
              equations
but this search is informed and enriched by much deeper connections
              with ideas
from geometry and topology than the ones alluded to in this
              introductory
example.  The theory of special values of L-functions is a case
              in point. While defined
by counting solutions of equations modulo prime number
              it turns out that values
of these functions can sometimes be expressed in
              terms of integrals of
differential forms, or volumes of certain lattices.
              Nobody knows exactly why such a relationship
should hold. The examples one can
              prove all seem to rely on some happy
coincidences, although they follow a
              pattern that leads one to guess ("conjecture") what
happens in general. This
              is much like the situation in an experimental science. The
investigator and
              his collaborator have generalized this picture to situations where the
system
              of equations has some additional symmetries and they now try to
              collect
further evidence for (or indeed falsify!) their conjectures. As far as
              applications are
concerned, number theorists would probably agree that
              L-functions are a key concept in their
field. On the other hand, number theory
              as a whole no longer needs to be defensive about its
applicability, with much
              of cryptography and coding, on the internet and
otherwise, being based on its
              results.
