Title       : Interactive Web-Based Experimental and Computational Learning Environments for
               Earthquake Engineering Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2000 
File        : a0088130

Award Number: 0088130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469343             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed-W. M. Elgamal elgamal@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J E. Luco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andre Filiatrault  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding to the University of California-San Diego under the
              direction of Dr. Ahmed-W.M Elgamal, for the support of a Combined
              Research-Curriculum Development project entitled, "Interactive Web-Based
              Experimental and Computational Learning Environments for Earthquake Engineering
              Research and Education."  This project will integrate state-of-the-art
              earthquake engineering experimental and computational research into the
              undergraduate and graduate educational process.  The proposed developments will
              employ Internet web-based technologies to allow for real-time video monitoring,
              control, and execution of appropriate cutting-edge experimental research
              efforts in earthquake engineering.  Such setups include large shake-table
              earthquake experiments, centrifuge geomechanics tests, and dynamic tests of
              actual large buildings. Course modules will be developed to incorporate these
              unique experiments and associated computational-simulation codes at the
              undergraduate and graduate levels.  Appropriate quantitative instructional
              measures will be employed to dictate the direction and achieve the most
              effective educational goals.  A multi-disciplinary approach will involve
              researchers from Earthquake Engineering, and appropriate Internet Networking
              and Instructional Technology experts.  UCSD and Caltech conduct major
              earthquake experimentaion efforts, and constitutes an optimal environment for
              development of the proposed education and research objectives.  Signicant
              collaboration opportunities will be facilitated through interaction between
              earthquake engineering and ongoing Internet-based research at the UCSD San
              Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC).  On the national scene, dissemination will
              be facilitated through the the three US national earthquake centers (PEER, MAE,
              and MCEER).
