Title       : Integration of Fluorescence Microscopy and Imaging Technology Into a Liberal
               Arts Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0088677

Award Number: 0088677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75351              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy G. Magill nmagill@coe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coe College
	      1220 First Avenue NE
	      Cedar Rapids, IA  524025008    319/399-8000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) This comprehensive project is integrating new
              microscopic and imaging technology into the undergraduate biology curriculum.
              In addition to the incorporation of phase contrast microscopy into our first
              year curriculum, we are incorporating experiments using techniques such as
              single excitation wavelength epifluorescence, dual wavelength fluorescent ratio
              imaging, and other types of microscopy in studying the ecology, physiology, and
              cellular processes of cells. We are developing new experiments for our
              Introductory Biology lab series as well as in Bacteriology and Cell Physiology
              and other upper-level labs in the department. We believe that improving our
              courses focusing on cells will make a needed connection for the students in
              understanding how the molecules relate back to the cells and eventually to the
              organism. A major component in current understandings of cells and how they
              function is the use of epifluorescence microscopy and imaging analysis. This
              equipment is being used in a variety of courses starting with the introductory
              labs where we have many prospective biology majors, nursing majors, physical
              education majors as well as students involved in both the environmental science
              and molecular biology/ biochemistry collateral majors. We are also using the
              microscopes in the Microbiology, Bacteriology, and Cell Physiology. The
              equipment will also be used in an Environmental Microbiology course being
              developed for Biology majors and the Environmental Science collateral and in a
              new course for non-majors called Life at the Extremes. The effort is motivated
              by recommendations of the American Society of Microbiology from which suggested
              approaches are adapted, as well as techniques culled from the scientific
              literature.

