Title       : Some Problems in the Theory of Partitions and Q-series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0088975

Award Number: 0088975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishnaswami Alladi alladi@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project the PI intends to conduct research on a wide  class of problems
              in the theory of partitions and q-series.  In  collaboration with Alexander
              Berkovich, the PI first proposes to  obtain a four dimensional extension of a
              deep partition theorem of Gollnitz and study the consequences.  A second
              direction of investigation is to search for new weighted partition identities
              based on earlier  research of the PI. In addition, the PI intends to conduct a
              systematics study of a fundamental but unexploited partition invariant, and
              obtain multiparameter extensions of various important  q-series
              identities.

The theory of partitions which deals with the representations of
              whole numbers in terms of other whole numbers, is an exciting area of research
              owing to its interaction with many fields within mathematics and with allied
              disciplines.  The subject is a part of the Number Theory and Combinatorics
              which deal with discrete  structures.  In the mid 1980s, major discoveries
              involving partitions  were made in studies in statistical mechanics which had
              important applications.  More recently, partitions have been used in
              fundamental ways in the study of various models in conformal field theory in
              physics.  With the availability of powerful computer algebra packages in the
              last few years, many new combinatorial identities have been found.  The goal of
              this proposal is to discover new and deep partition identities, as well as new
              relationships among well known partition functions, motivated by questions
              arising from different branches within mathematics, and some from physics. 
              Progress on these problems would yield new mathematical perspectives and might
              lead to significant applications outside of mathematics.

