Title       : Adapting Interdisciplinary Materials Science into Chemistry and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a0088172

Award Number: 0088172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82472              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott P. Sibley ssibley@goucher.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sasha Dukan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Goucher College
	      1021 Dulaney Valley Road
	      Baltimore, MD  21204    301/337-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) 

This project is introducing and integrating an
              interdisciplinary materials science emphasis into the undergraduate chemistry
              and physics programs. The objective of this new materials science and applied
              technology emphasis is to increase the number of undergraduate students
              choosing to study chemistry and physics, to foster collaboration, and to
              prepare students for increasingly interdisciplinary industry or research
              careers. The project includes development of a laboratory-based, team-taught
              interdisciplinary materials science course, and introduction of innovative
              discovery-based projects into the freshman laboratories. The project is
              adapting an inter-departmental approach utilized at Gustavus Adolphus College
              as well as specific laboratory projects developed in the materials physics
              course at Miami University. An upper-level course is using investigative,
              hands-on projects that model modern research collaborations in physics and
              chemistry. It is adapting an innovative, expert/novice, peer-learning scheme
              from Miami University in which students from two disciplines learn from each
              other. The hands-on projects in the course include the study of metals,
              semiconductors, superconductors, polymers, and other materials science topics
              presented from the perspectives of both disciplines. The equipment requested
              for this project is improving the freshman as well as the upper level chemistry
              and physics laboratory courses, providing a foundation for a materials
              science/applied technology emphasis in both departments. The equipment
              complements the expertise of the current faculty, and thereby helps to ensure
              the on-going growth of collaboration between the two departments beyond this
              specific project.
