Title       : Monolithically Integrated Tunable ZnO SAW Chip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0088549

Award Number: 0088549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $509937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yicheng Lu ylu@ece.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposed research focuses on the materials growth, device design and
              fabrication, and
applications of a ZnO monolithically integrated tunable
              surface acoustic wave (MITSAW) chip. The
novel chip integrates acoustic,
              optical and electrical process' in one material system. It uses
              tunable
acousto-electric and acousto-optic interaction between surface
              acoustic waves (SAW) and a two
dimensional electron gas (2DEG) in a
              ZnO/MgxZn1-xO quantum well.

ZnO is a multifunctional material possessing
              unique electrical, optical, acoustical, and mechanical
properties. The high
              electromechanical coupling coefficients of piezoelectric ZnO in conjunction
              with the
low acoustic loss and high velocity of sapphire (Al2O3) offers high
              frequency and low loss RF
applications. Alloying ZnO with MgO forms the
              ternary compound MgxZn1-xO, which permits band-gap
tuning from 3.32 eV to 4
              eV. ZnO/MgxZn1-xO heterostructures with 2DEG can be integrated with SAW
              to
create a unique acoustic velocity tuning mechanism. The 2DEG interacts with
              the lateral electric field
resulting in ohmic loss, which attenuates and slows
              the surface acoustic wave. This mechanism is used to
tune the acoustic
              velocity. The high coupling coefficients offered by the ZnO/R-Al2O3 systems
              allows
velocity tuning up to 1%. Combined with the optical characteristics of
              the wide and direct band gap
(~3.3eV) semiconductor ZnO and transparent
              conductive ZnO electrodes, the MITSAW chip can be used
for UV optical signal
              processing. The proposed MITSAW consists of a ZnO/MgxZn1-xO quantum
              well
structure grown on a R-plane sapphire (R-Al2O3) substrate using MOCVD.
              R-plane sapphire is chosen
instead of the popular C-plane substrate, as this
              substrate provides in-plane anisotropy in the ZnO layer.
By aligning the
              device parallel to the c-axis of the ZnO film, Rayleigh type surface acoustic
              waves are
excited, while Love type SAWs are excited when the devices are
              aligned perpendicular to the c-axis. The
Rayleigh wave mode is suitable for
              gaseous environment sensing, while the Love wave mode, which has
no vertical
              wave component, is ideal for liquid environment sensing. The ZnO MITSAW chip
              also offers
an acoustic-optical dual mode sensing mechanism. Likewise, the
              optical properties parallel and
perpendicular to the c-axis are different,
              allowing novel optical devices, such as high contrast modulators,
to be
              fabricated.

The successful development of the ZnO MITSAW chip technology
              will provide industry with
state-of-the-art new multifunctional chip
              technologies. It will not only improve the existing devices but
also develop
              fundamentally new approaches to many important application areas,
              including
tunable/adaptive communication systems, novel multi-mode tunable
              chemical and biochemical sensors,
and optical signal processors such as delay
              lines and multiplexers.
