Title       : PsychExperiments: Expanding and Training the User-Developer Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0088304

Award Number: 0088304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth O. McGraw pymcgraw@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Tew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              (7x) "PsychExperiments" is an online psychology laboratory that offers research
              opportunities to undergraduates and their instructors. It is now established as
              a valuable educational resource used by 141 classrooms in the U.S., Canada, and
              abroad. Based at the University of Mississippi, the site has been featured in
              two articles in the American Psychological Association's APA Monitor, one
              article in the American Psychological Society's APS Observer, and has been
              awarded first-place in the Learning Software Design Competition (non-profit
              division) hosted by the University of Minnesota. Due to growing use in the
              United Kingdom, the University of Edinburgh has asked to mirror the site to
              provide more convenient and economical access. One major benefit of
              PsychExperiments is that it serves as a replacement or supplement for
              department-maintained laboratory facilities, thus freeing departments from some
              of the costs in maintaining computers and software for laboratory student use.
              This makes it possible for even the most poorly funded 4-year institutions,
              along with junior colleges and even some high schools to offer quality research
              experiences. Typical use of the site begins with an instructor asking students
              to participate in one of the experiments at the site using any
              Internet-connected computer. Students subsequently download the data they have
              generated (along with additional data from other classes when one's own class
              size is too small for meaningful analysis), which they analyze on their own or
              with the site-provided Excel macros. When students have access to a
              multi-computer lab, the whole process of research participation, data download
              and analysis can be completed within 20 to 30 minutes, depending on the
              experiment, which leaves ample class time for discussing the results and their
              implications. The technology that serves laboratory class requirements also
              serves the needs of student and professional researchers who wish to take
              advantage of web-samples or simply the convenience of off-site data collection.
              Hence PsychExperiments hosts student and professional research experiments
              along with laboratory experiments. Furthermore, by serving as an open
              laboratory, PsychExperiments serves to build community among the group of
              researchers and instructors who have participated in building the site. This
              project is continuing to improve and disseminate the collection of
              PsychExperiments and the prototype. The project consists of three components:
              (1) dissemination by visits to regional campuses and conventions, (2) enlarging
              the contributor core through developing training materials to supplement or
              supplant workshop-based training (a package of multimedia instructional
              material that will assist faculty and students in creating new experiments),
              and (3) continued site development and innovation. We estimate that the
              measurable results of these efforts will by project's end increase the user
              base from the Spring 2000 level of 141 classrooms to at least 1000 classrooms,
              and increase the number of trained contributors from 30 to a minimum of 60.
              Ancillary goals are expanding the pedagogical focus of PsychExperiments to
              social and developmental psychology and incorporating technological
              improvements that are making PsychExperiments more useful, attractive, and
              engaging.
