Title       : NMR Spectrometry Across the Chemistry and Physics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2000   
File        : a0088177

Award Number: 0088177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98459              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Anderson anderso@westmont.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nivaldo J. Tro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Marten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren F. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allan M. Nishimura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Westmont College
	      955 La Paz Road
	      Santa Barbara, CA  931081023    805/969-5051

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

NMR has revolutionized the modern study of chemical structure
              and dynamics and all chemistry students need to understand and experience its
              manifold capabilities. Therefore, a primary educational objective is to
              increase and diversify the student's exposure to state-of-the-art NMR so they
              may discover and apply its versatility to challenging problems they will
              encounter in their professional workplace. The timely and excellent article of
              Davis and Moore [Journal of Chemical Education, 1999, and the National Science
              Foundation Division of Undergraduate Education, Award #9751056] is serving as a
              model for curricular changes and, after modifying some of their experiments and
              adapting results from our own research and published sources (mainly the
              Journal of Chemical Education), this model is being implemented. A 300 MHz
              FTNMR spectrometer is being used to introduce students to NMR techniques as
              freshmen and then to give them progressively more sophisticated experiences as
              they proceed through advanced courses and undergraduate research. NMR is
              serving as a central theme in the chemistry/ biochemistry (14 experiments in 9
              courses) and physics (3 experiments in 2 courses) programs. Students are
              learning about chemical shifts, spin-spin splitting patterns, quantitation
              using integrated peak intensities, and simple decoupling in their freshman and
              introduction to organic chemistry courses. NMR characterization of
              student-synthesized compounds is now routine. In advanced organic chemistry,
              students are progressing to 2-D COSY and HETCOR techniques. Extension of NMR to
              solid state and inorganic applications are part of the analytical chemistry
              course. A metabolic reaction is monitored by NMR in the biochemistry course.
              The thermodynamics of a keto-enol equilibrium, a gas-phase isotope exchange
              study, and the spin-saturation technique as an introduction to the kinetics of
              molecular internal rotation, are investigated with NMR in the physical
              chemistry laboratory. In physics, students examine the free induction decay of
              nuclei in an external field, Knight shifts, and the coupling of nuclear
              magnetic moments with their local environments.

