Title       : Collaborative Proposal - Reforming Physics: Algebra-based Physics with Human
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a0088712

Award Number: 0088712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95222              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Plano Clark mplanoclark@doane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher D. Wentworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Doane College
	      
	      Crete, NE  68333    402/826-2161

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) Reform movements in calculus and in physics education have shown
              the advantage of active methods in lively applications for improving students'
              conceptual understandings. Research has shown that the learning of diverse
              groups of students is enhanced by the use of multimedia. The Mathematics Across
              the Curriculum projects supported by the NSF have shown the efficacy of
              embedding mathematics within other disciplines. This project brings all of
              these insights together with interesting human applications of physics to
              reform the algebra- based physics course. This project is developing a complete
              set of course materials and background physics notes that can be used in a wide
              variety of institutional settings to offer a reformed algebra-based physics
              course to diverse student audiences. In addition to the human applications, the
              interactive learning methods encouraged by these materials are especially
              helpful to enable the students to learn by methods of inquiry. 

The project
              co-PIs at UNL, Texas Tech University, Mercy College and Doane College are
              developing content topics with the help of a mathematics consultant. The
              materials are being field-tested and assessed in cooperation with the
              evaluation consultant. Materials developed at each institution are being
              field-tested at the other cooperating institutions, and tested materials will
              be made available for commercial distribution. By the end of the project
              completely reformed algebra-based physics course materials featuring human
              applications supported by interactive multimedia and mathematical modeling will
              be available for use across the nation. Faculty enhancement institutes will be
              held using these materials. The use of these materials for the learning of
              physics concepts by inquiry methods will be advocated. The appropriateness of
              the multimedia and mathematical modeling materials for a wide range of students
              will be demonstrated. 


