Title       : Phase Behavior of Colloidal Suspensions of Rods and Spheres
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2002  
File        : a0088008

Award Number: 0088008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth Fraden fraden@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on determining the phase behavior of rodlike colloids, and
              mixtures of rodlike and spherical colloids.  Biological examples of rodlike
              colloids include proteins such as actin and microtubules, DNA, and filamentous
              viruses. The rodlike colloids on interest in this work consist of genetically
              engineered filamentous phage fd virus. The spherical particles are , either
              polystyrene latex or water soluble polymers such as poly(ethylene) oxide. 
              Knowledge gained from these well characterized materials has implications for
              the fundamental understanding of liquid crystals, colloid-polymer mixtures, and
              the biophysics of the intracellular environment, as well as the design of
              composite materials where molecular ordering and self-assembly is important.  A
              primary goal will be determining fundamental properties of the liquid
              crystalline phase of pure rod suspensions, then mixtures of rod and spheres,
              mixtures of rods of different lengths, and mixtures of rods of different
              diameters. Specifically, the angular distribution function of the rodlike
              colloids, co-existence concentrations, and virial coefficients will be
              obtained.  These experiments are designed to determine the roles of attraction
              and repulsion in governing phase behavior, as well as to explore further rich
              and unexpected microphase behavior discovered in mixtures of rods and spheres
              during the previous NSF grant. The kinetics of phase transformation in mixtures
              of rods and spheres will be examined, including the identification of
              metastable phases. Finally, the dynamics of individual rods and spheres seen as
              tracers will be studied.  Students participating in the research receive
              interdisciplinary training that will prepare them for a variety of careers in
              academe, industry, and government.
%%%
This research focuses on determining
              the states of matter exhibited by rodlike colloids and by mixtures of rodlike
              and spherical colloids. Rodlike colloids, though less studied than spherical
              colloids, are of considerable importance.  Biological examples of rodlike
              colloids being proteins such as actin and microtubules, DNA, and filamentous
              viruses. The rodlike colloids studied in this project consist of genetically
              engineered filamentous phage fd virus. For spheres, the well known  polystyrene
              latex or water soluble polymer poly(ethylene) oxide are employed. All these
              colloids are well characterized, uniform particles for which an established
              theoretical framework exists for understanding their phase behavior.  What is
              learned about these particular systems has implications for the fundamental
              understanding of liquid crystals, colloid-polymer mixtures, the biophysics of
              the intracellular environment, as well as the design of composite materials
              where molecular ordering and self-assembly is important.  This research lies at
              the intersection of chemistry, biology, and physics.  Biological molecules and
              processes are increasingly being understood at a mechanistic level, and physics
              is making significant gains in understanding non-equilibrium and disordered
              systems. Thus these two fields, which traditionally have been widely separated,
              are swiftly growing towards each other.  Students participating in the research
              receive interdisciplinary training that will prepare them for a variety of
              careers in academe, industry, and government.



