Title       : An Integrated, Thematic Approach to Biology Methods for Teacher Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0088855

Award Number: 0088855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64280              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katrina L. Mangin mangin@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa K. Elfring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
Faculty from the Departments of Biochemistry and
              Ecology and Evolutionary Biology are developing an integrated pair of biology
              methods courses for pre- service teachers. One course focuses on topics related
              to cell biological, molecular, and biochemical topics; the other highlights
              topics and approaches in teaching about ecology and evolution. Both focus on a
              level of understanding appropriate for middle and high school biology teachers
              and provide considerable exposure to biological content as well as teaching
              methods. The two courses are offered separately, but are integrated by a common
              conceptual theme of life in the desert. All topics are considered from the
              point of view of adaptations to the desert environment, from the whole organism
              to the cell and molecular level. Extensive use is made of both campus and
              off-campus resources that help students better understand life in the desert.
              Computer-interfaced field instruments and sensors facilitate investigative
              field research projects that are designed and carried out by students who are
              also student teachers. Both courses engage students in dialogue about the
              common misconceptions about the natural world, and how an interdisciplinary,
              hands- on teaching approach can help to identify and clarify misconceptions.
              Our goal in focusing on misconceptions is to model how teachers can best help
              students learn difficult concepts and how to genuinely assess learning and
              understanding. The focus on misconceptions also creates an environment in our
              courses where questioning and intellectual thought are valued, where a lack of
              understanding is an impetus for further exploration, and where students are
              encouraged to learn from each other and to value a diversity of styles of
              teaching and learning. 

Students work through exemplary activities and
              discuss the techniques that foster student involvement in biology laboratory
              activities. Both courses are mapped to Benchmarks for Science Literacy (AAAS,
              1993) and the National Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996) and both adapt
              practices from a number of resources including Great Explorations in Math and
              Science, Full-Option Science Series programs, Science and Technology for
              Children, Bottle Biology, and the American Chemical Society Chemistry in the
              Community . A practicing secondary school teacher is a valued collaborator in
              course design and teaching to ensure that both courses are as relevant as
              possible to the actual classroom teaching situation.







