Title       : Bottom Quark Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0088949

Award Number: 0088949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James J. Whitmore                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $886712             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Thorndike thorn@pas.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for the research program of the high energy
              physics group at the University of Rochester.  This group has concentrated on
              electron-positron colliding beam physics, working within the CLEO collaboration
              at the CESR electron-positron storage ring located at Cornell University and
              supported by the NSF. Past studies by this group have focussed on b quark
              decay.
	During the previous three-year CGI award, members of the Rochester
              group have played leadership roles in CLEO, as Analysis Coordinator and as
              CoSpokesman.  As part of the NSF-sponsored upgrade of the CESR accelerator and
              CLEO detector to CLEO III, they have helped in the design and construction of a
              new drift chamber for finding and measuring charged particles.  In physics
              analysis of CLEO II data, they have studied the decay of the b quark to charm
              and anticharm quarks, a study which helps explain why the measured b quark
              decay rate to electrons or muons is smaller than expected
              theoretically.
	During the three-year period of this proposal, the group plans
              two major physics analysis projects.  The first is a study of charmless
              semileptonic b decay, i.e., b  u l n, which should lead to a measurement of the
              CKM matrix element V(ub) to an accuracy of 10%.  The actual measurments will be
              of the decays B  p l n and B  r l n which cover a large fraction of the b  u l
              n phase space.  The second project is a search for and study of the rare b
              decay processes b  s g, b  s l+ l-, and b  s n n-bar down to levels predicted
              by the Standard Model of quarks and leptons in order either to find evidence
              for physics beyond the Standard Model, e.g., supersymmetry, or to place severe
              constraints on such models.

