Title       : Topological and analytical invariants of singularities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0088950

Award Number: 0088950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andras Nemethi nemethi@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-0088950

PI: Andas N\methi


Abstract: An invariant of a
              normal surface singularity is
topological if it is a 3-manifold invariant of
              its link, or
equivalently, if it can be determined from the combinatorics of
              its
minimal resolution graph. The driving question of the proposal is: when
              are the
geometric genus and the Hilbert-Samuel function topological?
The
              proposal has three parts. The main message of the first part  is that for those
              Gorenstein singularities whose link is a rational homology sphere, the work of
              Artin and Laufer on rational, respectively  on minimally elliptic singularities
              can be continued.
The optimism is partly based on the author's recent work on
              Gorenstein elliptic singularities with rational homology sphere links. For
              these singularities 
the author proved among  other facts that their geometric
              genus
is topological: it is exactly the length of the elliptic
sequence (in
              the sense of S. S.-T. Yau). 
The first step in any general investigation is
              the testing of the 
conjectures in some non-trivial particular cases. In the
              second part of the 
proposal the case of suspension singularities is discussed
              in more details.
The third part of the proposal deals with higher dimensional
              
generalizations of the Artin-Laufer program. 

Local analytic spaces are
              defined by locally defined analytic functions,
in particular they carry a lot
              of analytic invariants. A very important
question in their classification is
              the following: can these analytic  
invariants be determined from the
              topological description of these spaces? 
In the case of complex  surface
              singularities, the topological structure
is determined from the link of the
              singularity which is an
oriented 3-manifold. The goal of the project is to
              describe some of the 
analytic information of the singular space in terms of
              this 3-manifold
(in those cases when it is possible). 


