Title       : Establishing the Pattern of Holocene-LGM Changes in Sediment Contributions from
               Antarctica to the Southern Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0088054

Award Number: 0088054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Goldstein steveg@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sidney R. Hemming  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0088054
Goldstein

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and
              Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to
              investigate the sediment core from the Southern Ocean for paleoenvironmental
              research. The polar regions are susceptible to the largest changes in climate
              and are among the least accessible places on Earth. Current concern about the
              instability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet has heightened awareness of the
              vulnerability of polar regions. This proposal seeks to gain a basic
              understanding of the isotopic characteristics of terrigenous sediment sources
              derived from Antarctica in the Holocene and Last Glacial Maximum, and their
              dispersal into the Southern Ocean. Terrigenous clastic sediments are brought to
              the ocean from continental sources via rivers, ice and wind, and distributed
              within the ocean by surface and deep currents. At present there are virtually
              no isotopic data on circumpolar detritus, save a few strontium (Sr) isotopic
              ratios in the Atlantic sector. This project will fill part of this gap. From
              the large range in geological ages of crustal provinces of Antarctica, we would
              predict that there are large isotopic differences in detritus around the
              continent. The main objectives are to (1) characterize the
              strontium-neodymium-lead-argon (Sr-Nd-Pb-Ar) isotope compositions of sediment
              sources derived from Antarctica, (2) to identify the composition and source
              ages of major ice rafted detritus (IRD) contributions by analyzing individual
              grains of hornblende and feldspar in conjunction with bulk isotopic analysis,
              and (3) track sediment dispersal into the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC)
              during the Holocene and Last Glacial Maximum.

Because of the paucity of
              circumpolar data, this research necessarily has a large exploratory component.
              Consequently, it will provide a basic database for future studies. Nevertheless
              there are important hypothesis-driven questions that will be addressed in this
              primary pass. Can lessons learned in North Atlantic IRD studies be applied
              toward understanding the history of Antarctic ice sheets? Can the large
              geological variability around the Antarctic margin be treated as a series of
              natural tracer injections into the ACC, and thus characterize its trajectory,
              speed, and interaction with other current systems today and in the past? The
              proposed study is motivated by an exciting set of results from the South
              Atlantic, showing that detrital Sr isotope ratios are a sensitive current
              tracer in that region. This research should serve a basic need across many
              Earth Science disciplines if the use of long-lived radiogenic isotopes
              (Sr-Nd-Pb-Ar) as tracers of marine sediment sources is successful in
              elucidating processes related to changing climatic conditions. The results of
              this study will fill a basic gap in our knowledge of an important region of the
              Earth. At the same time, it will provide an essential basis for attempting
              reconstruction of the ACC during the LGM, as well as for future studies of
              Antarctic geology, ice sheet history, and the Southern Ocean circulation.
