Title       : A Remote Wireless Sensing and Control Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a0088507

Award Number: 0088507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46470              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne A. Molter lmolter1@swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erik A. Cheever  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Maxwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)

 The project, "A Remote Wireless Sensing and
              Control Laboratory," provides an integrated laboratory experience in Electrical
              and Computer Engineering to Engineering students with a wide range of interests
              in Computer, Electrical, Civil/Environmental, and Mechanical Engineering.
              Broad-ranging applications of the laboratory include smart sensors and person
              detection, web-based acquisition and control, and wireless communication
              system.

Two particular applications encompassed by these projects include an
              intelligent security system, and an energy conservation system resulting from
              monitoring room usage. Experiments being adapted and extended for more in-depth
              and multi-disciplinary applications include several compiled in Agilent's
              Educator's Corner, as well as contributions from Springfield Technical
              Community College's "The Wireless Telecommunications Laboratory Project." This
              multi- and inter-disciplinary Remote Wireless Sensing and Control Laboratory is
              being evaluated to determine how it can be most effectively utilized as a
              pedagogical tool. Assessment is being done by incorporating questions into
              surveys currently in use by Swarthmore's Engineering Department, including
              course evaluations, senior surveys, and alumni surveys that provide
              longitudinal information. Outside evaluators, including Swarthmore's
              Engineering Council, are also assessing the impact of this work on current
              students. Results are being compiled for dissemination via articles and
              presentations to ASEE's Journal of Engineering Education and Annual Meeting,
              and the Council on Undergraduate Research. Because web-module-development is
              integral to many experiments, especially those related to the web-based
              acquisition and control project, extensive use of the web is a critical
              component of this work. Results will also be posted and linked to sites such as
              Agilent's Educator's Corner.



