Title       : The Use of Research Data to Teach Critical Thinking in the Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a0088342

Award Number: 0088342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laraine L. McDonough LaraineM@brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louise Hainline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Cognitive (73) 
In order to teach students psychology, it is
              essential to provide them with opportunities to measure and analyze real
              samples of behavior. In this proof of concept project, we are exploring the use
              of new technology, namely DVD recordings, to bring behavior samples into
              developmental psychology courses in a more efficient and structured way than
              has typically been done in undergraduate psychology classes. Through contacts
              with researchers in child development, we are obtaining copies of videotaped
              experimental sessions, and transcribing them on DVDs for ease of use and
              presentation in the classroom. This project includes three components: (1)
              technical demonstration of editing, compressing, and transferring laboratory
              segments of developmental research sessions to DVD with a quality acceptable
              for use in the classroom; (2) obtaining subject and investigator releases in
              accordance with intellectual-property and privacy issues that will allow us to
              expand the project for full development; and (3) obtaining reliable data
              demonstrating effective educational use of this new format for delivering
              examples of behavior during standard classes. Although our work in this project
              is focused primarily on issues in developmental psychology, the considerations
              we address are general; they could deal equally well with many instructional
              topics. A critical aspect of this process is depicting a range of behaviors
              ranging from normal to a variety of abnormal developmental patterns. This is
              facilitating improved learning by students because they are more fully able to
              understand the range of behaviors that one sees in studying a particular aspect
              of development. Psychological research on learning and memory has shown that
              the greater the range of examples portrayed, the better able students/learners
              are at generalizing what they learn to new circumstances. 


