Title       : Connecting Research and Teaching with Inquiry-Based Biology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a0088318

Award Number: 0088318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99979              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Londraville londraville@Uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Niewiarowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
Our first- year Biology laboratory is being revised
              significantly by adapting and implementing "A Computer- Based Laboratory for
              Teaching Investigative Research in Physiology" (A. M. Smith, NSF- DUE award
              #9650721). This program uses computers connected to instrumentation for
              laboratories conducted in an inquiry- based framework. Our adaptation of this
              approach is to make an explicit link to a faculty research program( s) during
              each lab investigation. Each laboratory is designed around investigation of a
              central biological principle. Students are given the time and latitude to
              design experiments, collect, and analyze data related to understanding that
              principle and to compare this data to that generated in faculty research
              laboratories. In redesigning these labs, we are working toward the following
              goals:1) Increased "biological literacy" among our students, 2) Increased
              understanding of Science as a Process, 3) Improved student attitudes toward
              Biology, 4) Increased retention of Biology majors, and 5) Modeling of Inquiry-
              Based Learning for science education majors. Principles of Biology is a two-
              semester introductory biology sequence for majors that also enrolls a
              significant contingent of science education majors. The PI and Co- PI have
              recently been trained in Inquiry- Based pedagogies through participation in F.
              I. R. S. T.( Faculty Institutes for Reforming Science Teaching through field
              stations, NSF award # 9752713). As a result, we have completely changed how we
              teach our sections of the Principles lecture, from a lecture format to an
              inquiry- based/ cooperative learning format. Our preliminary data and anecdotal
              feedback from students convinced us that this style of teaching is effective
              and exciting for both faculty and students. This project applies these
              innovative pedagogical techniques to the laboratory. The infusion of faculty
              research into the student laboratory classes also feeds our growing
              undergraduate research program by advertising faculty research to students and
              by including students in faculty research projects from the beginning of their
              undergraduate careers. Assessment is under the guidance of a national expert,
              Dr. Ebert- May, Director of the Lyman Briggs School at Michigan State Univ.
              Assessment is rigorous, tied to the project's goals, and is both formative and
              summative. It is our long- term goal to provide Inquiry- Based Learning for
              every science major at the University of Akron. 

