Title       : Enhancing and Implementing an Internet-Based System for Mathematics Homework
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2000   
File        : a0088835

Award Number: 0088835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163813             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Ziemer wziemer@csulb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tangan Gao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur K. Wayman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Saleem Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Angelo Segalla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach
	      1250 Bellflower Blvd
	      Long Beach, CA  908400004    213/498-4121

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 

This project enhances, implements and
              disseminates a technologically innovative software application, WeBWorK.
              WeBWork, an Internet-based system for generating and delivering homework math
              problems to students, was developed at the University of Rochester and is in
              use at several other major universities. This project adapts WeBWork to meet
              mathematics content and populations specific to the institution. It also
              enhances the tool so that other faculty can use it easily and can contribute to
              the database that supports the tool. The goals of this project are to improve
              mathematical literacy for undergraduate math students, to enhance the
              educational effectiveness of homework in a wide variety of lower division
              classes, to improve the content and capabilities of the national WeBWorK
              database program, and to pioneer the extension of WeBWorK throughout the
              university system and to community high schools. The project broadens the base
              of faculty who can author problems by developing additional software tools for
              instructors that will enable them to create mathematical problems to be used on
              WeBWorK without writing code. The project includes development of WeBWorK
              instructor's guide and web-based teaching guides for distribution to university
              and high school faculty members from the community. The final enhancement is
              development of a mechanism to enable faculty to conduct a keyword search of the
              database for searches on the national database.


