Title       : The Biotechnology Emphasis: Integrating Research into Education to Build a
               Learning Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0088654

Award Number: 0088654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77395              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Wallert wallert@mnstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Brisch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shawn G. Dunkirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chris J. Chastain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Provost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minnesota St Unv Moorhead
	      1104 7th Avenue South
	      Moorhead, MN  56563    218/236-2011

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)

In 1998 we initiated the biology/chemistry double
              major with a biotechnology emphasis that introduces students to research-based
              experiences and culminates in a senior research experience. Unfortunately, many
              students have had difficulty transitioning from the lower level courses to the
              upper level courses that require a greater level of independence in the
              laboratory. In order to develop a stronger, more comprehensive program, we are
              now adapting the Project Kaleidoscope model and curricular materials from
              Ferris State University and Bates College to our courses in biotechnology.
              Utilizing the principal investigator system of investigative labs, we are
              integrating authentic research experiences and creating a community of scholars
              beginning in the first courses of the program. Courses are being designed to
              foster the sequential development of undergraduates by employing laboratory
              exercises that build upon one another from course-to-course and year-to-year.
              Five sophomore and junior level courses including plant physiology, cell
              biology, vertebrate systems, biochemistry I and biochemistry II are being
              revised to incorporate faculty research interests and to involve students in
              independent research projects much earlier in their academic career. This
              provides students a more comfortable transition from investigative laboratories
              to full research driven laboratories. In each course, students use
              sophisticated instruments to collect and analyze data and ultimately present
              their results to each other and the scientific community. In order to develop
              an enhanced sense of community we have developed an annual Biotechnology
              Welcome experience, a Biotechnology Awards Banquet, and Biotechnology
              Discussion and Advising Groups. These opportunities mimic professional meetings
              and informal scientific exchanges and allow students to interact with each
              other and with the faculty members in the program on a more consistent and less
              formal basis. 


