Title       : Gas Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry Throughout the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2000   
File        : a0088173

Award Number: 0088173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41772              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Q. Thompson robert.q.thompson@oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Nee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert R. Matlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 

Mass spectrometry (MS) has become one of the premier
              techniques for the identification
of molecules and macromolecules. Recent
              developments in MS instrumentation and interfaces have ushered in a new era of
              chemical analysis that demands that scientists have knowledge of and experience
              with MS. While gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) is one of the
              oldest of the hyphenated techniques, it remains one of the better and most
              cost-effective means for teaching mass spectrometry to undergraduates. This
              acquisition is allowing the introduction of MS at all levels of the curriculum
              and to offer experiences in MS never before possible in our program. The new
              instrument has the following crucial features: (1) an attached autosampler to
              provide unattended analysis of samples; (2) access to chemical ionization to
              provide beginning students with less complex mass spectra; i.e., those that
              contain intense "molecular ion" peaks for easier molecular weight
              determination; and (3) an ion trap mass analyzer rather than a quadrupole that
              makes possible trace analysis experiments that depend upon the selectivity and
              sensitivity provided by GC-MS-MS.

Guided inquiry and discovery-based
              experiments involving GC-MS that had good
success at other institutions are
              being adapted or directly implemented into six courses in the curriculum by
              four of our eight full-time chemistry faculty. Students' knowledge of mass
              spectrometry is evolving from simple molecular weight information, introduced
              in general chemistry, to qualitative and quantitative analysis in the organic
              and analytical chemistry core courses, to analysis of fragmentation patterns
              and tandem mass spectrometry experienced in two advanced laboratory courses.
              Our research efforts with undergraduate students are being enhanced as well.
              This project is supporting major changes in our local general chemistry program
              and that may serve globally as a model for the integration of both routine and
              advanced applications of GC-MS in an undergraduate chemistry curriculum.


