Title       : Applications of Double Dirichlet Series to Automorphic Forms and Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0088921

Award Number: 0088921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Hoffstein jhoff@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator continues his investigation of applications of double Dirichlet
              series to the study of automorphic L-series and number theory.  He and various
              collaborators have been developing the theory of double Dirichlet series for
              several years.  It offers a simple replacement for the Rankin-Selberg method in
              many instances.  For example, it provides a very short proof of the entirety of
              the symmetric square L-series of a generic automorphic form on GL(2).  The
              investigator hopes to extend this technique as far as possible to understand
              higher symmetric power L-functions and the collective behavior of higher order
              twists of standard L-functions.  As an additional source of input for trying to
              guess potential applications of the double Dirichlet series method, the
              investigator studies the Mellin transforms of certain generalizations of
              metaplectic forms.  These are constructed from other non congruence subgroups. 
              The theory of these forms is correspondingly rich and should contribute further
              insights into applications of double Dirichlet series.

The study of L-series
              has been an essential part of the development of mathematics over the last 100
              years.  For example, certain L-series provided vital links in the chain that
              led to the recent proof of Fermat's last theorem.  The study of double
              Dirichlet series is leading to an improved understanding of L-series which in
              turn leads to further knowledge of some very deep areas of mathematics.  It is
              impossible to predict the ultimate impact of this investigation, but potential
              areas of application include cryptography.


