Title       : Development of an Integrated Inquiry-based Curriculum in Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2000  
File        : a0088369

Award Number: 0088369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Tankersley rtankers@fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark B. Bush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph G. Turingan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
This project aims to strengthen the undergraduate
              curriculum in ecology through the development of an integrative series of
              laboratory modules for students majoring in ecology and marine biology. The
              project is an adaptation of a successful model developed at Middlebury College,
              VT, which strives to increase the integration and cohesiveness among classes
              through (1) the reapplication and reinforcement of common themes, including
              experimental design, hypothesis testing, and statistics, across multiple
              classes, (2) the establishment of common field sites, and (3) the development
              of a series of inquiry-based laboratory exercises that follow a similar format.
              The laboratory modules are patterned after the inquiry-based labs developed by
              Switzer and Shriner (2000), which use teacher-guided exercises and
              student-designed investigations to mimic the scientific process. Equipment
              secured through this project enables students to conduct a broader array of
              field and lab-based experiments and improves the resources available for
              computer assisted data acquisition and analysis.

The primary goal of the
              project is to provide students with a stronger, more comprehensive background
              in the fundamentals of ecology while increasing their enthusiasm for learning
              and their appreciation for the scientific process. Thus, the success and
              effectiveness of the reform effort will be evaluated by assessing the students'
              ability to think critically, formulate hypotheses, design experiments, and
              evaluate data. The project results will be disseminated nationally through (1)
              presentations at scientific meetings, (2) development of an interactive website
              and instructors workbook, and (3) summer workshops for educators, teachers, and
              graduate students on creating effective inquiry-based laboratories for high
              school and college ecology classes.


