Title       : Improving Undergraduate Laboratory Experiences by Using Problem-Based Learning
               for GC/MS Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2000  
File        : a0088357

Award Number: 0088357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49901              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Baird baird@wju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman V. Duffy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wheeling Jesuit University
	      316 Washington Avenue
	      Wheeling, WV  260036243    304/243-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) A gas chromatograph/ mass spectrometer (GC/ MS) is used to expand
              and enhance laboratory experiences in organic, instrumental, environmental and
              physical chemistry laboratory courses as well as in undergraduate research
              projects. A series of original problem- based experiments and experiments
              adapted from the literature increase in complexity as students progress from
              organic through physical chemistry laboratory courses. The experiments vary in
              the amount of procedural detail provided to the students. Initially, complete
              procedures are provided. In upper level experiments, a problem- based approach
              is taken where students are presented a problem and required to research the
              literature, develop a method for analysis and work as a team to obtain a
              solution. This approach develops independent problem-solving skills needed to
              address the many complex analytical issues facing society. Where appropriate,
              experiments are related to current real-life problems, such as environmental
              and energy-related issues. The rationale for this approach is that students
              become more interested and excited about laboratory experiments if they can
              relate their assignments to current industrial practices rather than performing
              cookbook-type experiments. This redirection in laboratory experiences equips
              graduates to meet the challenges of industry and graduate schools. In addition,
              this project provides future middle school and high school teachers in the
              institution's chemistry education program with examples of discovery-based
              learning topics related to environmental issues.
