Title       : Enhancing Astronomy Education through Technology - From Small Telescopes to CCD
               Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a0088034

Award Number: 0088034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27266              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Landy landy@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. McKnight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy (11) This uses astronomical laboratory instrumentation to improve and
              enrich the educational experience of both undergraduate non-science and science
              majors. The project involves creation of a comprehensive series of laboratory
              exercises that are integrated into courses ranging from Introductory Astronomy
              for non-science majors to advanced highly-technical labs and research projects
              for physical science majors. Equipment consists of twelve 8-inch optical
              telescopes to complement the laboratory experience the non-science majors are
              currently receiving through CLEA labs. Second, an existing Celestron 14-inch
              telescope is being upgraded with a CCD camera and spectrograph that provide
              more scientifically and technological focused students the experience of true
              modern astronomical observation and data reduction. This equipment will also be
              utilized to incorporate on-site (perhaps real-time) data into the CLEA
              laboratory exercises. 

 The 8-inch telescopes afford the non-science
              students hands-on experience in astronomical observations and techniques to
              enhance the important but cookbook nature of the computer labs at a level
              appropriate to their abilities and interests. The CCD camera and spectrograph
              for the 14-inch telescope serve several purposes. One is to adapt the CLEA labs
              in order to supply local data, and even real-time data when possible, from this
              rooftop telescope for use by the students. This provides an immediate
              connection between the students' laboratory work and real astronomical
              observations. It also allows the development of more sophisticated labs and
              research experiences for the science-orientated students and majors. Students
              can also use this equipment in their Senior Thesis projects. Future directions
              will be to modify a subset of the labs developed for the Introductory Astronomy
              course for use by the William and Mary School of Education in their Earth
              Sciences teacher development program in association with the Department of
              Physics. 

