Title       : Making the Connections: An Integrated Approach to Physical and Inorganic
               Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0088243

Award Number: 0088243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25305              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Thoemke john.thoemke@mankato.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie K. Pomije  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minn State Univ, Mankato
	      Research and Sponsored Programs
	      Mankato, MN  56001    507/389-5275

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) This project addresses the need to stimulate undergraduate
              students to build intellectual bridges between different areas of chemistry and
              to strengthen their critical thinking skills in a modernized integrated
              laboratory environment. The proposed merger of physical and inorganic chemistry
              laboratories provides chemistry majors at the institution with the opportunity
              to learn in an enhanced environment. The merger extends the approach
              traditionally used in the physical and inorganic lab courses through a series
              of projects that progressively evolves from the standard "structured" approach
              to a more open- ended approach in a teamwork-driven, self-motivated atmosphere.
              The approach stimulates the students to synthesize, integrate, and apply
              concepts from both areas of chemistry while tackling projects designed to
              replicate a research environment. The request centers on acquiring a laser
              system, and computer hardware and software to provide valuable experience for
              the students in a number of modern spectroscopic and computational methods used
              in concert with instrumentation and methods currently used in our upper
              division lab courses. The project directors are adapting and implementing
              experiments from the literature, and are developing several new projects to be
              used in the new course. Developing this course and the necessary lab course
              materials provides information that is useful to other educators. This project
              addresses the DUE themes of integration of technology in education and faculty
              development.
