Title       : Thermal Analysis Across the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0088633

Award Number: 0088633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36839              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Scharrer escharrer@ups.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne T. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johanna L. Crane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis Mehlhaff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Rousslang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puget Sound
	      1500 North Warner
	      Tacoma, WA  984160075    253/879-3400

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
Thermal analysis involves monitoring the behavior of a compound
              as a function of temperature, and techniques such as differential scanning
              calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) are used extensively as
              characterization tools in materials science research. We are adapting
              experiments from the research and educational literature and are developing new
              experiments, all of which utilize thermal analysis techniques that can be
              carried out using our new DSC and TGA instruments. These experiments are being
              implemented in laboratory courses across our chemistry curriculum (organic,
              physical, inorganic, polymer, and biochemistry). For example, students
              determine the kinetic parameters associated with polymer degradation using TGA
              in physical chemistry, and analyze protein denaturation using DSC in
              biochemistry. Our goal is to have students gain experience with thermal
              analysis techniques, and develop an appreciation for the applicability of these
              techniques to a wide range of problems. Students also are using the DSC and TGA
              instruments in their undergraduate research projects. Evaluation of the project
              is occurring in a number of ways, including pre- and post-exposure assessment
              in the affected courses, and compilation of data from exit interviews of our
              senior majors. Procedures for the new experiments are being made available on
              the internet, and tested experiments also will be published in the appropriate
              journals.


