Title       : OLEO: The On-Line Educational Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0088005

Award Number: 0088005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499643             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence A. Marschall marschal@gettysburg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn A. Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Helenmarie H. Hofman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Richard Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gettysburg College
	      North Washington Street
	      Gettysburg, PA  17325    717/337-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy (11) Project CLEA (Contemporary Laboratory Experiences in Astronomy)
              is developing
an on-line environment that provides discovery-based laboratory
              exercises to
undergraduate astronomy students. The components of the system
              are: (1) A
browser-based On-Line Educational Observatory (OLEO) which
              realistically
simulates optical, radio, and space-based telescopes, along with
              photometric,
spectroscopic, and imaging instruments,. (2) An extensive
              heuristic database, covering
the entire sky, which incorporates selected data
              on positions, magnitudes, spectra, and
other properties of a wide range of
              real astronomical objects including asteroids, stars,
galaxies, pulsars, x-ray
              and IR sources. (3) Student workbooks and teacher's guides for a
variety of
              exercises using the Virtual Educational Observatory.
CLEA materials are made
              available on a dedicated OLEO Website, as well as
on a series of CD-ROMS for
              installation on mirror sites, local networks, and individual
machines. The use
              of the materials is supported by outreach workshops held at
national and
              regional teachers' meetings. A summer training workshop for college
teachers
              will be held on the Gettysburg College campus in the summer of 2003.
              The
curricular impact and pedagogical effectiveness of these materials is
              being evaluated at a
diverse group of institutions (Universities, 4-year
              colleges, 2-year colleges, and High
Schools), by observations by an external
              evaluator and through the analysis of on-line
questionnaires.




