Title       : A Web-Based Mathematics Skill Enhancement Program for College and High School
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a0088264

Award Number: 0088264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Megginson meggin@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia D. Shure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alejandro Uribe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 

This project is implementing a system delivered
              through the World Wide Web for strengthening the algebraic and computational
              skills of students in a large reformed calculus and precalculus program, with
              an outreach component to help high schools evaluate whether students have the
              specific algebraic skills needed to succeed in college mathematics while there
              is time to repair students' individual weaknesses before college. This is being
              done by adapting high quality practices and materials developed elsewhere, in
              this case the web-based delivery and grading of mathematics exercises using the
              eGrade software package developed at the University of Nebraska. This software,
              originally called Webtests, was designed to handle homework and tests in
              introductory college mathematics courses. In this project this software is
              being adapted and used in conjunction with other methods of providing and
              collecting information through the Internet to deliver all of the following
              across the web: mathematics skill evaluation materials for use in high schools;
              algebra review and practice modules for use in college and high school; two
              complete mathematics courses; and a major gateway skill testing program.
              

The project has the following outcomes:
(a) Gateway tests are being
              offered in a computerized testing center in electronic form, with automatic
              grading and reporting of scores to instructors and immediate feedback to
              students. 
(b) Web-based review materials containing eGrade practice problem
              sets are being written to accompany the gateway tests, so that students who
              encounter difficulties can review and practice the material between
              attempts.
(c) Web-based readiness tests are being created that can be used
              under the guidance of high school mathematics teachers to diagnose weaknesses
              in the specific algebraic skills needed for introductory college mathematics
              courses. 
(d) Two web-based courses are being built around eGrade, an algebra
              and trigonometry skill course for students not quite ready to take precalculus
              and a brief precalculus course for students not quite ready to take calculus.
              
(e) Extensions to multivariable calculus are being explored in a pilot
              activity to study ways to convert some existing Calculus III computer
              laboratory modules for delivery across the web.
