Title       : Effective Methods for Diophantine Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0088913

Award Number: 0088913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Bennett mabennet@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for NSF-0088913

One of the fundamental problems in Number Theory is
              that of determining the number and distribution of integral or rational points
              upon curves of positive genus.  Falting's theorem indicates that the number of
              such points is finite if the genus exceeds one, but, in general, one has little
              specific information available.  The investigator studies a variety of
              techniques, principally from Diophantine approximation, which may be applied to
              quantify Falting's theorem in special situations.  In particular, Bennett
              considers approaches based upon rational function approximation to systems of
              hypergeometric functions (the generalized hypergeometric method), lower bounds
              for linear forms in logarithms of algebraic numbers, local methods and
              computational Diophantine approximation.  These are applied to study families
              of quartic equations, Thue equations, polynomial-exponential equations and
              integral points on given models of elliptic curves.  The investigator also
              discusses two effective methods for finding such ``integral points'' on higher
              genus curves, where the aforementioned ones fail.  These involve, respectively,
              extensions of an old technique of Chabauty and arguments exploiting the
              modularity of certain Frey curves.

Number theory, one of the oldest branches
              of mathematics, has enjoyed a renaissance in recent years. On one hand, the
              remarkable proof of Fermat's Last Theorem by Andrew Wiles has reaffirmed Number
              theory's position as a central one in modern mathematics.  On the other,
              numerous and striking applications to such diverse problems as data encryption
              and signal transmission have demonstrated the utility of the field, both for
              industrial and governmental purposes.  In the project at hand, the investigator
              studies a number of questions in the subfield of Diophantine equations,
              including some stemming from work of Wiles.  The techniques employed allow the
              complete resolution of a number of classic problems in this area.  These
              equations are connected to the theory of error-correcting codes which, in turn,
              are of crucial importance to, for example, data processing from satellites, cd
              and dvd players, cell phones and smart cards.


