Title       : Laboratory Investigations in Neurobiology Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a0088650

Award Number: 0088650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30826              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Hedrick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Hayward Fdn
	      25976 Carlos Bee Blvd
	      Hayward, CA  945421602    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) This project is developing and implementing a
              Laboratory Investigations in Neurobiology (LIN) course. This course is
              providing undergraduate students with a hands-on, inquiry-based experience in
              modern neurobiological techniques. This course addresses a widespread problem
              of overcoming "conceptually difficult" material in neuroscience that can be
              experimentally addressed by students. The course provides students an
              opportunity to develop technical skills that will lead directly to increased
              educational and occupational opportunities. The LIN course complements an
              existing lecture course in neurobiology and provides an inter-disciplinary link
              for undergraduate students in other departments. The primary objectives of the
              project are: 1) acquisition of fundamental knowledge and technical skills,
              including data analysis and report writing, in an active, inquiry-based
              learning environment; 2) application of acquired knowledge and technical skills
              to design and test hypotheses based upon a background of primary literature in
              neuroscience; 3) access to neuroscience training within the biology curriculum
              for a large population of underrepresented students at the university; 4) make
              a significant contribution to faculty and curriculum development. These goals
              are being achieved by the development of a LIN course in which students first
              acquire fundamental skills and knowledge and then apply these skills to develop
              an independent project suitable for presentation to the scientific community.
              The topics covered include nerve cell bioelectricity, sensory and motor
              neurophysiology, neuroanatomy and neurotransmitter identification. The modules
              to be developed are adaptations of experimental protocols published in
              commercially available lab manuals. The expected outcome of this project is a
              new laboratory course with a detailed, student-centered laboratory manual for
              future use in the course. The results of the project will be disseminated via a
              CSUH website and presentations at national meetings. 




