Title       : Physiology Program using Computer-based Data Acquisition and Student-designed
               Investigations.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0088725

Award Number: 0088725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21556              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charmaine B. Henry charmaine.henry@bakeru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baker University
	      8th and Grove
	      Baldwin City, KS  66006    913/594-6451

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
The Biology Department of Baker University is
              conducting a significant improvement of our physiology laboratory experience,
              and the enhancement of research opportunities for undergraduates. The current
              physiology program has not kept pace with technology and provides only limited
              opportunities for gaining hands-on experience using modern physiological
              techniques. The laboratory approach has been traditional in that 'cookbook'
              experiments are conducted with little room for student-designed investigations.
              We are correcting this problem by revising the program to offer an effective
              laboratory component that emphasizes modern physiological approaches to solving
              biological problems. The effort is an adaptation of an project at Bates
              College. The objectives of this project are 1) to promote independent learning
              by applying computer technology to the study of physiology, 2) to teach
              students scientific inquiry methods, and 3) to engage students in undergraduate
              research projects. These objectives are being accomplished by conducting fewer
              traditional experiments and having students design and carry out their own
              investigations, then present their results in the form of a scientific paper.
              We are using the BIOPAC physiology teaching system interfaced with computers to
              facilitate data collection and analysis in real time, and provide access to
              interactive, multimedia presentations of physiological processes. The new
              equipment is also being used for independent research projects in the
              cardiovascular physiology of the chick embryo in shell-less culture. Our aims
              are to 1) improve conceptual understanding of physiology, 2) stimulate student
              experimentation, critical thinking and problem solving, 3) improve
              understanding of scientific methodology, and 4) increase student participation
              in research and presentations at national meetings. The use of new technology
              in our curriculum reform is impacting the education of approximately 40
              students per year in Comparative Physiology and Human Anatomy and Physiology
              classes.
