Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Platform for Designing and Evaluating Electric Power System
               Generation Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2001   
File        : a0128168

Award Number: 0128168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Laufenberg lauf@powerworld.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PowerWorld Corporation
	      1816 South Oak Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/384-6330

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0128168
Laufenberg
     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
              project proposes a new software platform for designing and simulating electric
              power generation and delivery networks.  The demand for reliable electric
              power, both in this country and in developing nations seeking to forge a
              sustainable industrialized economy, is growing dramatically. At the same time,
              fears over the environmental repercussions of burning carbon-rich matter,
              particularly in regards to the emission of greenhouse gases and acid rain, are
              intensifying.  While using cleaner energy sources and technologies could help
              mitigate the environmental impact of increased power production, the larger
              initial investment required by such alternatives has made their adoption a
              tough sell.  The software will enable system architects to design a system
              graphically and to assess and compare its merits using an integrated approach
              that considers reliability, financial cost, and environmental impact.  Users
              will be able to distribute generation resources throughout a system, change
              generator fuel and technology types, and experiment with various transmission
              topologies with unprecedented ease.  The package will assess system reliability
              using an integrated contingency analysis tool.  It will evaluate the financial
              implications of a design by accounting for start-up and construction costs
              associated with various generating and transmission equipment and calculating
              projected operating costs using economic dispatch.  Finally, it will assess the
              environmental impact of a design by calculating the amount of pollutants
              emitted by its power sources based on empirical formulas for emissions defined
              by the user.
     The market niche that PowerWorld Corporation is attempting
              to exploit is the development of high-quality, yet extremely user-friendly
              power system visualization software to help answer the question: how can
              increased demand for electric power be met reliably, cleanly, and economically?
               By integrating reliability, economic, and environmental analyses into a single
              package, the tool will enable developers, engineers, economists, and policy
              makers to develop efficient and clean power system designs.


