Title       : Molecular and Morphological Phylogeny of Acalypha (Euphorbiaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0128872

Award Number: 0128872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey A. Levin levin1@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor W. Steinmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0128872 
Levin
       The genus Acalypha, commonly known as copperleaf, is the
              fourth largest genus in its family (Euphorbiaceae) with about 450 species. It
              is widespread geographically, with species native to the Americas (about
              two-thirds of the known species), Africa, Asia, Australia, and the Pacific
              Islands. It is most abundant and diverse in subtropical and tropical regions.
              Some species are problematic weeds in native and agricultural systems, whereas
              others are rare; two are common ornamentals, and there is growing evidence that
              some species contain potential pharmaceuticals. Unfortunately, the taxonomy of
              Acalypha has not been revised in more than 75 years and is suspected to reflect
              true relationships poorly. Ecological, conservation, pest management, and
              medical research on the genus are being hindered by the poor classification.
              Drs. Levin and Steinmann at the University of Illinois and the Institute of
              Ecology in Mexico intend to address this issue and provide better understanding
              of the evolution of the genus by using DNA sequence data and morphology to
              reconstruct the phylogeny, or evolutionary history, of a large sample of the
              genus. Combining field work and existing collections, they will examine about
              two-thirds of the species. Morphological data and sequence data from two genes
              (nuclear ITS and plastid ndhF) will be analyzed separately and in combination
              to reconstruct relationships within the genus. The results will then be used to
              revise the classification and assess various aspects of copperleaf evolution,
              particularly changes in growth form and reproductive organization. The
              investigators will develop a web site to distribute the results of this project
              and of future studies of Acalypha. 
        This project is significant
              because it develops human resources, strengthens research on a poorly known
              group, stimulates further research, and facilitates conservation and pest
              management. Very few systematists work on Euphorbiaceae, especially given that
              the family is the seventh largest family of flowering plants with over 7,000
              species. This project helps address this issue by providing training to a
              graduate student and a young researcher (Dr. Victor Steinmann). Further
              scientific work will be stimulated by providing the framework for other studies
              on a diverse group. Because of its simple flowers but varied ways of organizing
              them on the plant, Acalypha could become a model group for applying newly
              developed genomic techniques to understanding the evolution of floral
              development, but only if a well-supported phylogeny is available to provide the
              evolutionary context. In addition, Levin's and Steinmann's work will have
              broader societal benefits. A modern, well-supported classification will
              facilitate conservation of rare species, management of agricultural weeds and
              invasive species, and the search for pharmaceuticals.


