Title       : SBIR Phase I: Surface Modification of Textiles for Protective Clothing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2001   
File        : a0128513

Award Number: 0128513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don B. Elrod don.elrod@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    979/693-0017

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1630,9147,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project concerns the surface
              modification of textiles in order to impart properties to the fabric necessary
              for their use as protective clothing. The increase in disease transmission, the
              widespread use of pesticides in agriculture, and the increased proliferation of
              chemical and biological weapons worldwide have increased the need for the
              development of effective fabric treatments for protective clothing. During the
              Phase I research, agents will be covalently attached to the surface of fabric
              in order to give them the desired properties.  The modified fabric will then be
              tested for antimicrobial activity against a broad spectrum of pathogenic
              microorganisms, for detoxification of chemical pesticides and appropriate
              surrogates for chemical and biological weapons, as well as for skin
              cytotoxicity. The Phase I research will show that the modified textiles are
              able to effectively eradicate a broad range of pathogenic microbes, detoxify
              chemical pesticides  and surrogates for chemical and biological weapons while
              retaining their original physical  properties and possessing no skin
              cytotoxicity. Potential applications for this  technology include protective
              clothing and materials for medical and dental institutions, agricultural
              workers, and military soldiers as well as for cloth products for household
              disinfection and various consumer products.

Commercial applications for
              fabric that is active against pathogenic microorganisms as well as chemical
              agents are wide and diverse. Protective clothing for agricultural workers and
              military servicemen could be produced from these modified fabrics. A multitude
              of applications could be found in the medical and dental area. Clothing for
              medical and dental personnel and patients including lab coats, scrubs, caps,
              shoe covers, masks, privacy drapes, surgical drapes, bed sheets, etc. could be
              rendered antimicrobial utilizing this technology. Consumer products such as
              diapers, athletic socks, water filters, and disinfectant wipes could also be
              prepared from these materials.

