Title       : Applications of General Equilibrium to Incomplete Markets and Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0128039

Award Number: 0128039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charalambos D. Aliprantis aliprantis@mgmt.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project is concerned with applications of the recent developments in general
              equilibrium theory to problems arising in incomplete markets and finance. When
              markets are not complete, an investor, who seeks portfolio insurance, will be
              interested in the cheapest hedge that is marketed. Such insurance will not
              exactly replicate the desired insured-payoff, but it is the "best'' that can be
              achieved using today's market. One of the proposed problems deals with several
              new methods of computing the minimum-cost portfolio by applying the newly
              developed portfolio dominance method. In another direction, a new incentive
              compatibility notion is proposed that will allow to develop a model where the
              standard accepted conditions in finance will guarantee that a security that can
              be obtained through incentive compatible trading must also allow all of its
              options (puts and calls) to be obtained through incentive compatible trading.
              

Several applications in various disciplines of the techniques that are
              being developed in this project are planned. The most important of which seems
              to be on the problem of "Optimal Crop Diversification under Uncertainty" in
              agriculture. Crop diversification is still practiced widely by both small and
              large agricultural producers in industrialized countries.  Smaller producers,
              especially vegetable producers, often find the fixed costs associated with crop
              specific technologies too high to be profitably employed.   Large producers on
              the other hand usually find the use of specialized technology highly
              beneficial, yet they continue to plant different varieties or hybrids of the
              crop of specialization.  Planting different varieties, often those that respond
              differently to uncontrollable elements of the local environment, provides
              farmers with a natural form of hedging against risk. The existing literature on
              risk in agriculture provides numerous insights into the proper role and use of
              crop insurance, price and revenue hedges, and weather related derivatives. Much
              of the discipline's existing literature and knowledge focuses on issues related
              to price uncertainty and methods to hedge against price risk. The proposed
              project will provide a complementary solution to these approaches by applying
              the method of minimum premium hedge to the crop diversification problem.


