Title       : Phylogeny of Physid Snails (Basommatophora: Physidae) and Evolution of
               Reproductive Isolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0128964

Award Number: 0128964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Lydeard clydeard@biology.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen E. Strong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert T. Dillon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	The Physidae (Gastropoda: Basommatophora) is a group of freshwater snails with
              a native distribution in North, Middle, and South America, and Eurasia, but
              reach their greatest diversity in North America.  The family constitutes a
              major component of the freshwater molluscan fauna in many lake, pond, and
              stream habitats.  Despite the prominence of physids in behavioral,
              physiological and ecological studies, little is know of the phylogenetic
              relationships among the taxa.  Furthermore, many questions remain as to whether
              many of the currently recognized species, subspecies, and "morphs" constitute
              valid evolutionary entities.  Despite nearly 200 years of taxonomic and
              systematics studies, no rigorous study has been done employing modern methods
              and analyses.  The purpose of the NSF-sponsored research is to collect physid
              snail specimens representing recognized species, subspecies, and "morphs" to
              estimate an evolutionary "tree" using on mitochondrial and nuclear gene DNA
              sequences and shell and anatomical data.  In addition, the principal
              investigators will examine whether the family Physidae constitutes a natural
              assemblage of snails, being more closely related to each other than to any
              other group of snails. 

Although estimating a phylogeny for the ecologically
              important Physidae is important for its own sake, the resultant evolutionary
              "tree" will be used in conjunction with a modern, analytically based view of
              species to test whether currently recognized groups constitute valid species. 
              At a time when species inventories are being made to discover hotspots and
              prioritize areas for various protection measures, it is imperative that
              recognized species correspond with phylogenetic species.  Furthermore, the
              researchers will examine the evolution of reproductive isolation among selected
              physid species by conducting a series of controlled experiments in the
              laboratory.

This research will provide a robust evolutionary "tree" and
              modern classification of the snail family Physidae.  In addition, an empirical
              examination of species issues in physids will provide important data for
              estimating how many species actually exist within the family.  These data will
              be of considerable use to conservation and evolutionary biologists as well to
              federal and state wildlife agency personnel. 

