Title       : SBIR Phase I: Interactive Software for Environmental Sampling and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0128046

Award Number: 0128046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88054              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence H. Keith larrykeith@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Instant Reference Sources
	      890 Providence Club Drive
	      Monroe, GA  30656    770/267-7758

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will provide
              interactive software to improve the quality of data obtained in environmental
              monitoring projects that involve chemical analysis. It will facilitate
              understanding and successful implementation of the complex interactions between
              project data quality objectives, sampling and analytical method selection, and
              numbers and kinds of samples analyzed. Developing an expert system that can be
              used as a tool for cost-effective project planning will do this. Although the
              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency initiated systematic planning for
              environmental sampling and analysis over ten years ago, successful
              implementation of it has been difficult. This SBIR project will provide
              solutions to the frequently misunderstood areas of data quality, information
              quality, and method performance. It will enable scientists and engineers to
              generate environmental analytical data at a quality level (and resulting cost)
              based on the use of that data (i.e., performance based measurement systems -
              PBMS) instead of only using current prescriptive protocols. Interactive
              software will be developed that facilitates more rapid and cost-effective
              environmental sampling and analysis which is based on the interrelated factors
              of confidence levels, numbers of samples, and analytical method selection. 
  
                   The software will combine method performance information from a new
              National Environmental Methods Index (NEMI) with U.S. EPA's Data Quality
              Objective (DQO) Process and a user's desired Measurement Quality Objectives
              (MQOs). Although it will be primarily a commercially useful product for
              industry and government organizations, it will also function as an educational
              tool to support university and technical school curricula. Another potential
              application is for the software to be incorporated as a technical basis for a
              future front-end user interface to NEMI.


