Title       : SBIR Phase I: Xtractica: A System for Extracting Coherent Data from Documents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2001   
File        : a0128508

Award Number: 0128508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99804              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hasan Davulcu hdavulcu@xsb.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : XSB, Inc.
	      SUNY Software Incubator
	      Stony Brook, NY  117903383    631/444-6800

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
              the feasibility of designing and building a software system: Xtractica. This
              software system will allow domain experts to specify programs that transform
              unstructured or partially structured data from a variety of document sources,
              such as World Wide Web sites, PDF files and text into structured, coherent and
              readily usable information. Xtractica will consist of a set of tightly
              integrated powerful syntactic and semantics-driven data extraction technologies
              that are managed from a graphical user interface to retrieve information that
              was created for human understandability, and extract and reason about it to
              create knowledge that can support automated decision making and transactions.
              An important feature of Xtractica is that users can rapidly create extractors
              by simply supplying examples of the data to be extracted. Thus it will empower
              users who are knowledgeable about their application domains but are not
              necessarily trained as computing technologists, to structure data into
              knowledge.

The Phase I project will develop the operational specifications
              of Xtractica and determine its feasibility by prototyping its critical
              components. Phase 2 will then produce a fully functional Xtractica system based
              on results from Phase I. Finally Phase 3 will make Xtractica commercially
              available to clients with diverse business interests including content
              aggregation, e-procurement, ERP and supply chain management vendors.
