Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: The Arctic Sea Cover: Scaling Properties
               Associated with Deformation of Geophysical Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0128689

Award Number: 0128689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21755              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry L. Stern harry@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Moritz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald W. Lindsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Andrew Rothrock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 5219,5918,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0128689
Stern

This three-year award for US-France collaboration on studies
              of the Arctic Sea ice cover involves researchers and students at the University
              of Washington and at the Glaciology and Environmental Geophysics Laboratory in
              Grenoble, France.  The principal investigators, Harry L. Stern in the US, and
              Jerome Weiss in France, lead a team
of researchers with expertise in the
              fracture of geophysical materials and motion and deformation of Arctic Sea ice.
               The objectives of this collaboration are to characterize the variability of
              sea ice deformation, understand its connection to stresses and coastal
              conditions, test the fracture mechanisms independent of spatial scale, and
              improve sea ice models.  Heterogeneity and scaling laws associated with the
              process of deformation will be modeled in order to study the dynamics of the
              Earth's lithosphere. A major source of data for the studies is from the
              RADARSAT Geophysical Processor System. 

The US team brings to this
              collaboration expertise in remote sensing of deformation and dynamics of sea
              ice cover and applications to oceanography and climate.  This is complemented
              by French expertise in fracture of geophysical material of the Earth's interior
              and their development of multifractal and wavelets analyses. The collaboration
              advances understanding of the dynamics of the Arctic Sea ice cover and will
              improve existing models. Arctic sea ice dynamics are important to monitor
              because of potential consequences for global climate, marine life and commerce.
               The collaboration contributes as well to research and education
              infrastructure.  Students will benefit through advanced training and
              participation in an international team effort.
 
This award represents the US
              side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS.  NSF will cover travel
              funds and living expenses for the US investigator and his students. The CNRS
              will support visits by French researchers and students to the United States. 

