Title       : Host Specialization and Fungal Speciation in Ceratocystis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2002    
File        : a0128104

Award Number: 0128104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Harrington tcharrin@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1174,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0128104
Harrington
     Studies of fungal species, their reproductive
              strategies, how they evolve, and how humans influence their evolution and
              distribution are needed.  This need is particularly acute for plant pathogenic
              fungi because humans unwittingly move cryptic species of fungi around the world
              on their crops (mostly on plant propagative materials such as seeds and
              cuttings) and plant products (such as logs, wood chips, packing materials,
              etc.), often with devastating consequences.  Introductions of invasive fungal
              species and changes in fungal populations frequently frustrate disease control
              strategies, reduce food and fiber productivity, and threaten forest ecosystems.
               Ceratocystis species, which are primarily found in the Americas, have been
              particularly damaging when introduced into new ecosystems or when introduced
              plant hosts come into contact with indigenous pathogen populations. The
              research of Dr. Thomas Harrington at Iowa State University focuses on how new
              species arise in the Ceratocystis fimbriata complex, which contains some of the
              most aggressive pathogens in the genus Ceratocystis.  Although currently
              considered one species, it is actually a complex of many species that share
              morphological similarities but infect different hosts in different parts of the
              world.  Dr. Harrington will use a variety of modern molecular and traditional
              tools to delimit species within the complex and infer their evolutionary
              history.  Particular emphasis will be given to the host range (which hosts the
              pathogen can infect) of each of the delimited species.  DNA fingerprinting
              markers will be used to study the diversity of populations and trace the
              suspected spread of host-specialized species by human activity.  Recently
              derived populations should have low levels of genetic diversity and have
              limited geographic ranges, except where the geographic range has been extended
              by humans.  Older lineages are hypothesized to have more genetic diversity and
              broader geographic ranges.  Also, the hypothesis that older lineages are more
              restricted in their host ranges will be tested. 
     These studies will build
              a foundation for a taxonomic treatment of this ecologically and economically
              important genus.  Where and how populations of C. fimbriata were introduced by
              humans will also be determined, and this information will be particularly
              important because of the increasing movement of plant pathogens on logs, wood
              chips and crating material.  The studies will allow for a better understanding
              of how ecological niche affects speciation and will lead to a more practical
              definition of species in the fungi. The definition of a species continues to be
              among the most controversial issues in basic biology, but the practical
              implications for plant pathology, particularly for quarantine concerns, are
              immediate.  Concerns over invasive species, including plant pathogens, have
              been heightened by the globalization of our economies, and the simple concept
              of a species continues to be of pivotal importance to the prevention of
              introductions and management of introduced pests.


