Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Parallax Barrier Technique for Autostereoscopic Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a0128141

Award Number: 0128141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse B. Eichenlaub jbe@dti3d.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dimension Technologies Inc
	      315 Mount Read Boulevard
	      Rochester, NY  146111911    716/436-3530

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project will be used to
              investigate an optical system to be used with LCDs or plasma displays to
              produce 2D/3D switch-able autostereoscopic displays which produce images
              possessing the full resolution of display.  Various companies have begun to
              market autostereoscopic displays.  Such displays are encountering a market
              barrier in some applications because they achieve their 3D effect by
              sacrificing resolution.  They divide the pixels on the display between a right
              and left eye image, thus leaving each image with half the resolution of the
              flat panel itself.  The proposed technology will produce autostereoscopic
              images without sacrificing resolution.  The objective of the project is to
              establish the feasibility of the autostereoscopic imaging concept, to identify
              the best configuration for the optics, and to determine the feasibility of
              using the concept on LCD and plasma displays.  To accomplish this objective,
              small test optics will be created and evaluated, measurements of relevant
              properties of representative plasma and LCD panels will be made, and a
              development path for the next phase of the project will be identified.
     
              The project has the potential to produce a practical high resolution flat panel
              autostereoscopic displays suitable for high resolution 3D imaging applications.
               The direct commercial potential of the projects lies in autostereoscopic
              products that will be manufactured using this technology.  Such display
              products will find widespread use in scientific and medical visualizations
              applications, industrial inspection, telerobotic and other remote vision
              applications.  Consumer based applications may include electronic commerce and
              computer gaming.
l
