Title       : SBIR Phase I: Comprehensive Database Resource on Protein Localization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0128604

Award Number: 0128604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99872              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Rubin david_rubin@cognia.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cognia
	      117 East 55th Street
	      New York, NY  100223502    212/331-7841

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               
This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project  will enable
              the development of the first knowledge management system dedicated specifically
              to protein localization (ProLoc). Data generated from high-throughput genomic
              and proteomic experimentation and information published across the entire
              spectrum of cellular and molecular biology is proliferating at exponential
              rates. Moreover, current database systems remain incapable of handling the
              intricate network of relationships between proteins. ProLoc, a database system
              that integrates expert-curated information from published literature with
              primary data from a range of experimental methodologies, will begin to attack
              this problem by focusing on one discrete area of cell biology (protein
              localization). Researchers will be able to mine pathways and mechanisms,
              leading to disease elucidation and new therapies.  Phase I will be used to
              create the framework for a functioning relational database, with representative
              entries for initial beta testing. This will provide an essential foundation for
              Phase II, when comprehensive content and ancillary tools will be added,
              creating a highly structured, sophisticated, and interactive relational
              database system. Once the daunting challenge of reflecting biological pathways
              into standard database formats has been met through the ProLoc database, the
              ProLoc structure can be extended to many other cell regulation pathways and
              processes.

ProLoc will stand out as an extremely high quality specialized
              resource in the field of protein localization that will be a necessary part of
              any set of molecular biology benchtop databases and tools.


