Title       : SGER: Reproductive Biology of Female King Penguins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0128913

Award Number: 0128913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Nolan nolanpm@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              F. Stephen Dobson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Considerable evidence has accumulated that female birds may exert control over
              the sex ratio of their offspring. Under optimal conditions, more female chicks
              are produced; and under poor environmental conditions, more of the young are
              males.  There are several plausible explanations for this. In some cases, young
              males disperse and so under stressful conditions do not compete with parents or
              siblings. In other instances where habitat conditions are favorable, mothers
              with new chicks are assisted by older female offspring, increasing reproductive
              success. In species that lay clutches with multiple eggs, there can be chicks
              of both sexes and self-assessment of parent condition may not be as crucial.
              However, in other species such as penguins, only one or two eggs are laid
              during each breeding season. In this situation, the application of the strategy
              of sex ratio allocation requires that females must be very capable of assessing
              their condition and that of their mates. This Small Grant for Exploratory
              Research will investigate the sex ratio of king penguin chicks relative to the
              condition of the parents to determine if females are controlling the gender of
              chicks. Sex determination will be accomplished by DNA analyses of blood
              samples, a new method to be tested on king penguins in this project.
              Quantifying parental condition will be done by several standard methods,
              including measures of body size, parasite load, and immunocompetence. This
              study will also explore the possibility that plumage coloration is an indicator
              of condition in penguins as it is in other bird and fish species. Plumage color
              is from diet-derived carotenoids and may be a useful proxy for evaluating
              health and fitness. Penguins are dominant predators in their environment and
              shifts in a population parameter as fundamental as offspring sex ratio might
              reflect changes in climate or in distribution and abundance of food resources.
              The results of this work, which will be conducted in collaboration with
              scientists from the French Antarctic Program, will provide a better
              understanding of penguin population dynamics and the complex mechanisms of
              environmental biofeedback.

