Title       : Deforestation, Cloud Formation, and Hydrological Coupling of Lowland and Montane
               Systems in the Tropics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0128924

Award Number: 0128924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald M. Welch welch@nsstc.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qingyuan Han  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert O. Lawton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The project will develop understanding of the linkage of tropical deforestation
              with cumulus cloud formation and orographically generated cloud-banks in
              environmentally complex terrain.  Advancing hydrologic predictions in regions
              undergoing land-use and land cover change from the use of remotely sensed cloud
              observations will be an important project objective.  The research is motivated
              by the need to understand and model land-surface interactions and cloud
              connections in regional hydrologic cycling in terrain regions such as the
              tropical montane cloud forest ecosystems of northern Costa Rica.  The research
              will involve regional atmospheric modeling, remote sensing of land-surface
              characteristics and cloud distribution, and on-site monitoring of soil moisture
              and cloud-base heights.  Drs. Welch, Han, and Lawton (University of Alabama,
              Huntsville) expect project activities to shed insight into causes of lowland
              deforestation, watershed management, ecosystem functioning, and biodiversity
              conservation in mountainous parts of the tropics.  The project is supported by
              NSF's Water and Energy:  Atmospheric, Vegetative, and Earth (WEAVE)
              interactions program, which seeks to improve understanding of the Earth's
              hydrologic and energy cycles to support better assessments of the potential
              impact of human activities on those cycles and on the climate system, in
              particular.
