Title       : SBIR Phase I: Information Theoretic Learning and Application to Fetal ECG
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a0128452

Award Number: 0128452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96874              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil R. Euliano neil@nd.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NeuroDimension Inc
	      1800 North Main St., Suite D-4
	      Gainesville, FL  32609    352/377-5144

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project focuses on
              the development and evaluation of a new class of algorithms for blind source
              separation (BSS) and independent component analysis (ICA) based on a recently
              proposed information theoretic learning (ITL) criterion.  The algorithms yield
              several practical criteria to adapt universal mappers, either under
              unsupervised or supervised paradigms.  The ITL criterion can dramatically
              improve upon systems trained with mean square error.  NeuroDimension will
              develop new algorithms to choose the segments for separation, address BSS of
              noisy mixtures, and extend the ITL criterion to convolutive mixtures.  The firm
              further proposes to validate these methods via the fetal heart rate monitoring
              problem, which requires the separation of the maternal and fetal ECGs, a blind
              source separation problem.  The ITL criterion of minimum cross entropy can
              exploit the fact that the ECGs are statistically independent. The expectation
              is that the new information theoretic learning will extract a much cleaner ECG
              because it is exploiting all the information about the signal statistics, not
              only the second order statistics (as MSE does). Finally the ITL criterion will
              be compared with the conventional interference cancellation algorithms in real
              data obtained from the University of Florida College of Medicine.
     The
              project has the potential to develop a new piece of clinical instrumentation, a
              fetal heart monitor, for which there is a demonstrated market.  The firm
              utilizes a new approach to information signal process that may be able to
              identify the elusive fetal heart signal in a practical, real-time manner. 


