Title       : Comparative Osteology and Phylogenetic Relationships of Fossil and Living
               Sturgeons (Actinopterygii, Acipenseriformes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0128929

Award Number: 0128929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Hilton ehilton@fieldmuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lance Grande  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Bemis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 1571,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

	Sturgeons, paddlefishes and their fossil relatives form a
              small
group of fishes from the Northern hemisphere called Acipenseriformes
              that
is believed to have split off from other ray-finned fishes
              (the
actinopterygians) some 150 million years ago. The morphology of
              living
sturgeons (25 species) has remained largely unchanged since they
              first
evolved. Although there have been many studies of sturgeon
              morphology,
there never has been a study that is detailed or comprehensive
              enough to
allow modern studies of their evolution. The new study of the
              skeleton of
fossil and living sturgeons by Hilton, Grande and Bemis has two
              main goals.
The first objective is to describe in detail the skeleton of the
              shortnose
sturgeon (Acipenser brevirostrum), a small species of sturgeon found
              in
coastal rivers of eastern North America. This study will be based
              on
several types of specimens, including dry skeletons, hand cleaned
              skeletons
that are stored in alcohol, and cleared and stained skeletons (in
              which the
soft tissue is made clear, cartilage is stained blue and bone is
              stained
red). Specimens representing all life history stages will be studied,
              from
the earliest embryos to the oldest specimens available. Such an
              approach
allows observations of changes of morphology due to growth and
              development
of the skeleton. The results of this study will be published in a
              large
format monograph, illustrated with photographs for documentation and
              line
drawings for interpretation, accompanied by clear text descriptions.
              The
intention is that this monograph will serve as a lasting contribution
              to
the knowledge of the anatomy of sturgeons and a standard reference
              for
anatomical studies of primitive ray-finned fishes.
	The second part of
              this study concerns tracing evolutionary
relationships among living and fossil
              sturgeons. Most fossils that are
identified as sturgeons are very fragmentary,
              and only after a detailed
study of the living members of a group can such
              specimens be properly
interpreted. Additionally, new comparative data
              generated during the first
part of the study will be used to formulate new
              hypotheses of
relationships. All previous morphological studies of the
              relationships of
sturgeons are inadequate for various reasons. For instance,
              many studies
have looked only at relationships of sturgeons from a particular
              geographic
region or country. Evolution has not occurred within political
              boundaries,
and Hilton, Grande and Bemis' study will be the first to
              incorporate
morphological data for all sturgeons on a worldwide scale. All
              species of
sturgeons are afforded some form of protection, with many listed
              as
endangered. The precarious conservation status of many sturgeons
              make
studies of their evolutionary history even more critical.

