Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Compressible Gas-Liquid Framework For Simulating Cavitating
               Pumps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2001   
File        : a0128105

Award Number: 0128105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashvin Hosangadi hosangad@craft-tech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CRAFT Tech
	      174 North Main Street
	      Dublin, PA  189172108    215/249-9780

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1443,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will study an innovative
              formulation for simulating unsteady cavitation phenomena in pumps. The
              formulation is based on a compressible gas-liquid framework that accurately
              models the acoustics in multi-phase mixtures, and may be extended to account
              for generalized thermodynamic effects. An innovative cavitation model based on
              tracking the surface area associated with dense, bubbly vapor clouds is
              presented: this permits the implementation of detailed bubble dynamics within a
              continuum framework. The multi-phase formulation will be available within a
              commercial CFD code CRUNCH, which has a multi-element unstructured framework
              and is ideally suited for complex turbomachine geometries. The Phase I effort
              will focus on validating the procedure for unsteady cavitation in unit problems
              that will be extended to three-dimensional pump geometries in the Phase II
              program. This technology will be applicable to a wide variety of
pump systems
              that have to operate over a range of low, off-design flow rates and Net
              Positive Suction Head (NPSH)conditions, where the coupling of unsteady
              hydrodynamics and cavitation has the potential for causing excessive vibration
              and damage. The limited reliability of current design tools in this flow regime
              makes this innovation a
useful tool for high-energy pump
              designers.

Commercial Potential
Manufacturers of high-energy pumps have to
              certify their systems for operation at off-design conditions. However, unsteady
              flow behavior coupled with fluctuating vapor volumes at low NPSH levels can
              result in
significant damage in this flow regime. Hence, considerable
              resources are currently being expended by the pump industry to better
              understand the formation of cavitation instabilities. The development of
              innovative designs that eliminate or mitigate the formation of cloud cavitation
              will result in a significant competitive advantage for both marketing of new
              products as well as aftermarket upgrade opportunities. However, current design
              tools, such as empirical correlations and one-dimensional analyses, have
              limited reliability in this flow regime. Furthermore, experimental testing over
              the entire flow regime is impractical. The proposed effort here will address
              these needs by providing a tool for refining preliminary designs, as well as
              correcting problems with existing designs. In addition, The innovative
              technology proposed here would resolve the deficiencies of currently available
              commercial CFD codes: such codes typically do not resolve the acoustics within
              the gas/liquid mixture, which can have very low sound speeds and directly
              impact hydrodynamic time scales. Indeed for accurately modeling this unsteady
              multi-phase problem, the generalized compressible framework proposed is
              essential for simulating the coupling between hydrodynamic pressure
              fluctuations and the cavitation rate process. Potential customers for this
              product are anticipated to be U.S. manufacturers of a broad range of
              high-energy industrial pump systems.

