Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Optically Pure Ortho-Quinone Methide
               Complexes- Synthesis and Stereoselective C-C Bond Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0128861

Award Number: 0128861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas B. Grotjahn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0128861
Grotjahn

This three-year award for US-France collaboration in
              organometallic chemistry involves researchers and students at the San Diego
              State University and University Pierre and Marie Curie (Paris VI).  Douglas B.
              Grotjahn in the US and Hani Amouri in France lead further investigations of
              stable metal complexes - simple ortho quinone methides (o-QMs) - discovered
              recently by the Amouri team.  In the absence of metal, o-QMs are capable of
              forming complex organic molecules or damaging DNA.  The Amouri-Grotjahn
              collaboration will use metals to stabilize the o-QM by binding tightly to it. 
              Preliminary studies show reactivity of o-QM complexes with the metal iridium. 
              Complexes of other metals are expected to show different reactivity. The
              investigators will use coordinated o-QM ligands to create new carbon-carbon
              bonds and rings.  Optically pure samples of o-QM complexes will be used to make
              single enantiomers (mirror images) of the products.

The US investigator
              brings to this collaboration expertise in optically active organic molecules
              and synthetic application of organic cycloadditions using advanced Nuclear
              Magnetic Resonance (NMR) techniques.   This is complemented by French expertise
              in the chemistry of quinone methide complexes and their application.  The
              collaboration advances understanding of o-QM complexes and their synthetic
              applications in products.
Students from a predominantly undergraduate research
              institution will gain international experience and benefit from training in new
              synthetic techniques used in the French laboratory.

This award represents
              the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS.  NSF will cover
              travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator and students.  The
              CNRS will support visits by French researchers and students to the United
              States. 

