Title       : Operating Center Proposal for The Center for Identification Technology Research
               (CITeR): An I/UCRC in Biometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0128402

Award Number: 0128402
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $548000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Hornak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The automated interaction of computers with humans and the biosphere in which
              they reside represents an increasingly important attribute of computing in the
              information age. Identification is a critical component of this interaction
              whether the application be projection of human identity at a distance over the
              internet, criminal justice and forensics, or medical diagnostics and therapy
              delivery. Defined across this application spectrum, automated biometric
              identification systems measure a physiological, behavioral, or biological
              "signature" from the human body or environment, process and
              recognize
classifiable signal components, and then renders an identification
              decision based upon the parameters of a given application. Effectively
              addressing the breadth of needed biometric identification system research from
              the life sciences to the computing sciences represents a significant challenge
              to industry and government. Cohesive university faculty groups are particularly
              well suited to address innovations at this intersection of disciplines. The
              Center for Identification Technology Research (CITeR) organizes the activities
              of faculty groups at four universities spanning the physical, health, and
              computer sciences and
engineering, to effectively address the cross-cutting
              research needed to address automated advance biometric identification
              technology and systems. CITeR will serve an enabling role in the technical and
              economic development of this area through research of new enabling
              technologies, the integrative training of scientists and engineers across its
              breadth, and the facilitation of the transfer of this technology to the private
              and government sectors. 

