Title       : Paleoecological and paleoanthropological excavations of in situ breccias at
               Makapansgat, South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2002   
File        : a0128770

Award Number: 0128770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey K. McKee mckee.95@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1066,5976,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Knowledge of our evolutionary past, along with observations of changes in the
              ecological community in which our predecessors lived, is vital to helping us
              understand how we got here and what the human place in nature is today.   The
              Makapansgat Valley has yielded a wealth of fossil fauna that reveal past
              environments through time, along with an important sample of an early
              human-like species known as Australopithecus africanus - our earliest known
              predecessors of southern Africa. 
        The Australopithecus fossils  from
              the Makapansgat Limeworks, considered to between about 2.8 and 3.2 million
              years old , may be the oldest from southern Africa.  As these fossils are
              broadly contemporaneous with the early Australopithecus sample from East
              Africa, they hold key clues to understanding the emergence and diversity of
              human ancestors across the continent.  Moreover, the rich assemblage of fossil
              fauna from the limeworks has provided valuable insights into the ecological
              context of human origins and evolution in southern Africa, although
              interpretations have varied.  Our plan is to augment our current knowledge base
              with a well-controlled excavation from which the fossils can be studied in a
              detailed context.  We will excavate the known Australopithecus-bearing layers
              of the Makapansgat limeworks, as well as lower levels of the sediments that
              promise to reveal earlier stages of the valley's prehistoric changes.
       
              In addition, other sites in the Makapansgat Valley preserve a record of
              environmental change from the well over 3 million years ago through to the
              present.  For example, recent excavations at Buffalo Cave have yielded a rich
              mammalian sample from between 1 and 2 million years ago.  Fossils and stone
              artifacts from the Cave of Hearths represent much of the past several hundred
              thousand years of human occupation in the area.  The Makapansgat Valley thus
              provides a valuable opportunity to understand how global and continental
              environmental changes were reflected in a tightly constrained local context.
 
                    Fossils from Makapansgat have conjured up many images of pre-human
              behavior, ranging from our ancestors having been "killer apes" to visions of a
              more docile creature at the mercy of a wide variety of predators.  Given the
              significance of the Makapansgat Valley's sites for interpretations of our past,
              it is important to understand that the earliest sequence from the Limeworks has
              only recently undergone preliminary systematic excavation of in situ fossils -
              i.e. those in their original context.  For the past half-century fossil
              collecting at the site focused almost exclusively on the waste dumps of breccia
              (fossil bearing sandstones) left behind by limestone miners decades ago.  This
              simple fact - that most of Makapansgat's fossil fauna has been recovered from
              mine dumps - helps explain the difficulty in reaching consensus concerning
              paleoenvironmental and ecological reconstructions of this important fossil
              site.  For this reason, the primary objective of the proposed research is to
              continue and enhance systematic in situ paleoanthropological excavations of
              Makapansgat limeworks in order to recover fossils of known context, and to
              better analyze how this reflects ancient environments and ways of life. 

