Title       : SBIR PHASE I: ECR (Electron Cyclotron Resonance) Plasma Treatment of Polymer
               Tubing Such As Catheters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2001  
File        : a0128308

Award Number: 0128308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ward D. Halverson whalverson@spirecorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spire Corporation
	      One Patriots Park
	      Bedford, MA  017302396    617/275-6000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1407,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will develop plasma
              processes to treat both internal and external surfaces of medical polymer
              tubing such as catheters. The treatments will facilitate attachment of
              bioactive coatings, will clean, sterilize, and reduce friction; similar
              processes can also deposit organic or inorganic coatings. Plasmas driven by
              electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) will treat the lumen and external surfaces
              more uniformly, and over a greater range of process parameters, than
              conventional glow discharge or corona plasmas. Phase I will demonstrate that
              all treated surfaces of polymer tubing samples have been significantly and
              uniformly activated by the ECR plasma treatment without causing damage or
              discoloration of the material. A final Phase I test will evaluate the
              uniformity of a heparin-containing bioactive coating applied to the lumen wall
              of actual hemodialysis catheters. Phase II will refine plasma processing
              parameters for attachment of antithrombotic and antibiotic coatings,
              sterilization, pore sealing, and removal of contaminants on the lumen wall and
              exterior surfaces of medical catheters. Phase II would also begin applying
              research results to an ECR plasma activation system for Phase III production
              and commercialization.
     The ECR plasma process should be expandable to
              large-scale, low-cost commercial production of polymer tubing for catheters. A
              surface treatment to facilitate attachment of bioactive coatings and for
              cleaning, sterilization, and friction reduction would add both therapeutic and
              economic value to dialysis and other catheter types. The same plasma treatments
              can be applied to tubing for other medical and non-medical applications, such
              as prevention of biofilm formation in dental water lines

