Title       : SBIR Phase I: Electrochemical Disinfectant Generator for Multiple In-Situ
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2001   
File        : a0128511

Award Number: 0128511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Tennakoon charles.tennakoon@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    979/693-0017

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1403,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will focus on the
              development of an electrochemically operated organic peroxy acid generator.
              Peroxyacids are popular disinfectants that can eliminate even resistant
              microorganisms (i.e. spores, viruses).  Peracids produce biodegradable end
              products, are effective at dilute concentrations (ppm levels), are safe for use
              even in food preparation applications, and are thus applicable to many
              point-of-use applications in homes, restaurants and hospitals. These include
              the use of peroxylactic or peroxyacetic acids for diverse uses, including: i)
              preventing the
build up of heterotrophic bacteria in water treatment
              appliances, ii) destroying pathogens in water and on food surfaces, iii)
              sterilizing medical devices, and iv) sanitizing food processing equipment by
              incorporating a clean-in-place capability. The conventional method of
              manufacturing peroxy acids involves mixing concentrated hydrogen peroxide,
              organic acid, and inorganic acid catalyst (concentrated sulfuric acid) with
              numerous stabilizers and additives. In the proposed method, peracids can be
              generated and used on demand using oxygen or air, thus eliminating the need for
              hydrogen peroxide and sulfuric acid. In Phase I, optimization of the
              electrocatalyst (to improve current and energy efficiencies), preliminary cell
              design and catalyst configuration, and biocidal properties of the peracid
              product will be conducted.

There is a considerable need for miniature and
              scalable clean-in-place devices in point-of-use applications in homes, hotels,
              food service establishments and hospitals.  Many equipment manufacturers are
              trying to incorporate a self cleaning capability into their existing product
              lines due to concerns of microbial contamination, especially one that requires
              minimal user interaction, is cost effective, and environmentally friendly.  In
              water treatment applications alone, the market for these decives is estimated
              to be over $1billion annually in the U.S. and $3 billion worldwide.
