Title       : Partitioning the Effects of Selection and Immigration in Small Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0128855

Award Number: 0128855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa M. Meffert lmeffert@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              

	The role of immigration in rescuing a population from the threat of
              extinction remains to be tested in a comprehensive experiment. By exploiting
              the amenability of the housefly for large-scale long-term experiments, the
              effects of immigration and selection on the survival of persistently small
              populations will be examined. Replicate metapopulations (i.e., interacting sets
              of small subpopulations) will be constructed. Over the course of 20
              generations, each metapopulation will be managed under one of six specific
              treatments for immigration and selection effects. For the selection treatments,
              only the adults with the highest reproductive activity will be allowed to
              contribute offspring to the next generation. For the immigration treatments,
              members from one subpopulation will be allowed to breed in another
              subpopulation. Measures will be made on reproductive activity and on the
              genetic variation for molecular and complex traits to assess the threat of
              extinction. The central hypothesis is that a low level of immigration will
              bolster the selection response for higher mating activity and rescue
              subpopulations from inbreeding depression.  
In agricultural programs to
              select for economically important traits and in efforts to save endangered
              species, immigration is commonly used to relieve the detrimental effects of
              inbreeding. Recent studies in laboratories and in nature, however, have
              identified gaps in our understanding of the genetic complexities of
              near-extinction events. This large-scale long-term experiment is uniquely
              designed to explain how populations in nature, agriculture, laboratories, and
              conservation projects escape the threat of extinction.

