Title       : SBIR Phase I: Numerical Techniques for Human Oriented Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0128729

Award Number: 0128729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Kramer kramer@virtex.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Immersion Corporation
	      801 Fox Lane
	      San Jose, CA  951311601    408/467-1900

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will research and
              develop the missing link in current virtual prototyping systems for
              computer-aided design (CAD).  This missing element is the human hand.  Current
              virtual prototyping strategies involve mice or other low-dimensional point-like
              interaction mechanisms.  By adding life size, real-time interaction at the
              level of the human hand, virtual prototyping becomes significantly more
              valuable because of the higher order information available to the user. 
              Interaction methods like grasping, pushing, sculpting as well as force feedback
              data can provide designers with critical product related information not
              usually available until a physical prototype has been built.  Building on
              Immersion Corporation's existing SOLID infrastructure for real-time interaction
              with NURBS geometries and kinematic assemblies, the firm proposes to both
              research and develop numerical techniques necessary for true interaction with
              realistic models as well as the interaction paradigm itself.  This innovation
              has great potential for all designers who build and prototype products that
              humans interact with.
     The introduction of interaction at the level of the
              human hand will leverage existing infrastructure at Immersion Corporation for
              intellectual property, product evaluation and marketing.  The result will be an
              efficient transition to a product with a large existing market of designers and
              engineers from a significant cross-section of industry.

