Title       : SBIR Phase I: Characterization of Three Dimensional Discontinuity Properties
               from Digital Images of Rock Masses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0128392

Award Number: 0128392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Handy jeff@spliteng.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirstin K. Girdner  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Split Engineering LLC
	      110 S. Church Avenue
	      Tucson, AZ  85701    520/327-3773

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
              the usefulness of image processing technologies for characterizing
              discontinuities in rock masses. Discontinuities in rock masses include joints,
              faults, bedding planes, etc., and characterizing these features is one of the
              most important inputs to engineering design in rock masses. Split Engineering
              LLC has developed image processing and mathematical algorithms for I)
              delineating fracture traces in images of rock fractures, and 2) extracting
              three-dimensional properties (including strike and dip) from the delineated
              fracture traces. The first objective of the Phase I work is to test and further
              refine the image processing and mathematical algorithms that have been
              developed. The second objective is to investigate the synergies between this
              technology and the laser scanning technologies, which also have great
              commercial potential in the field of fracture characterization. The third
              objective is to conduct a number of field case studies to validate the trace
              analysis approach and to determine under what circumstances it is beneficial to
              incorporate laser-scanning technologies into the approach.

Knowledge of
              geologic discontinuities is important for a number of industries. Current
              technologies have resulted in either millions of dollars in damage due to a
              missed fracture or costly reinforcement where it was not needed because of a
              misinterpreted discontinuity. Important end-users of the technology proffered
              by Split Engineering LLC, referred to as the trace analysis technology, are the
              mining and geotechnical industries. The capability fits in especially well with
              the need to automate certain rock characterization tasks and incorporate the
              resulting information into the mining process. If the project is successful in
              developing improvements in fracture system characterization, benefits for the
              petroleum and environmental industry are also plausible.
