Title       : Comparative Anatomy, Phylogeny and Biogeography of Fossil and Living Gonorynchid
               Fishes (Teleostei: Ostariophysi)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0128794

Award Number: 0128794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry C. Grande tgrande@orion.it.luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lance Grande  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 1571,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              

Comparative Anatomy, Phylogeny and Biogeography of Fossil and Living
              Gonorynchid Fishes

	The family Gonorynchidae is an extant family of
              primitive ostariophysan fishes with a long, and well-preserved fossil record
              dating over 65 million years. Ostariophysi (e.g. carps, minnows, catfishes) in
              turn, is one of the largest groups of fishes on earth (75% of all freshwater
              fishes). An understanding of this basal fish group, (i.e., Gonorynchidae) will
              provide vital information necessary to better understand the complicated
              history of the Ostariophysi as a whole. This study contains three clearly
              defined objectives. First, The comparative osteology and development of extant
              species will be examined. It is necessary to understand Recent forms first
              before including fossil taxa. Fossil taxa are often incompletely preserved and
              developmental stages are often not available. Second, based on the data
              generated from objective 1, a phylogenetic or evolutionary analysis of all
              gonorynchid species will be conducted. Third, data generated from the
              phylogenetic analysis will be used in a study of Historical Biogeography. If
              one assumes that the earth and its biota evolved together, than an
              understanding of the evolutionary patterns of the biota should lead to a better
              understanding of the history of the earth. This project thus has broader
              application to those interested in earth history and global change.
	The
              significance of this project is multifaceted. This study will cross
              disciplinary lines and combine paleontology and neontology into one project. It
              will provide the first phylogeny for Gonorynchidae that is based on a thorough
              comparative examination of all fossil and living species. Results from this
              study will ultimately result in a better understanding of one of the most
              important teleost fish groups known, the Ostariophysi. Because of the
              well-bounded nature of this study, it will be used as a training tool for
              undergraduate and Masters students at Loyola University and the Field Museum.
              Students will have hands-on experience to all aspects of this project from the
              preparation of both fossil and extant taxa to data collection and computer
              analyses. Funds from this grant, along with matching funds from Loyola
              University, will expose students to both the complexities and the intellectual
              rewards of doing comprehensive anatomical phylogenetic work, and contribute to
              the long-term health of comparative morphological studies in general. This
              project thus extends beyond the limits of ostariophysan systematics and will be
              of interested to developmental biologists, biogeographers and systematists in
              general. The goal of this project is not only to provide vital information to
              colleagues, but also to help assume the responsibility of educating and
              training students to a field of biology fundamental to other disciplines. 

