Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Behavioral Ecology of Chimpanzees Living in a
               Dry Area, Ugalla, Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0128157

Award Number: 0128157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6440               (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig B. Stanford stanford@almaak.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the ecology and behavior of chimpanzees living in the
              Ugalla area of The Tongwe East Forest Reserve in Tanzania. Ugalla is one of the
              driest environments in which chimpanzees are known to exist and it shares
              similarities with many of the paleoenvironments reconstructed for early
              hominids. It has long been proposed that chimpanzees living in dry areas are an
              important source of data for modeling the behavior and ecology of early
              hominids, but very little research has been conducted on such populations.
   
              This study attempts to discern the factors that influence where the chimpanzees
              nest and how they use their habitat. Since the chimpanzees at Ugalla are not
              habituated to human observers and are not provided with food, the study methods
              require no direct observation of these apes. Maps of chimpanzee nests as well
              as other signs of their presence (feeding remains, feces) will be constructed,
              and the distribution of the resources they use (food, water, available trees
              for nesting) will be studied. Data on the amount and seasonal distribution of
              the fruit available to the chimpanzees will be obtained by monitoring
              individual trees of species known to be eaten or possibly eaten by the
              chimpanzees. In addition, data on the chimpanzees' diet will be obtained by
              analyzing feces and the contents of carbon and nitrogen present in hair
              collected from nests.
    The data obtained from this study will be compared
              with that for other chimpanzee populations as well as for other great apes.  It
              will also be important to compare these results against the archaeological
              evidence for early hominid habitat use.

