Title       : SBIR Phase I: Feasibility of Using Anonymous Cell Phone Tracking for Generating
               Traffic Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2001   
File        : a0128649

Award Number: 0128649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99908              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall J. Cayford cayford@ttechsys.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TTech Systems
	      337 Valley View Road
	      Pleasant Hill, CA  945232635    925/256-8992

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is an
              investigation of the feasibility of using anonymous tracking of cellular phones
              to generate traffic information on a road network.  Delays due to congestion
              are expensive both in terms of lost time and in aggravation.  Management of
              congestion is difficult due to lack of information on current conditions. 
              While most information is gathered via expensive detector systems installed in
              the roadways, it is possible to determine traffic conditions by following the
              movements of sample vehicles, called probes. Many vehicles contain a cellular
              phone, and, due to a recent FCC mandate, which requires that all
              telecommunication carriers be capable of locating a cellular phone to within
              125 meters, an opportunity exists to build a system where the movements of a
              large number of cell phones can be used to determine conditions on every road
              in a road network. This project will determine whether the
location systems
              installed by the carriers can be used to generate traffic information. The
              results will enable the development of an area-wide traffic information system
              which can be used for the dissemination of travel information and for the study
              of traffic patterns on road networks.

Commercial application of the results
              of this project fall into 3 areas: traffic management, fleet operations, and
              information dissemination. Traffic information is valuable to the users of the
              road network. Traffic management includes the many public agencies around the
              country tasked to aid in the management of the roads. Fleet operators consist
              of large and small delivery vehicles. Information dissemination includes
              cellular phones, personal digital assistants, in-vehicle display systems,
              websites and radio. All three markets are significantly affected by traffic
              congestion, particularly unexpected congestion. Each market is large and
              commercially addressable by a traffic information system based on cell phone
              tracking.
