Title       : SBIR Phase I: Analytic Simulation Method for Oil/Gas Field Management and
               Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2001   
File        : a0128291

Award Number: 0128291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy D. Hazlett rdhazlett@integrity.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Potential Research Solns
	      1818 Shelmire Drive
	      Dallas, TX  75224    214/941-3907

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 1266,9139,9186,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project assesses the
              feasibility of new oil and gas reservoir management tools for optimization of
              hydrocarbon recovery.  It proposes extension of state-of-the-art analytic
              solution methods for potential flow in porous media from 2-D to 3-D.  It will
              incorporate 3-D analytic fluid flow simulation technology into large-scale
              optimization routines where reservoir recovery performance is required.  Unlike
              previous analytic solution methods, complex heterogeneous reservoir
              architecture can be entertained.  Well conditions are modeled directly, making
              possible design of complex wells.  Phase I will also address the possible
              extension of the method to alternate subregion shapes to allow even faster and
              more flexible implementations.  This project will provide a new class of
              reservoir management tools capable of rapidly and accurately screening what-if
              scenarios for field development.  The objectives of the research as to 1)
              generalize analytic solution boundary element methodology to three dimensions;
              2) build a prototype, 3-D, analytic simulation tool; 3) propose and test
              algorithms or well and field optimization using an analytic solution
              performance evaluation; and 4) extend algorithms to include additional
              geometric shapes for enhanced flexibility.  The next phase of the research
              involves algorithm refinement, generalization, optimization shell
              implementation, and testing.  Subsequently, concentration will be on commercial
              software development and a user interface.

There is a recognized need for
              speed, accuracy, and simplicity in reservoir engineering management tools. 
              There is also a demand for such tools without the high-end computational
              horsepower expected of most numerical reservoir simulators.  Potential Research
              Solutions envisions a PC software product as a deliverable from this research
              and development, allowing improved management of existing hydrocarbon
              resources, especially in mature reservoirs.  The proffered software product
              would benefit in-fill drilling programs, allocation of production rates to
              balance well load and drainage volumes, and screening of a large portfolio of
              reservoir management options--all with accurate reservoir performance
              predictions in complex reservoir architecture--and, it will be of particular
              interest to independent oil and gas producers with limited access to high-end
              computers.
