Title       : Collaborative Research/RUI: The Role of Frequency Dependent Selection in the
               Evolution of Color Pattern Polymorphism in Guppies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0128455

Award Number: 0128455
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Houde Houde@lfc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              F. Helen Rodd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Forest College
	      Sheridan & College Road
	      Lake Forest, IL  60045    312/234-3100

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1160,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Naturally occurring populations of guppies (Poecilia reticulata) exhibit
              striking genetically based variability in the color patterns of males. Each
              male has a unique color pattern or one that is shared with one or very few
              other fish in the population. How this polymorphism is maintained remains a
              mystery despite decades of study on this model organism. Laboratory studies
              have suggested that the mating success of males may depend on how rare or
              common their color pattern is, and theory suggests that such frequency
              dependent selection could maintain genetic variation. This study will examine
              the role of frequency dependent selection in maintaining color pattern
              variation in naturally occurring guppy populations. It will use new techniques
              for molecular paternity analysis and permanent marking of fish to examine
              patterns of survival and mating success of individual fish in streams.
              

Understanding how genetic variation can persist in natural populations has
              long been a goal of research in evolutionary biology and more empirical study
              is needed. Dwindling populations of organisms often suffer from loss of genetic
              variation. Thus, this is an increasingly important topic for investigation and
              application to conservation strategies. This research involves an international
              collaboration between research and undergraduate institutions, and research
              participation by undergraduates and a high school teacher.

