Title       : SBIR Phase I: Residual Stress and Part Distortion Prediction in Machined
               Workpiece Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2001   
File        : a0128420

Award Number: 0128420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Troy D. Marusich troym@thirdwavesys.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Third Wave Systems, Inc.
	      7301 Ohms Lane, Suite 580
	      Minneapolis, MN  554392340    952/832-5515

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will develop and
              validate a three-dimensional finite element modeling capability to predict
              machining induced residual stresses. This project will significantly extend the
              current state-of-the-art that is limited to 2D residual stress analysis and
              recently, 3D oblique cutting models of single cutting edge geometries. Residual
              stress has become increasingly important because of its effects upon surface
              quality, fatigue, and workpiece distortion. Residual stress has high economic
              impact to industry since the cost of manufacture is incurred prior to any
              measurement or detection. Testing methods are very expensive, difficult, and
              not developed for production purposes. Industry and government testing has
              determined that machining induced residual stresses can be significant enough
              in magnitude to induce part distortion and out-of tolerance conditions on
              completed workpieces. This project will demonstrate an integrated approach to
              predicting residual stress effects upon completely manufactured parts.
              Workpiece residual stress due to machining parameters will be modeled,
              verified, and then integrated into a complete part analysis to determine the
              final state of stress and distortion for a complete workpiece part prior to any
              manufacture.

The commercial applications include large, thin walled
              aerospace parts (such as wing spars), structural components, and parts
              susceptible to high rates of fatigue (rotor wing hubs and load carrying parts,
              spindles, structural, and powertrain components). The economic impact to
              predict and control part distortion induced by machining processes is very
              high. The cost of rejection of one part due to out-of-tolerance conditions can
              easily exceed $100,000 and routinely create weeks in production delay and
              scrap. The automotive sector, primarily within engine block manufacture, piston
              liners, bearings, spindles, and hard turning applications (generally) could
              also benefit from this technology.

