Title       : Evolutionary Economics of Plant-Pollinator Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0128896

Award Number: 0128896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin T. Morgan mmorgan@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Plant and pollinator interactions have profound economic and biological impact
              (e.g., pollination of crops, persistence of fragmented populations or
              endangered plant and pollinator species, diversification of floral form). This
              research develops mathematical and computer models of plant and pollinator
              interaction. Specific objectives are: (1) To investigate the dynamics of
              interacting plant and pollinator populations; and (2) To understand when
              `generalist' (e.g., one plant relying on many different pollinator) versus
              `specialist' (e.g., an intimate one-to-one relationship between plant and
              pollinator) interactions evolve. Theoretical methods are based on the premise
              that plants and pollinators are participants in an economy of production and
              consumption (e.g., nectar, produced by plants and consumed by pollinators).
              Mathematical and computer models of plant production and pollinator consumption
              are integrated using the economic notion of trade. These models provide insight
              into the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of interacting plants and
              pollinators.

This endeavor is broadly significant in its contribution to
              study at the interface between evolutionary and ecological processes, and to
              understanding the evolution of plant reproductive systems and plant-pollinator
              mutualisms. In addition to these academic contributions, the proposal supports
              science and mathematics training with graduate research assistantships and
              undergraduate learning opportunities. The proposed training exposes beginning
              scientists to a research program integrating quantitative reasoning into
              questions of biological relevance.

