Title       : Genetic Tradeoffs in Resistance to Natural Enemies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0128999

Award Number: 0128999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michal Polak polakm@email.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In theory, tradeoffs between host resistance against parasites and host fitness
              traits play a key role in the maintenance of genetic variation and hence in
              determining the evolutionary potential of resistance. The proposed research
              encompasses a comprehensive empirical study of tradeoffs focusing on host life
              history and ecological traits, and will utilize a Drosophila-mite system as a
              model to address several key hypotheses. These hypotheses are that strains
              selected in the laboratory to be more resistant to parasitic mites will suffer,
              in the absence of the parasites, significant reductions in egg hatch success,
              ability to compete for limiting resources, survivorship and fecundity, and in
              defensive capabilities against other natural enemies. These enemies include an
              invertebrate predator and an insect-pathogenic bacterium. Another major
              emphasis will be to test for the presence of costs of resistance under variable
              environmental conditions to which the host organism is known to be exposed in
              nature. 



Many of the elements that mediate the Drosophila-parasitic mite
              association are seen in vertebrate host-ectoparasite interactions, and in
              associations between insect prey and their predators. Thus the results of the
              proposed work should provide data of importance toward understanding the
              mechanisms and evolution of resistance across a broad array of animal species.
              The data generated are also expected to help define criteria for choosing
              appropriate natural enemies, and especially mixtures of natural enemies, for
              effective biological pest control. The research should therefore help to reduce
              dependency on chemical pesticide and herbicide usage, and hence promote
              environmental health. Our general knowledge of multispecies associations and
              their ecological complexities should also be advanced. The research effort will
              contribute to the training of both undergraduate and graduate students, and it
              should be of practical and societal value as it is expected to help develop
              novel methods of sustainable biological control. 


