Title       : STTR Phase I: Magnetically Controlled Microwave Powered Fluidized Bed Reactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2001   
File        : a0128201

Award Number: 0128201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Atwater jatwater@urcmail.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Goran N. Jovanovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Umpqua Research Co.
	      P O Box 609
	      Myrtle Creek, OR  974570102    503/863-7770

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1443,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes
              development of a magnetically controlled and microwave powered fluidized bed
              reactor, incorporating three primary innovations: [1] highly energy efficient
              waveguide-based microwave transmission and irradiation of fluidized media, [2]
              unique self-regulation of fluidized bed temperature using a localized magnetic
              field gradient and the temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility to
              confine only relatively cold particles within the heating zone, and [3] a novel
              microwave-compatible temperature measurement system.  The  temperature
              dependence of   the benefits of microwave heating have been applied to a vast
              array of chemical syntheses and related unit operations. However, most work to
              date has been conducted using relatively inefficient multi-mode cavities with
              poor temperature control. The innovation couples the excellent mass transfer
              efficiency of Fluidized Bed Reactors (FBRs) with the vastly superior heat
              transfer efficiencies achievable using high performance waveguide-based
              microwave irradiation systems. Anticipated benefits include: 1) energy savings
              resulting from improved thermal efficiency, 2) much faster reactor start-up due
              to substantially improved heating rates, 3) improved temperature uniformity, 4)
              improved control of reactor operating temperature, 5) development of novel
              magnetically controlled particles, and 6) greater understanding of the heat
              transfer characteristics in fluidized bed reactors. 
The successful coupling
              of optimal heat transfer and mass transfer characteristics with novel
              temperature control materials can be utilized to improve reactor efficiency and
              reduce costs. It is most probable that small-scale laboratory units will be the
              first commercial product

