Title       : Conference: Recent Progress in Cerebellar Research, November 16-18, 2001, St
               Louis, Missouri
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0128419

Award Number: 0128419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Highstein highstein@wums.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Thomas Thach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This three-day conference will bring together the international community
              of cerebellar researchers to discuss the current status of the field. Progress
              in cerebellar physiology has proceeded at a rapid pace and a meeting to
              exchange new results and concepts seems timely. This meeting will serve to
              cross-fertilize efforts between various factions in the field in the
              understanding of cerebellar function. Seven sequential panel sessions, each
              with an organized and moderated discussion period, two plenary lectures the
              history of landmark discoveries, and a poster session will be presented over a
              three-day period to consider the following topics that are important for
              understanding cerebellar function.  1) The cerebellum as a device for
              coordination of movement; 2) Relative roles of the cerebellar cortex and
              nuclei; 3) Parallel fiber beams.  What do they do? 4) Climbing fiber inputs to
              the cerebellum. What is signaled? 5) Cognitive processing by the cerebellum; 6)
              LTD, LTP and molecular mechanisms of learning and memory; 7) Models of
              cerebellar function. It is expected that attendees of the meeting will be
              informed of the very latest progress and research in the cerebellar field.
              Because cerebellar research is presently extremely active, and because many of
              the speakers use state of the art technology such as optical recording and
              multiple electrode recording techniques, attendees will also be informed of the
              state of the art of methodology related to the neurosciences.  The open format
              of the poster session will provide the opportunity for active, intimate
              discussion.






