Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships of Cyphelloid and Aquatic Homobasidiomycetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0128925

Award Number: 0128925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Hibbett dhibbett@black.clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manfred Binder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0128925
Hibbett and Binder
The proposed research by Drs. David Hibbett and
              Manfred Binder at Clark University concerns the evolutionary relationships of
              homobasidiomycetes, which include the mushroom-forming fungi. There are about
              13,500 described species of these fungi. Homobasidiomycetes play important
              ecological roles as decayers, pathogens, and beneficial symbionts of plants and
              animals. Traditionally, classifications and evolutionary hypotheses in this
              diverse group have been based on the morphology of the fruiting bodies, which
              include forms with a cap and stalk, club and candelabra-shaped forms,
              puffballs, bracket fungi, etc. Recently, however, DNA sequences have been used
              to infer evolutionary relationships of homobasidiomycetes. The proposed
              research will use DNA sequences to study relationships of two groups of
              homobasidiomycetes: "cyphelloid" fungi (roughly 300 species), which are minute
              cup-shaped forms, and aquatic homobasidiomycetes (20 species, usually quite
              rare). Both cyphelloid and aquatic homobasidiomycetes have been taxonomically
              obscure. Recent molecular evidence suggests that these groups may be closely
              related, which had not been predicted previously. The proposed research will
              follow up on the leads generated in recent molecular studies, and will include
              fieldwork to expand knowledge of the diversity in both groups. The proposed
              work will increase understanding of the pathways of morphological evolution in
              homobasidiomycetes. In addition, it will elucidate the ecological transitions
              from terrestrial to aquatic habitats in fungi.
The proposed research will
              benefit science and society in two major ways: 1) The proposed research will
              enhance understanding of biodiversity. In particular, it will highlight an
              unusual group of organisms that even most biologists are not aware of, but that
              play important ecological roles. 2) The proposed research will include a
              significant training and outreach component. A post-doctoral fellow and a Ph.D.
              student will receive training. In addition, a series of summer workshops in the
              Worcester, MA, area for local high school students and high school teachers is
              planned (one student and one teacher will be supported per year). The summer
              workshops will provide exposure to modern techniques of molecular biology and
              evolutionary biology. Teachers who participate in the workshops will receive
              professional development points, which are necessary for annual recertification
              in Massachusetts, and which Clark University is authorized to award. Teachers
              and students will be recruited from the Worcester public school system.

