Title       : Gender-Specific Fitness and Intersexual Developmental Conflict in a Fruit Fly
               (Drosophila) Model System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0128780

Award Number: 0128780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Rice rice@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates a process by which natural selection can lead to
              gender-specific dysfunction.  Males and females need to accomplish different
              biological functions, yet nearly 90% of the genome is expressed in both sexes. 
              In a recent pilot experiment the entire genome of the common fruit fly
              (Drosophila melanogaster) was cloned and then identical copies of the same
              genomes were expressed in both males and females.  Genomes that produced the
              highest Darwinian fitness in females produced low fitness in males, and visa
              versa.  This intersexual reversal suggests that genes that are favored in one
              sex and disfavored in the other sex are common in the genome of the fruit fly. 
              Because all animals express many of the same genes, the observed intersexual
              genetic conflict may be widespread.  In the proposed research cytogenetic
              cloning will be used to measure: i)  the functional significance of sexually
              antagonistic genetic variation, ii) its distribution among chromosomes, iii)
              its transmission dynamics between generations, and iv) the traits that mediate
              intersexual genetic conflict. 
	The experiments are relevant to hereditary
              factors that mediate gender-specific impairment (e.g., sterility).  In the past
              it has been assumed that harmful genetic variation was maintained solely by
              recurrent mutation or genetic drift.  This research evaluates a new source for
              the genetic polymorphisms that are responsible for gender-specific dysfunction.
              

