Title       : SBIR/STTR PHASE I: Novel Ambient Temperature Emissions Control Catalyst
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2001  
File        : a0128236

Award Number: 0128236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Kittrell kseinc@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KSE Inc
	      P O Box 368
	      Amherst, MA  010040368    413/549-5506

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1403,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to establish the
              technical and economic feasibility of a novel technology to completely oxidize
              formaldehyde at dilute concentrations in air at room temperature by use of a
              novel catalyst system. Formaldehyde-containing resins are widely used in the
              U.S., leading to widespread emissions of formaldehyde at the product formation
              molds, and in storage and use of these resins. A novel technology will be
              developed to completely destroy the formaldehyde using room temperature
              catalytic oxidation with a new class of noble metal reducible oxide (NMRO)
              catalysts designed specifically for such compounds. This new class of catalysts
              provides destruction efficiencies for the complete oxidation of formaldehyde
              dramatically higher than traditional platinum VOC oxidation catalysts. This
              research program will utilize catalyst composition studies to tailor a superior
              catalyst for this application, reactor studies of the destruction efficacy of
              the NMRO class of catalysts, and a competitive cost analysis of the technology
              relative to other alternatives for formaldehyde destruction. 
     The
              commercial applications for the concept will be for efficient cleansing of
              indoor air, cleansing of workplace air, and control of emissions at ambient
              temperature and low cost, capable of rapid deployment. The commercial
              applications of the research should be of value to both the private sector and
              the government sector, providing cost effective commercial systems to enhance
              indoor air quality and emissions controls. The program should help protect the
              nation's environment and improve economic competitiveness. 

