Title       : Patterns and Processes of Genetic Diversification in Solitary and Social
               Subterranean Rodents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0128857

Award Number: 0128857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen A. Lacey ealacey@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 5911,5977,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Lacey
0128857

The PI will examine relationships among social behavior,
              demography, and genetic variation in two species of tuco-tucos (Rodentia:
              Ctenomyidae) from southwestern Argentina.  The presence of both the
              group-living colonial tuco-tuco (Ctenomys sociabilis) and the solitary
              Patagonian tuco-tuco (C. haigi) in Argentina's Limay Valley provides an unusual
              opportunity to explore the effects of sociality on genetic variation in closely
              related species that occur in similar habitats. Using DNA extracted from tissue
              samples collected from 10 populations per species, variation at both
              microsatellite and Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) loci will be
              quantified.  These data will be used to determine how genetic variation is
              apportioned within and among populations of each species.  Specifically, the PI
              will test the hypothesis that group living is associated with enhanced
              selection for diversity at MHC genes, which are the genes associated with the
              vertebrate immune response.  To determine if selection on MHC genes is
              influenced by presumably greater pathogen exposure among members of
              group-living species, the prevalence of fleas and flea-borne bacteria of the
              genus Bartonella will be assessed for all populations of C. sociabilis and C.
              haigi sampled by the PI.   

The proposed research is important in that it is
              one of the first studies of natural populations of non-human vertebrates to (1)
              link behavioral and demographic variables to patterns of MHC variation and (2)
              explore the role of behaviorally-mediated differences in pathogen exposure in
              generating selection on MHC genes.  Both aspects of the project will
              significantly improve our understanding of the processes underlying observed
              patterns of genetic variation in vertebrates.  The project will also contribute
              significantly to our understanding of the biology of the endangered colonial
              tuco-tuco, which is endemic to the western Limay Valley and surrounding hills. 
              Specifically, by engaging Argentine university students to assist with the
              project, the PI will facilitate involvement of local biologists in the study
              and management of this little-known species.   

