Title       : SBIR Phase I: Assessing Complex Learning Outcomes through Web-based Classroom
               Assessment Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a0128320

Award Number: 0128320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. McGee learning_partnership@yahoo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Learning Partnership
	      50 Era Street
	      Wheeling, WV  260036012    304/242-7813

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9150,9177,9178,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop
              database information technology for constructivist teachers who are
              dissatisfied with the limitations of classroom testing for guiding reform.  The
              Learning Partnership will provide Web-based classroom assessment services that
              measure a wide range of complex learning outcomes.  Unlike EduTest.com, a test
              preparation program, The Learning Partnership's system will be optimized to
              diagnose student learning and provide direction for improvements in the
              learning process.  The technical objectives for this project are as follows: 
              1. Adapt the discrete assessment approaches developed at the NASA Classroom of
              the Future for use with the Looking at the Environment curriculum, a one-year
              comprehensive inquiry-based high school science curriculum that is fully
              technology integrated that is being developed at Northwestern University in
              partnership with the Chicago schools..  2. Create an assessment framework that
              integrates these discrete assessment approaches.  The framework will track
              student performance at three levels: activity level, module level, and course
              level.  3. Develop database information technology that will support mass
              customization of assessment tasks, tracking of student performance, and
              reporting of results.  These services will address a growing demand for online
              assessment materials.  
      If science education reform in the U.S. is to
              succeed, new approaches to assessment are critical.  On the one hand,
              assessment is essential provide school administrators with empirical evidence
              of student learning for accountability purposes; on the other hand, it is also
              essential to provide teachers with the depth of information needed to guide
              their practices.  The Learning Partnership proposes to address this problem by
              providing classroom assessment services that bring together multiple forms of
              assessment for tracking student progress from the activity level to the
              high-stakes testing level.

