Title       : Phylogenetic Systematics of Moraceae: Inflorescence Evolution and the Origin of
               a Pollination Mutualism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0128833

Award Number: 0128833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275001             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Weiblen gweiblen@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Weiblen
0128833
Work by Dr. George Weiblen at the University of Minnesota
              examines the evolutionary history of the mulberry family (Moraceae) using the
              DNA sequences from the living members of this ancient lineage of flowering
              plants.  There are more than 1000 species of Moraceae worldwide, including such
              economically important fruits as figs, mulberries, jackfruit and breadfruit.
              Among the Moraceae, the figs (species of the genus Ficus) have been a major
              focus of research in ecology and evolution because of their complex
              interactions with fig wasps.  Specialized wasps that feed on fig seeds are the
              exclusive pollinators of over 700 species of figs. The mutually beneficial
              relationship between figs and their wasps has stimulated much research on
              coevolution, the process by which two species undergo genetic change in
              response to each other. Ecological studies of fig pollination have advanced our
              understanding of coevolution, and yet the origins and evolutionary stages
              leading to fig pollination have remained virtually unknown. This project uses
              new tools of DNA sequencing and phylogenetic analysis to probe the early
              history of the mulberry family and to identify the closest relatives of the
              figs.  Field work in the Old World tropics will focus on pollination biology of
              several Moraceae. Reconstructing patterns of diversification in this way makes
              it possible to test theories on the origin of the unique fig pollination
              syndrome, and to improve our understanding of general trends in floral
              evolution.
The project will significantly expand our taxonomic and
              phylogenetic knowledge of an important branch of the tree of life. Economically
              significant members of the Moraceae include ornamental and edible figs (Ficus),
              breadfruit and jackfruit (Artocarpus), paperbark mulberry (Broussonetia), a
              source of fiber, and breadnut (Brosimum), a major tropical timber. Mulberry
              (Morus) also plays a key role in the production of silk as the main food source
              for silk moths. Understanding how these plants are related genetically is
              important for their sustainable use and conservation.  In addition, the
              research provides an opportunity for advanced graduate training in
              state-of-the-art molecular techniques combined with museum collections-based
              approaches to the study of biodiversity.

