Title       : Embryonic Transitions in Vertebrate Cardiovascular Physiology - II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0128043

Award Number: 0128043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $591944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren W. Burggren burggren@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9177,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award will extend our current highly limited understanding of the
              development of cardiovascular regulation, and its potential plasticity in
              vertebrate embryos. The four-year project will focus on three areas of study,
              using conventional developmental models (the fry of zebrafish Brachydanio
              rerio, embryos of chickens Gallus gallus), as well as embryos of other fishes
              and birds. 
The first area extends the PI's investigation of the development
              of the circulation and its regulation in early vertebrate embryos, making
              quantitative measurements of blood pressure, blood flow, and heart rate as a
              function of development, and during pharmacological and environmental
              manipulation. In particular, these studies will focus on two aims: 1)
              Determination of changes in cardiovascular regulation during embryonic
              development. Recent findings show that there are non-linear rates of both
              appearance and maturation in the development of reflexes controlling the
              circulation. Major species-specific differences are emerging between chicken,
              emu and zebrafish embryos. Thus experiments to determine whether the venerable
              chick embryo model is indeed representative of vertebrate physiological
              development are warranted. 2) Quantification of the specific properties of the
              blood vessels of the avian chorioallantoic membrane (CAM), which remains
              largely a physiological black box. Because the CAM and embryonic vessels are
              located in series, intrinsic responses of the vascular beds of the embryo could
              be muted or completely masked by qualitatively different vessel diameter
              responses occurring simultaneously in the CAM per se, especially when blood
              pressure and other measurements are made at only one point in the
              circulation.
The second area focuses on the breathing  transition in late
              incubation of the avian embryo as it internally pips (pushes its beak into the
              internal air cell) and relinquishes respiration using the CAM for respiration
              using the lungs. This award will fund experiments to characterize the
              physiological changes that occur from day 19-21 in chick embryos, and from Day
              50-53 in emu embryos. The PI's experiments to date suggest that this 2-3 day
              period holds intense and complex change for cardiovascular regulation, and its
              relatively slow time course relative to mammalian birth should provide critical
              new insights in cardio-pulmonary transitions.
The third area will be an
              investigation of how environment (e.g. hypoxia) influences normal developmental
              trajectories for the cardiovascular system.  In particular, planned experiments
              will explore the extent to which embryonic cardiovascular systems exhibit
              "self-repair" as development progresses. Exciting new results suggest that
              embryos with modifications of metabolism in early development produced by low
              environmental oxygen can develop along unexpected trajectories and still arrive
              at a normal  metabolic state.
The proposed research program will make
              important and timely contributions to scientific advancement and human resource
              development.  The proposed measurements will provide mechanistically-based
              information on how cardiovascular systems develop, how they respond acutely to
              common environmental stress, and to what extent their long-term function during
              subsequent development may be altered by environment. The experiments will
              yield a basic understanding of embryonic physiology in vertebrates which will
              be important in developing corrective procedures for human defects through a
              combination of gene therapy and embryonic corrective surgery (envisaged by some
              as the next surgical frontier). This project will train a new cohort of
              undergraduate and graduate students in the use of contemporary physiological
              techniques to address critical questions in developmental physiology. The
              project will increase international collaboration, and the broadening of
              professional vistas for trainees through the PI's informal Environmental
              Genetic and Growth Science (EGGS) network of collaborating scientists from six
              countries. And finally, a greater love of science in high school and middle
              school teachers and their students will be fostered.   Selected secondary
              school teachers from Denton will participate in original scientific research at
              UNT, through the PI's collaborative program with the local school district. 

              

