Title       : Supporting Teachers and Encouraging Lifelong Learning: A Web-Based Integrated
               Science Environment (WISE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a0128062

Award Number: 0128062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1197453            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia C. Linn MCLINN@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Slotta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Web-based Integrated Science Environment (WISE)was founded in 1997 with a
              3-year grant from the National Science Foundation.This invited proposal for an
              Accomplishment Based Renewal (ABR)describes planned WISE activities for 3
              additional years at the current rate of funding.Our document conforms to the
              four-page ABR proposal limit;much more can be learned about WISE activities at
              http://wise.berkeley.edu.
WISE capitalizes on the synergies between Internet
              connectivity and integrated science to advance our understanding of inquiry
              science instruction.In the first 3 years,WISE has created the following
              elements of inquiry:
o The WISE learning environment that incorporates recent
              cognitive and social research and gives new authoring partnerships a headstart
              on effective inquiry designs.
o Over 30 WISE projects that meet our design
              criteria and can be used by teachers everywhere.
o The WISE mentored
              professional development model that guides teachers to implement inquiry
              practices.
o WISE server technology that collects and stores both student work
              and teacher activities such as lesson plans, contributions to discussion, and
              reflection notes.
o WISE Knowledge Integration Assessments that measure
              progress in inquiry and can be used to detect transfer from the topic where
              inquiry was taught to new topics.
o WISE science, technology, and language
              literacy measures, and connections to standards-based measures of inquiry from
              NAEP,TIMSS,and state testing programs to establish broader impacts.
The
              proposed ABR will research how these elements of inquiry instruction jointly
              contribute to sustained improvement of science learning.We prepare to address
              four research themes:(a)What is the longitudinal impact on students of one or
              more WISE projects?(b)What are typical trajectories of teachers from diverse
              schools (urban, rural,and suburban)who adopt inquiry practices such as
              WISE?(c)What value do new technologies for visualization and modeling,
              including our new grant of Palm technologies, bring to inquiry instruction with
              WISE? And (d)How do Curriculum Design Partnerships progress in response to the
              design review and classroom trials of their curriculum projects?  Establishing
              and sustaining technology-enhanced inquiry science instruction requires a
              powerful learning environment that takes advantage of cognitive and social
              research as well as effective professional development,rigorous design of
              urriculum and assessments,and continuous monitoring of student progress. Our
              research will characterize trajectories of teachers as they adopt WISE inquiry
              projects and identify ways to make professional development more
              effective.

We will refine our design principles and test their effectiveness
              in guiding partnerships that design new WISE curriculum.We will incorporate
              emerging technologies into the WISE learning environment,adjust professional
              development practices,and test the effectiveness of these improvements on
              student learning. We will research the impact of WISE projects on students,both
              immediately and longitudinally,as a function of the expertise of the teacher
              and the extent of exposure to WISE projects. We will look specifically at the
              needs of diverse learners and identify ways to ensure that all students succeed
              in WISE. Proposed studies will inform the design of curricula,professional
              development,and science assessment. Our work will inform the setting of policy
              for equity and assessment.

To communicate our findings,we plan a book-length
              monograph,research publications,and conference presentations, as well as
              workshops for teachers, netcourses, and extensive on-line materials. We have
              already attracted over 3000 teachers to join our web-based community. As
              participating teachers provide information about their customizations and
              insights into inquiry teaching,we expect this community to grow. We will
              connect teachers to mentors according to our WISE mentoring model for
              professional development.  We appreciate the contributions of our advisory
              board over the past 3 years and have identified some continuing and some new
              advisors for the ABR. The longitudinal impact theme will be advised by Paul
              Holland,ETS,and will continue to draw on the methodological expertise of Mark
              Wilson, University of California, Berkeley; David Rogosa, Stanford University;
              Robert Linn, University of Colorado, and Lorrie Shepard, University of
              Colorado.

The teacher trajectory theme will be advised by Jane Bowyer, Mills
              College;and Louis Gomez, Northwestern University who both have experience with
              urban systemic reforms. The value of new technologies theme will benefit form
              collaborations with CILT Post Docs Eric Baumgartner,Michelle Spitulnik,and Yael
              Kali;in addition,we will be advised by computer scientists Michael Clancy,UC
              Berkeley,and Elliot Soloway,University of Michigan;and by Nancy
              Songer,University of Michigan. The Curriculum Design Partnership theme will be
              advised by Philip Bell,University of Washington; Louis Gomez, Northwestern
              University; Roy Pea, Stanford University; and Nancy Songer, University of
              Michigan,all of whom bring experience in forming and sustaining partnerships.

