Title       : SBIR Phase I: HARBINGER: A Networked Embedded Systems Design Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a0128817

Award Number: 0128817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99803              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KT
	      3260 Hillview Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  943041201    650/320-8888

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
              problem of constructing high-assurance real-time, networked embedded systems. 
              The project will develop a design environment, called HARBINGER, supporting the
              specification, composition, analysis, and refinement-to-code of embedded
              systems, in a way that preserves consistency between requirements and code. 
              HARBINGER will also supported guided refinement, e.g., by generating resource
              tradeoffs throughout the process, enable capture and reuse of design knowledge,
              and yield formal proofs of correctness to the extent possible.  It is
              anticipated that HARBINGER will lower the cost of producing new embedded
              systems and improve the assurance of their correctness.  Once in use, HARBINGER
              will also make radical improvements in the evolution of systems originally
              constructed in its environment.  Practical problems such as targeting
              applications to changing host platforms will be handled much more easily within
              HARBINGER
      In this project, the firm will assess the practicality and
              effectiveness of the HARBINGER approach for commercially important
              applications.  This will require selecting an initial market with strong
              requirements for high assurance software and systems as the basis for a
              proposal for the next phase of the research.  Initial application candidates
              include automotive and aviation vehicle control systems, areas in which the
              firm has extensive connections.  In both of these areas, attention will be paid
              to the practical consideration of legacy code and to the impact of important
              new protocols.

