Title       : Mathematical Modeling of Advanced Liquid Crystal Systems: Ferroelectricity and
               Chirality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0128832

Award Number: 0128832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria-Carme Calderer calde014@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0128832

PI: 			Calderer,
              Maria-Carme
Institution: 		University of Minnesota, Twin Cities 
Program:
              		Applied Mathematics
Program Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title:
              Mathematical Modeling of Advanced Liquid Crystal Systems: Ferroelectricity and
              Chirality

Liquid crystal phases are intermediate between solid and liquid
              and present a wealth of rheological and electro-optical properties.  Novel
              technological applications involve highly ordered phases such as the
              ferroelectric smectic~C*.  Ferroelectricity in liquid crystals is a consequence
              of the chirality of the phase (i.e., molecules are arranged in helical
              patterns). Chirality also turns out to be a central attribute of all living
              organisms. This fact brings a biological scope to liquid crystals research.
              This proposal deals with mathematical and modeling issues of advanced liquid
              crystal materials, in the context of applications to optics and rheology.   
              Ferroelectricity and chirality are at the core of the proposed models. One of
              the issues of the project is the modeling of ferroelectric display. The
              switching time of such a display is much less than that of other liquid crystal
              technologies (e.g., shutters are capable of a 70 microseconds transition time);
              it also allows for sequential coloring. The project also addresses related
              current trends of thin film research for liquid crystals, with a view towards
              biological applications. One such trend relates to the need of miniaturization
              of devices, such as the manufacturing of very thin ferroelectric displays (from
              10 to 100 nano-meters thickness). These are particularly needed in interactive
              video applications, where some of the display components are intended to be
              wearable.  One related aspect of the proposed research is the study  of
              interfaces and contact surfaces between liquid crystals and isotropic fluids,
              and the role of smectic liquid crystal phases as surfactants.    Such questions
              are also relevant in studies of biological membranes and processes, such as the
              transport of drugs through cell walls, and the attachment of proteins to
              strains of DNA.    The analysis of flow problems will encompass uniaxial and
              biaxial nematic, chiral and smectic liquid crystals and polymers.  The PI will
              also carry out research related to applications of  liquid crystals to optical
              switching and telecommunications, and will search for industrial partnership in
              such topics.  The work will incorporate modern theories of partial differential
              equations and calculus of variations. Numerical simulations will also be
              carried out for some of the problems. The PI will continue the very active
              program of connecting research activities  with undergraduate education through
              the following: the  summer REU program,  organization of industrial seminars,
              participation and organization of open houses for undergraduate students as
              well as for  high school students, first year seminars, and bringing state of
              the art computer software and technology to undergraduate mathematics.
              

Since their discovery at the end of the nineteen century, liquid crystals
              have been at the core of   the most exciting scientific events, and have
              brought one of  the truly remarkable technological advances of the twentieth
              century. They are found in the most basic household items, such as watches and
              calculators, to computer screens and instrument display panels (LCD). Following
                 the commercialization of the first display device towards the mid 20th
              century,   the physical and mathematical modeling  of liquid crystals has
              played  a major role in their technological development,  during the last
              quarter of the 20th century.  Moreover, the mathematical challenges posed by
              the liquid crystal models of continuum mechanics brought a wealth of activity
              in analysis and partial differential equations.  These achievements, in turn,
              prompted further technological developments.  The future of the liquid crystal
              research promises new levels of scientific and technological advances, but it
              is also filled with challenges. The goal of the proposed research is to
              actively participate in this endeavor and work on the forefront of the modern
              liquid crystal research. This proposal deals with mathematical and modeling
              issues of advanced liquid crystal materials, in the context of applications to
              optics and rheology. The work will incorporate modern theories of partial
              differential equations and calculus of variations. Numerical simulations will
              also be carried out for some of the problems.


Date: June 25, 2001

