Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Implicit Solvent Models for Biomolecular
               Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a0128783

Award Number: 0128783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Case case@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Brooks, III  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5918,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0128783
Case

This three-year award for U.S.-France collaboration in
              computational biophysics involves researchers at the Scripps Research Institute
              and the Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology and Genetics in
              Strasbourg, France.  David A. Case, Charles L. Brooks III in the US and Thomas
              Simonson in France lead the collaborative program. The joint effort is aimed at
              the development and distribution of computer codes for molecular dynamics
              simulations of proteins and nucleic acids.  The specific aims include
              performance of critical tests for parameterizations and implementation of the
              generalized Born solvent model and new applications for NMR (Nuclear Magnetic
              Resonance) structure refinement and for behavior of biomolecules.  The
              investigators have complementary expertise in biomolecular simulation and in
              widely used computer programs:  CNS/XPLOR (Simonson), CHARMM (Brooks) and AMBER
              (Case).  The new distributed computer codes will allow new types of
              biomolecular simulations.  The enhanced generalized Born model will be used for
              structure prediction, prediction of protein-ligand interactions, protein
              folding, structure-function analyses.
 
This award represents the US side of
              parallel proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific
              Research (CNRS).  NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses of the US
              investigators and graduate students.  The CNRS will support visits to the US by
              the French participants.  The project adds an international dimension to
              research training of graduate students and enhances opportunities for future
              collaborative partnerships. 

