Title       : LTREB: Climatic and Density-dependent Effects on the Ecology of Sockeye Salmon
               and their Freshwater Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0128902

Award Number: 0128902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118779             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Quinn tquinn@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray Hilborn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Schindler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0128902
Quinn
Despite the general appreciation for climatic effects on
              ecological dynamics, most biological
studies are too brief to test for
              interactions between climatic and biological processes. Alternatively,
many
              long-term studies do not span enough levels of biological organization to
              provide meaningful
insights into the complexity of ecological responses to
              environmental change. In the last century,
population dynamics of anadromous
              Pacific salmon have been influenced by interactions among large-scale shifts in
              regional climate, inherent density-dependent regulation, and fisheries
              activities. We propose to take advantage of unique, highly detailed biological
              and physical time series that extend for 40-50 years to test for interactions
              between climatic and biological processes in the freshwater ecosystems used as
              nursery habitats by sockeye salmon in southwestern Alaska. Sockeye are not only
              an important fishery resource to commercial and subsistence communities in this
              region, but are also keystone species, driving many components of freshwater
              and riparian ecosystems.
We have established a series of working hypotheses to
              investigate interactions among climatic
variables (e.g., hydrology, ice-out
              date) and biological variables (e.g., bear predation, juvenile
competition)
              that interact to control life history evolution and the ecology of sockeye in
              freshwater
ecosystems. Our main research themes are to explore: 1)
              interactions among habitat features, climate-driven variation in hydrology,
              bear predation and salmon density controlling the life history patterns and
              productivity of adult sockeye, 2) sockeye population dynamics and climate as
              controllers of limnological conditions in lakes used as nursery habitats, and
              3) biological and climatic factors controlling growth rates and age at seaward
              migration in juvenile sockeye salmon. Sockeye are an ideal species for such
              studies because they occupy stream, lake and open ocean habitats at discrete
              life history stages, exert top-down control on zooplankton communities, provide
              important marine-derived nutrients to freshwater ecosystems when they die and
              decompose, and occur in large, well-studied populations.
This LTREB research
              will: 1) maintain sampling programs to build on existing data sets established
              over four
decades ago in two lake systems of Bristol Bay, Southwest Alaska, 2)
              continue to develop a state-of-the-art data archive system to ensure long-term
              data security, and 3) initiate new and retrospective studies to test several
              hypotheses central to understanding the interactions between climate and the
              ecology of sockeye and their ecosystems. A major objective is to develop a
              living database available to investigators from all avenues of freshwater
              ecology and fisheries biology. These data sets include the abundance, size- and
              age-structure of adult sockeye salmon, regional climate, limnological
              conditions in nursery lakes, and abundance and growth of juvenile sockeye
              salmon and other lacustrine fishes. More specifically, we will evaluate the
              consequences of climate change for life history evolution and population
              dynamics of a fish species that plays an exceptionally important role in the
              structure and function of its ecosystems, and the local economy and culture of
              people in the region.
