Title       : Cell Interactions and Cell Fate Specification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a0128140

Award Number: 0128140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Ettensohn ettensohn@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0128140
Ettensohn

The accumulation of the protein beta-catenin in the nuclei
              of specific
cells is a critical, early step in the development of
              multicellular
animals. In all deuterostomes that have been studied,
              nuclear
accumulation ("nuclearization") of beta-catenin is polarized along
              one
axis of the early embryo.  Nuclearization of beta-catenin is required
for
              mesoderm and/or endoderm formation and the establishment of early
signaling
              centers. Despite its fundamental importance in patterning
deuterostome
              embryos, the mechanisms that regulate the differential
nuclearization of
              beta-catenin are unknown. The early sea urchin embryo
is an ideal experimental
              system for the analysis of this problem. The
embryo is highly transparent,
              which facilitates analysis of the dynamics
of protein turnover and targeting
              in vivo using light optical methods.
The sea urchin system is also unique in
              that specific cell types can be
isolated from early embryos in large
              quantities. This critical
characteristic means that it is possible to isolate
              large quantities of
early blastomeres that have, or do not have, beta-catenin
              in their
nuclei, and study biochemical differences in the two kinds of
              cells.
Many of the central molecular components of the beta-catenin
              pathway
have been cloned from sea urchin, including several key players
              that
have been cloned recently in our laboratory. This powerful
              combination
of characteristics makes the sea urchin embryo a unique
              experimental
system for the analysis of beta-catenin nuclearization.

This
              proposal tests several specific hypotheses concerning mechanisms
that regulate
              the nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin during early
development. To test
              these hypotheses, a combination of time-lapse, 3-D
confocal microscopy,
              manipulation of embryos by microsurgical and
molecular biological methods, and
              biochemical approaches will be
employed. The major questions to be addressed
              are the following:

a) Do interactions between blastomeres play any role in
              regulating the
pattern of beta-catenin nuclearization during early
              development?

b) What is the stability (half-life) of beta-catenin in
              different cell
lineages at different developmental stages? Does the stability
              of
beta-catenin increase or decrease at specific times and in
              specific
cells?

c) Is the loss of beta-catenin on the animal side of the
              embryo mediated
through GSK3? If so, are there measurable differences in GSK3
              activity,
stability, or abundance along the A-V axis?

d) What is the
              spatial distribution of axin, a regulator of beta-catenin
stability, along the
              A-V axis? 

e) Is the state of the degradation complex different in animal
              and
vegetal blastomeres?

This research project will advance scientific
              knowledge by elucidating
the mechanisms of a fundamental process in animal
              development. It will
also contribute to the development of human resources
              through the
training of undergraduate researchers, graduate students,
              and
postdoctoral fellows.


