Title       : RUI: The Herbivory Uncertainty Principle - How Experimenter Visitation and
               Measurement Affect Herbivory and Plant Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0128098

Award Number: 0128098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Niesenbaum niesenba@muhlenberg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Cahill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine M. Ingersoll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Muhlenberg College
	      24th and Chew Streets
	      Allentown, PA  18104    215/433-3191

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Herbivory Uncertainty Principle - How Experimenter Visitation and
              Measurement Affect Herbivory and Plant Growth

PI: Richard A. Niesenbaum,
              Muhlenberg College
CO-PI: James F Cahill, University of Alberta
CO-PI:
              Christine M. Ingersoll, Muhlenberg College


In 1927,Werner Heisenberg
              proposed that there are fundamental limitations to the study of subatomic
              particles, as the act of measuring them can affect their behavior.  Our prior
              work confirms that such uncertainty also occurs in ecological studies, where
              visiting plants to measure rates of herbivory actually changes those rates and
              significantly impacts the plant-insect interactions being studied. The
              implications of such "visitation effects" are enormous, and the proposed work
              will permit us to more substantially test whether visitation and measurement of
              plants alters rates of herbivory and plant growth, and will increase our
              understanding of the mechanisms responsible for these effects.  We will examine
              how the presence of neighboring plants and local light environment influence
              the occurrence of  "visitation effects", and how visitation and touch influence
              plant chemistry and insect foraging in the plant, Apocynum cannabinum.  Results
              from the proposed research will challenge the long-standing assumption that
              field researchers are "benign observers", as the essential act of visiting
              plants during an experiment could alter the performance of those plants. A
              significant visitation effect may motivate us to re-think the way that we
              measure and test hypotheses about herbivory, plant growth and productivity, and
              other plant-animal interactions. This work is essential to understanding
              possible strategies to mitigate any potential observer effect in future
              studies, and will provide information about the basic ecology of plant-animal
              interactions in natural plant communities.  An additional major goal is to
              advance undergraduate education by giving students primary roles in a
              significant ecological research project. 

