Title       : Genetic Control of Polar Nuclei Number in Maize Embryo Sacs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0296074

Award Number: 0296074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen S. Schumaker                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew M. Evans   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry L. Kermicle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0080353
Kermicle

In contrast to animals, the haploid products of meiosis do
              not differentiate into the gametes but undergo a few rounds of cell division to
              produce a multicellular gametophyte which produces the gametes.  This is
              obvious in lower plants with large free-living gametophytes but is also the
              case in angiosperms, the gametophytes of which are highly reduced in size. 
              Female gametophyte development in Arabidopisis and maize, begins when one of
              the products of meiosis undergoes three rounds of free nuclear division
              followed by cellularization to give rise to a seven celled embryo sac.  The
              free nuclear divisions are invariant in number, tightly regulated as indicated
              by their synchrony, and accompanied by stereotypical nuclear migrations.  The
              embryo sac consists of four cell types:  the antipodal cells, the central cell,
              the synergids, and the egg.  To further understand genetic regulation of female
              gametophyte development, mutants with excess polar nuclei in the central cell,
              which upon fertilization gives rise to the endosperm, are to be characterized
              in detail using maize as a model system.  The sensitivity of maize endosperm
              development to the addition or subtraction of a single polar nucleus provides a
              sensitive screen for these mutants.  These mutants are expected to affect one
              or both of two basic processes:  nuclear positioning and partitioning or
              negative regulation of free nuclear divisions.  Several mutants with excess
              polar nuclei have already been identified, and their characterization begun. 
              The mechanism by which extra polar nuclei are produced in these mutants is to
              be determined by studying embryo sac ontogeny using confocal laser scanning
              microscopy.  Interactions between the genes are to be determined by
              constructing double mutants between them.  More mutants with extra polar nuclei
              are to be identified through genetic screens of existing mutant collections and
              collaborations with current genome projects.  Molecular analysis of one of the
              best characterized of these genes, indeterminate gametophytel, is being
              initiated.  A  detailed analysis of these genes and their interactions should
              provide greater understanding of embryo sac development, particularly control
              of basic regulation of nuclear division and position.

