Title       : Workshop: Developing a Common Wireless Networking Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0296188

Award Number: 0296188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Niki Pissinou niki@eng.fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kia Makki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The rapidly expanding information superhighway allows the storage and retrieval
              of
information in a highly distributed information infrastructure. Yet this
              infrastructure
requires users to maintain a fixed and universally known
              position in the network,
which restricts user mobility and portability, so
              users can not access data from
anywhere and at any time. Now the next step is
              to make the information superhighway
available to mobile users. But this
              requires fundamental research that takes mobility,
variable communication
              conditions, energy limitations and high frequency of disconnection
into
              account when providing access to this distributed information infrastructure.
              To
reach this goal, intensive cooperation of researchers from a number of
              different
communities
including the different wireless, distributed systems
              and information systems communities
is necessary. Such collaboration currently
              appears at a risk. In view of this, our
objective is to
define and establish
              a common infrastructure of the discipline and to develop a consensus
based
              document that will provide a foundation for implementation and standardization
              as
well as further research. This infrastructure will foster collaboration
              between these
different communities. Such collaboration is necessitated by teh
              current needs of
wireless
technologies, if new horizons of research and
              development are to be achieved in the next
millennium.
