Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates: Advanced Materials Processing and
               Engineering at Clarkson University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a0296218

Award Number: 0296218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 7,  2001     
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dayakar Penumadu dpenumad@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don H. Rasmussen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7915,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9820489
Clarkson University	
Dayakar Penumadu              

It is proposed
              that a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site be established at
              
Clarkson University in the area of Advanced Materials Processing and
              Engineering.  The faculty 
mentors for the proposed research are all currently
              active members of the Center for Advanced 
Materials Processing (CAMP) located
              on the campus of Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY.  Each year 
of this
              three-year program, sixteen excellent undergraduate students will be brought on
              campus for a 
10-week intensive summer research experience.  The objectives of
              the REU Site program will be to: 1) 
provide qualified undergraduate students
              with an opportunity to conduct independent research; 2) 
demonstrate the
              process of conducting sound research and the importance of data analysis in
              solving 
advanced materials problems; and 3) develop a framework for dealing
              with professional ethics; and 4) 
create an interest in graduate school and
              awareness of its impact on having a successful career in the 
area of advanced
              materials.

The primary component of the program will be the completion of a
              research project in the area 
of materials for which small particles,
              colloidal media or surfaces play an important role in the 
processing or the
              properties of the final product.  Undergraduates will be assigned a
              self-contained 
aspect of a larger research project and will work with
              graduate students and faculty who belong to 
CAMP to complete their project. 
              Students will be matched with these faculty based on the interests and
              abilities of the students and the specific needs of the faculty.  Dissemination
              of their research results will be emphasized; all students will participate in
              research group meetings, write a report, and present their work at a
              university-wide undergraduate research symposium.  Several community-building
              activities designed to foster cohesiveness among the students and enhance their
              appreciation for belonging to a multi-cultural group will be included. 
              Assessment of the program will include continual evaluation and improvement of
              the proposed program to achieve the stated objectives.  Recruitment of
              qualified minority students from a nationwide search will be aggressively
              pursued through the office of minority student affairs.


