Title       : Service Diferentiation and Overload Control in Internet Servers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0296070

Award Number: 0296070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162842             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasant Mohapatra prasant@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The increasing volume and evolving types of Internet applications have
              been
demanding enhanced service from the Internet infrastructure. A
              significant amount of
work is in progress on the networking aspects of the
              Internet. To complement these
efforts, the Principal Investigator (PI)
              proposes to explore the issues at the server
level.  Specifically, this
              proposal addresses the support for service differentiation and 
overload
              control in Internet servers.

Support for service differentiation at the
              servers is necessary because of
two primary reasons. First, evolving
              applications like e-commerce and continuous media
transmission will be highly
              benefited by the differentiated service model. Second, the
adoption (most
              likely) of some form of service differentiation (at the router level)
in the
              next-generation Internet will demand the servers to reciprocate in
              their
services. The proposed research in this context will be approached in
              two steps: (a)
formulation of algorithms for service differentiation, and (b)
              evaluation of the
effectiveness and performance of service differentiating
              Internet servers.

Overloads at the servers are unavoidable because of the
              bursty and
unpredictable nature of the Internet traffic. Overload causes
              severe performance
degradation or even crashes the server. E-commerce
              businesses incur serious financial losses
because of the overloaded servers.
              The performance degradation of overloaded servers
may be greatly reduced by
              incorporating overload control mechanisms at the
servers. The PI proposes to
              address the design and implementation of overload control
mechanisms at the
              application level.

In general, the performance and functionality of the
              Internet servers will
be greatly enhanced by the adoption of service
              differentiation and overload control
mechanisms.

The outcome of the
              proposed research will have a broader impact on the
Internet infrastructure
              and on its users. Specifically, the proposed techniques will
be complementary
              to the efforts in the direction of the next-generation
Internet, and will be
              helpful for the e-commerce industry. They will also facilitate the
support of
              continuous media objects in the Internet. At the local level, the
research
              will have a positive educational impact on the students of Michigan
              State
University.




