Title       : Development of an Enhanced Pushover Procedure for Performance-Based Seismic
               Evaluation of Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0296210

Award Number: 0296210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sashi K. Kunnath skkunnath@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherif El-Tawil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1576,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award addresses the issue of inter-story drift and failure mechanisms that
              control the design of a structural system by carrying out a detailed and
              comprehensive study of both existing and evolving pushover methods. There have
              been several recent efforts to enhance FEMA-273 (1997) type procedures by
              indirectly incorporating high-mode effects in the evaluation process. While
              these new procedures have been shown to work in selective studies, a
              comprehensive evaluation of such techniques which identify their scope and
              limitations has yet to be conducted. The proposed evaluation will be carried
              out on a selected group of six existing buildings for which instrumented data
              from recent earthquakes is available. The six instrumented buildings will cover
              a practical range of building periods. The building models to be used in the
              analyses will be calibrated to measured response thereby ensuring the
              reliability of the ensuing evaluation exercises. These evaluations tasks will
              be conducted in two phases: the first phase will focus on the three FEMA-273
              procedures, and the second phase will deal with improved multi-mode and
              adaptive pushover techniques.

The importance of this project is to be
              recognized in light of the fact that the current state-of-practice in seismic
              engineering has begun to accept pushover analyses as a possible next step in
              the advancement of performance-based seismic engineering (PBSE). Until such
              time that routine nonlinear time-history analyses can be carried out in a
              design office, the need to develop simplified yet reliable static procedures is
              critical to the advancement of PBSE.


