Title       : CAREER: Indicators of Sustainability: Science and Democracy in the Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0296204

Award Number: 0296204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark A. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Wisc Gen Admin Of
	      1720 Van Hise Hall
	      Madison, WI  537061559    608/262-1234

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1094,1187,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              For much of the past century, policy-relevant measures of human welfare and
              well-being have focused on national indices of economic wealth and social
              demographics. In recent years, numerous institutions have begun instead to use
              indicators of sustainable development so as to incorporate society's dependence
              on nature into economic and social policies. In the process, these institutions
              are transforming fundamental aspects of the relationship between scientific
              measurement and democratic values. The change marks a growing concern for the
              sustainability of coupled human and natural systems on global scales and shifts
              the locus of scientific measurement from the nation state to a host of actors
              in society, including NGOs, industry, local communities, international
              institutions, and expert communities. 

With this career development award,
              the PI proposes to study the construction and policy uptake of indicators of
              sustainable development as a site for investigating how science and governance
              change as people grapple with the challenges of globalization and ecological
              degradation. The PI will develop an integrated research and educational program
              at Iowa State University. The research component will compare how international
              organizations, the U.S. and the U.K. put together and use indicators of
              sustainable development in three areas of environmental policymaking: natural
              resource depletion; ecosystem services; and agriculture and food security. The
              educational component will include a graduate training program and
              undergraduate curriculum development focused on science and technology as human
              institutions and the readjustments of political concepts-such as agency,
              authority, identity, sovereignty, and values-that accompany scientific and
              technological change.

The program established using this award will
              contribute to theoretical developments in the emerging field of science and
              technology studies and to their uptake into other social science disciplines
              and into scientific and policy practice. In addition, the program will
              contribute to the applied interdisciplinary field of the human dimensions of
              global environmental change as part of Iowa State University's new initiative
              in science, technology, and public policy for sustainable development. 

