Title       : Highly Accurate Computational Methods for Wave-Type Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0296100

Award Number: 0296100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191211             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej J. Safjan safjan@aero.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research project deals with a development of highly  accurate approximate
              solution techniques for wave-type  phenomena characterized by linear hyperbolic
              equations.  Potential applications include, but are not limited to  numerical
              simulation of propagation of acoustic, elastic,  and electromagnetic waves, as
              well as to analysis of various  coupled systems. Several features of this
              research are  significant. For example, high-order radiating boundary 
              conditions are critical for treating unbounded domain  problems, and split
              boundary operators promise high accuracy  while providing  a posteriori
              indicator of the error  introduce by domain truncation. High-Order Temporal 
              Approximations including new, implicit, unconditionally  stable TG
              (Taylor-Galerkin) schemes promise high accuracy  while balancing in an optimal
              way the variable high-order  spatial approximations. Also, hp-data structures
              and  adaptive methods involve date structure in which the mesh  size h and the
              spectral order p of a finite element  approximation of a spatial variation of
              the dependent  variables can be varied throughout the (spatial) mesh. If  these
              parameters can be orchestrated in an optimal way,  exponential convergence can
              be attained, meaning that highly  accurate results are  possible with few
              degrees of freedom.  Smart algorithms are developed in that by monitoring
              errors  in the hp-TG schemes and in radiating boundary operators,  automatic
              changes in solution algorithms can be introduced.  The research yields highly
              accurate computational methods  having a potential of reliably resolving the
              fine-scale and  large-scale features of scattering and radiation phenomena 
              needed in advanced designs.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
