Title       : Folding Mechanisms of Dihydrofolate Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0296053

Award Number: 0296053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. R. Matthews c.robert.matthews@umassmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-0011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Matthews
MCB 0081076

The overall goal of this project is to understand the
              mechanism by which the amino acid sequence of a protein directs its rapid and
              efficient folding to the native conformation.  Biophysical and protein
              engineering techniques will be employed to study a set of homologous proteins
              that have low sequence similarity but nearly identical three-dimensional
              structures.  Dihydrofolate reductases (DHFR) from Escherichia coli (ecDHFR),
              Lactobacillus casei (lcDHFR) and human (hDHFR) sources all belong to the
              alpha/beta sheet class of proteins and contain an embedded nucleoside-binding
              domain (NBD) that appears to play a critical role in folding.  Small angle
              x-ray scattering and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) will be used
              to probe for residual structure in urea-denatured ecDHFR.  Mutational analysis
              will be used to test for the contribution of hydrophobic clusters to the
              residual structure and to their role in the formation of parallel folding
              channels previously identified in the ecDHFR folding reaction.  Microsecond
              folding reactions will be monitored by interfacing FRET technology to an
              ultrafast continuous-flow mixing system.  Mutational analysis will be used to
              test the hypothesis that alternative docking modes between the loop domain and
              NBD are responsible for the parallel channel folding mechanism.  Systematic
              fluorescence and circular dichroism studies will reveal the folding mechanism
              of lcDHFR.  Comparison with the mechanisms for ecDHFR and hDHFR will test the
              hypothesis that folding mechanisms of homologous proteins are better conserved
              than the amino acid sequences.  Because the NBD is one of the top ten motifs
              found in all three super-kingdoms, it is expected that the insights obtained
              from these studies of the folding mechanisms of a set of DHFRs will be
              applicable to the folding of a large class of proteins.

An understanding of
              the mechanism by which the sequence of a protein dictates its folding pathway
              and, ultimately, structure would have a major impact on the prediction of the
              three-dimensional structure from sequence, on the de novo design of proteins,
              and on the production of protein products by the biotechnology industry.  This
              research will provide valuable instruction in experimental design, modern
              biophysical and protein chemistry techniques, and computer-based data analysis
              to undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral research
              associates.

