Title       : The New Politics of Land Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2001  
File        : a0296121

Award Number: 0296121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth R. Gerber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Land use politics dominates modern American local governments. Scholarship
              suggests that the traditional process of zoning property cultivates a "growth
              machine" coalition of developers, businesses, and elected representatives. In
              recent years, citizens, environmentalists, and other interests have
              increasingly turned to the institutions of direct democracy, especially voter
              initiatives, to counter pro-growth interests. Initiatives are laws or
              ordinances that are proposed and decided directly by citizens. They are
              institutional alternatives to traditional zoning practices, and are intended to
              shift the balance of political power over a community's land use decisions.
              

Given the prevalence of land use issues in the day-to-day business of
              American local governments, and the economic importance of their decisions,
              political scientists have paid surprisingly little attention to the politics of
              land use. We know very little about the consequences of the institutional
              choices made by participants in the land use process. This research advances
              our understanding of the new politics of land use by constructing and analyzing
              several new datasets on the dynamics of local land use initiatives and their
              consequences for development policy.  

Land use politics also provides a
              valuable lens through which to better understand a number of other important
              political science problems. At the heart of land use politics is a conflict
              over what interests in a community (e.g., landowners, community organizations,
              current residents, elected representatives) have the right to make decisions
              about the usage of private property. Understanding how these various interests
              interact, the effects of political institutions such as ballot initiatives on
              their interactions and influence, and the ultimate decisions communities make
              about land use and property rights are key motivations for this study.

The
              research has two major components. The first component is a study of the
              political dynamics of recent land use initiatives. The methodology involves
              first constructing a comprehensive list of land use initiatives in medium and
              large sized US cities since 1990. From this list, a sample of recent
              initiatives are analyzed to test hypotheses about what types of groups can use
              initiatives to promote their political interests, and what factors lead to
              their success. The research also involves several case studies to further
              explore the contours of the process by which private interest groups negotiate
              public land use policy. Together, these analyses will allow for the extension
              and refinement of existing theories of interest group influence. 

The second
              component considers the consequences of political institutions on land use
              policies and outcomes. Building upon a two-stage model of land use policy
              formation, this component estimates, first, the factors that lead proponents to
              use land use initiatives, and second, the policy consequences of those
              initiatives. The analyses  compares land use policy and outcomes on a number of
              dimensions in two sets of communities: those that are likely to regulate
              property usage primarily through traditional zoning ordinances, and those that
              are likely to use initiatives. This two-stage analysis assesses both whether
              policies differ when they are made under each institutional regime, conditional
              upon a community using the initiative process, and the representational
              consequences of these differences (i.e., what types of interests do they
              favor). 

Together, these two components provide a clearer understanding of
              when and how interest groups influence public policy outcomes, and the
              representational consequences of political institutions such as voter
              initiatives, in the important area of land use policy.  This dataset will be of
              significant value to others interested in this important topic.

