Title       : GLOBEC: Krill Distribution and Abundance in Winter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0296097

Award Number: 0296097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meng Zhou meng.zhou@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics (U.S. GLOBEC) program has the goal of
              understanding and ultimately predicting how populations of marine animal
              species respond to natural and anthropogenic changes in climate.   Research in
              the Southern Ocean (SO) indicates strong coupling between climatic processes
              and ecosystem dynamics via the annual formation and destruction of sea ice. 
              The Southern Ocean GLOBEC Program (SO GLOBEC) will investigate the dynamic
              relationship between physical processes and ecosystem responses through
              identification of critical parameters that affect the distribution, abundance
              and population dynamics of target species.  The overall goals of the SO GLOBEC
              program are to elucidate shelf circulation processes and their effect on sea
              ice formation and krill distribution, and to examine the factors which govern
              krill survivorship and availability to higher trophic levels,  including
              penguins, seals and whales. The focus of the U.S. contribution to the
              international SO GLOBEC program will be on winter processes. This component
              will focus on juvenile and adult krill and mesozooplankton prey distribution,
              using acoustic techniques. Studies will be conducted and krill shrinkage and
              mortality rates as well as krill aggregation behavior. The results will be
              analyzed in coordination with components involved in physical and biological
              models. The result of the integrated SO GLOBEC program will be to improve the
              predictability of living marine resources, especially with respect to local and
              global climatic shifts.
