Title       : Flagellar Motor Protein Interactions and Links to Flagellar Gene Expression and
               Flagellar Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a0296079

Award Number: 0296079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna L. Marykwas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. Passmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Motile bacteria such as Escherichia coli swim by means of multiple
              propeller-like appendages called flagella that are located on the bacterial
              cell surface. Each rotating E. coli flagellum has at its base a proton-fueled
              motor that operates alternately clockwise (CW) or counterclockwise (CCW). The
              motor's ability to switch between these two rotational states controls the
              cell's swimming behavior. The CW/CCW switch is comprised of three proteins:
              FliG, FliM and FliN. The two-hybrid system for the identification of
              protein-protein interactions has been successfully used to reveal direct
              interactions between components of the switch (FliG/FliM, FliM/FliM, FliM/FliN)
              and between a switch protein (FliG) and the structural protein of the motor's
              MS ring (FliF). Regions of proteins important for several of these interactions
              were identified by mutational analysis and form the basis for a molecular model
              for motor architecture.
The switch proteins are multifunctional: they are
              required for flagellar assembly, for torque generation, and for switching. They
              are expressed within an ordered hierarchy of flagellar genes, suggesting that
              they might also be involved in gene control. Novel switch protein interactions
              have been identified (in two-hybrid screens) that might elucidate the nature of
              these multiple functions: 1) the switch protein FliM interacts with a component
              of the cell's protein export machinery (GspE) involved in the assembly of a
              second class of cell surface structures, the type IV pili present in some
              strains of E. coli, 2) the switch protein FliG interacts with a transcription
              factor (H-NS) involved both in flagellum-specific gene expression and in
              pilus-specific gene expression. Null alleles of hns are nonflagellate, but
              motility (and therefore flagellation) can be restored by genetic suppression.
              Preliminary studies indicate that E. coli missing much of the gspE operon
              likewise have a motility defect that reverts readily.
To better understand the
              specific roles of the FliG/FliM, FliG/H-NS and the FliM/GspE interactions in E.
              coli flagellar biogenesis, several type of experiments will be done:  1) to
              verify and characterize the interactions biochemically (by co-sedimentation and
              affinity chromatography) and genetically (by interaction-defective mutation
              suppression analysis), 2) to further examine the in vivo relevance of the
              FliM/GspE interaction by constructing defined null alleles of gspE and
              assessing the effects of such nulls on flagellar assembly and function, 3) to
              test interaction-defective mutations in each of these interacting pairs in E.
              coli for their effects on flagellum assembly, for their effects on
              flagellum-specific gene expression when appropriate, and for pleiotropic
              effects when possible, 4) to characterize suppressors of the hns and gspE
              motility defects. Detailed studies of these and other motor protein
              interactions should contribute to our understanding of how structural proteins
              of bacterial surface organelles, such as flagella and pili, are expressed,
              exported and assembled, and whether proteins used for both flagellum production
              and pilus production serve to coordinate the two.

