Title       : Structure and Function of the Dbl Homology Domain of Human Beta-PIX, a Guanine
               Nucleotide Exchange Factor for the Rho GTPases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0296161

Award Number: 0296161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 31,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Rosen mrosen@biochem.swmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rosen
MCB 9817376

1. Technical

GTPases in the Rho family regulate
              cytoskeletal structure,
adhesion, motility, and gene expression in cells.  A
              key unresolved issue
in Rho-family signaling is how the GTPases are activated
              by upstream
guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) in the Dbl-family. 
              This
proposal describes structural and functional analysis of a
              recently
discovered Dbl-family GEF, human PIXB (hPIXB).  Initial stages of the
              work
will focus on structure determination of the Dbl-homology (DH) domain
              of
hPIXB by NMR spectroscopy.  The large size and poor aliphatic
              chemical
shift dispersion of the domain will necessitate use of selective
              methyl
group and aromatic labeling strategies to obtain sidechain chemical
              shift
assignments and a global fold of the domain.  The work will represent
              the
first application of these strategies to a protein of unknown fold, and
              as
such will provide a critical test of their utility in
              structure
determination of larger proteins by NMR.  The structure will
              facilitate
amino acid sequence analyses across the Dbl family, providing
              important
clues regarding mechanisms of catalysis and GTPase recognition by
              DH
domains.  The structure, along with NMR mapping of the GTPase
              interface,
will then guide mutagenesis experiments to identify the roles of
              specific
amino acids in mediating GEF catalysis.  Comparisons with structural
              and
functional data on other GEF domains will then reveal general principles
              of
nucleotide exchange catalysis.  Finally, the role of the plekstrin
              homology
(PH) domain, found immediately C-terminal to all DH domains, in
              regulating
GTPase binding and GEF activity will be examined biochemically
              and
spectroscopically.  The results will explain whether the hPIXB PH
              domain
functions simply as a membrane-targeting sequence or as an
              allosteric
regulator of DH domain GEF activity.  This information will
              have
implications regarding the regulation of DH proteins and mechanisms
              of
GTPase activation in the cell.


2. Non-technical

The Rho GTPases
              represent an important class of proteins that
transmit signals controlling
              cell shape, adhesion and movement.  These
molecules cycle between an inactive
              GDP-bound state and an active GTP-bound
state.  When complexed with GTP, but
              not GDP, they have strong affinity for
selected target proteins, and binding
              to these molecules constitutes
transmission of information within the cell. 
              Guanine nucleotide exchange
factors (GEFs) in the Dbl family are enzymes that
              catalyze release of GDP
and rebinding of GTP, thus serving to increase the
              cellular population of
activated Rho proteins.  This study focuses on
              understanding the molecular
mechanisms of Dbl protein activity toward the Rho
              GTPases. Initial work
deals with determination of the three-dimensional
              structure of one Dbl
family member, hPIXB, using nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy (NMR).
In addition to providing important functional information,
              these studies
will also provide a platform for development of new strategies
              for
structure determination by NMR.  This work will be followed by
              biochemical
studies of hPIXB mutants that will enable identification of
              individual
amino acids in the protein that are important for activity. 
              Finally, there
is evidence that the activities of the Dbl proteins may be
              regulated in an
intramolecular fashion through interactions of the catalytic
              domain with an
adjacent regulatory module. Spectroscopic and biochemical
              assays will be
sued to probe the nature and function of this interaction. 
              Together, these
studies will explain many of the biochemical and structural
              mechanisms used
to regulate the level of activated Rho family GTPases in the
              cell.

