Title       : Econometrics Using Spatial Models of Interdependence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0296209

Award Number: 0296209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 2,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122120             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy G. Conley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is supported because it contributes new methodologies for analyzing
              large cross-section time series data and it applies these methodologies to
              important substantive problems in macroeconomics and industrial organization.  
              The common theme of the research is the use of spatial models to put structure
              on cross sectional and panel data.  The notion of space here is not limited to
              physical locations but may be characterized by other economic distance metrics.
              This research develops models for describing the dynamics of large-dimension
              vector time series.   Examples of this type of data include quarterly
              observations on sector specific variables and weekly price data for many retail
              firms in a region. In situations like these, data will be dependent across time
              and agents. In addition, there are too few degrees of freedom to permit
              unrestricted time series estimation; restrictions are needed to make progress. 
              Typical restrictions model comovement across agents as being due to small
              number of factors or limit the number of interactions a priori. This proposal
              describes an alternative approach that uses patterns in agents' relative
              locations to model patterns in dynamic correlations of their series. This
              method is well suited to several applications where it is interesting to relate
              dynamic correlations in the data to measures of economic relationships captured
              by distances. This proposal contains proposed research on two such applications
              in macroeconomics and industrial organization.

The macroeconomic application
              in this proposal aims to characterize the dynamic correlation properties of
              sector-level variables and their relation to input-output structures. Several
              important models of business cycles rely on the presence of strong
              intersectoral linkages to account for fluctuations. These linkages can be
              quantified using this econometric method, so it can very useful in assessing
              the plausibility of these models. For example, the project constructs economic
              distances that measure linkages due to complementarity of outputs and
              similarity of technology. Preliminary evidence suggests that there is
              substantial comovement in sectoral variables related to these metrics.

The
              industrial organization application in this proposal is a study of the nature
              of competition between supermarkets. Unusually rich data on consumers and firms
              permit the estimation of a structural consumer choice model that explicitly
              considers interactions between consumers' demographics, income, and physical
              locations. The project uses these consumer model estimates to construct an
              appropriate economic metric between stores to use in studying their spatial
              competition. The estimates of these endogenous economic distances will comprise
              a component in a fully specified model of competition between these firms that
              accounts for both spatial and intertemporal dynamics.

