Title       : RUI: From Exclusion to Belonging: Citizen-State Relations Within the Salvadoran
               Diaspora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0296050

Award Number: 0296050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan B. Coutin scoutin@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research studies Salvadoran immigrants' relationships to the United
              States and El Salvador from the 1980s to the present.  Questions examined
              include: 1. How unauthorized migrants survive disenfranchisement;  2. Why
              receiving states sometimes legalize undocumented aliens; and 
3. Why sending
              states sometimes encourage expatriate citizens to remain distant but loyal.  To
              address these questions, the proposed research will examine the rationales for
              these policy changes, the ways that accounts of policy changes position
              migrants vis a vis each nation, and the effects of policy changes on migrants
              themselves.
Research will be conducted in three sites: Los Angeles, which is
              home to approximately half of the U.S. Salvadoran population; Washington, D.C.,
              where Salvadoran activists meet with U.S. immigration policymakers; and San
              Salvador, the Salvadoran capital, where Salvadoran officials, politicians and
              activists devise policies regarding expatriate Salvadorans. Research will
              consist of interviews with U.S. and Salvadoran policymakers, activists who have
              attempted to influence policymakers, and the Salvadoran immigrants who are the
              targets of policies. Between 100-150 individuals will be interviewed.
              Interviews will elicit interviewees' accounts of policy changes, focusing on
              explanations for policy shifts, points of controversy, the strategies and
              alliances that made changes possible, the limitations of current policies, and
              the possible effects of policy changes on the United States, El Salvador, and
              migrants themselves. Analyzing these accounts will reveal how and whether
              unauthorized migrants' strategies for surviving disenfranchisement can in turn
              lead to some form of enfranchisement in both their countries of origin and of
              residence.


