Title       : RARE: Reconfigurable Computing via the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0296083

Award Number: 0296083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60723              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clay S. Gloster, Jr. cgloster@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel J. Ducoste  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Frequently, applications that require several hours to a few weeks to execute on
              typical desktop computers are ported to supercomputers or large compute
              servers. Not only is this option costly, but often the entire program must be
              rewritten to effectively utilize multiple processors and other resources
              available on these systems. Reconfigurable computing (RC) systems can offer an
              advantage over this option since RC systems have been demonstrated that deliver
              performance approaching that of a supercomputer at a fraction of the cost.
              However, not only could it take several months to complete an RC system design,
              but RC system developers must be trained in both hardware design and software
              development.

The research project will develop a Remote Adaptive-Computing
              REsource on the Internet (RARE) that will assist scientists and engineers in
              solving problems that require excessive execution time when solved on a typical
              desktop computer. RARE comprises a comprehensive set of routines that have been
              optimized for high performance on a reconfigurable computer. A novel
              client/server program interface, developed as a part of this research effort,
              will manage the loading and execution of user process requests. The user
              interface to the resource consists of a library of functions and procedures
              that perform typical scientific/engineering computations. The goal of the
              project is to speedup local and remote versions of scientific data processing
              applications by orders of magnitude at reduced costs. Users of the system need
              only call a local or remote procedure that executes the application on the
              reconfigurable computing resource. A novel feature is that data is sent to RARE
              from a remote site, processed on hardware that has been optimized to perform a
              particular task significantly faster than a typical desktop computer, and
              transmitted back to the user via the Internet.

Recent experiments verify
              that remote hardware versions of several algorithms (implemented on a
              reconfigurable computer) can complete execution significantly faster than
              logical software versions of the same algorithm (implemented on a typical
              desktop computer). This statement is true in spite of the communication
              overhead that is present due to data transmission via the Internet.
              

Applications in the area of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) are prime
              candidates for this resource since many of these computer simulation models
              require enormous execution times. Typically, CFD simulations require the
              solution of a large number of simultaneous equations or extensive computation
              of derivatives and/or integrals. One such CFD model, developed at NC State,
              requires two weeks to run on a desktop computer and this model is only a subset
              of the complete system simulation. Software profiling reports obtained during
              execution of these models demonstrate that more than 70% of the total execution
              time is spent in a small number of atomic procedures. Hence, these applications
              are the primary focus of this research project.


