Title       : CAREER/RUI: Genetic Basis of Sperm Precedence and Sex-Specific Fitness in Fruit
               Flies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0296177

Award Number: 0296177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 31,  2000  
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly A. Hughes kahughes@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,9178,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9734008  Hughes         This project builds upon previous research indicating
              that genetic variation for male fertility in Drosophila melanogaster is due to
              one or a few major-effect genes on the third chromosome.  Other fitness traits
              in fruit flies (female fecundity, male mating success, larval viability) seem
              to be affected by variation at many genes of small or moderate effect, so male
              fertility is unusual in its genetic determination.  An experiment will be
              conducted to map genes affecting male fertility to specific locations on the
              chromosome.  It is expected that this mapping will eventually lead to   the
              identification of genes causing variation in the trait.  Measurement of
              specific properties of these genes (e.g., average effect, dominance and
              epistasis) will provide explicit tests of models of the causes of variation. 
              Another experiment involves measuring genetic and environmental   contributions
              to variation for sex-specific fitness.  One of the goals of  this experiment is
              to determine whether genes that have beneficial effects on one sex, but
              deleterious effects on the other (sexually-antagonistic effects) are involved
              in the maintenance of genetic variation within   populations.  The second
              primary emphasis of this project is educational. Undergraduate students will be
              involved in every phase of the research effort.  In addition, new courses and
              course modules that exploit molecular genetic techniques will be introduced
              into the undergraduate curriculum.       Populations of organisms, including
              humans, are genetically diverse for traits related to reproduction,
              developmental rate, lifespan, and disease resistance.  Because they largely
              determine the lifetime reproductive output of an organism, these life-history
              traits should be subject to very strong forces that eliminate variation.  Yet
              most populations retain substantial variation for these traits.  One of the
              main goals of population genetics is to gain an understanding of the forces  
              responsible for maintaining this variat ion.  Genetic diversity can have a
              direct impact on human health and longevity (when it occurs in humans or in
              human pathogens), on the productivity of agricultural systems (when it occurs
              in agriculturally important species), and on the risks of extinction for
              threatened and endangered species (when it occurs in these species, their
              pathogens, or their competitors).  This proposal describes two related projects
              designed to investigate the genetic basis of life-history traits, and to test
              specific theoretical models of the maintenance of   genetic diversity.  The
              educational emphasis of this project is focused on undergraduate researchers,
              and the introduction of new molecular techniques into the classroom.
