Title       : U.S.-Hungary Koros Regional Archaeological Research Project: Understanding the
               Neolithic-Copper Age Transition in the Southeastern Carpathian Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2001   
File        : a0296015

Award Number: 0296015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53009              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Parkinson wparkins@mailer.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Yerkes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Hungarian archaeological research project involves William Parkinson
              and Richard Yerkes of Ohio State University and Attila Gyucha of the Munkacsy
              Mihaly Museum in Bekescsaba.  Their intent is to examine socioeconomic
              organization and change that occurred during the late Neolithic to Early Copper
              Age period on the Great Hungarian Plain. The collaborative work involves
              excavations at two Early Copper Age settlements (Veszto 20 and Korosladany 14)
              located in the Koros River Valley. Results are expected to contribute to our
              basic understanding of social organization in "middle range" or "tribal"
              societies and to anthropological models for comparing development of pastoral
              economic systems. 

Together the Hungarian-U.S. team plans to explore the
              organization of specific sites within their local context to gain a regional
              framework for interpreting findings in the Carpathian Basin.  Efforts at each
              site will feature: 1) size and spatial organization of settlement sites, 2)
              economic organization, 3) paleoenvironmental reconstruction, and 4) chronology
              and social interaction. The insights gained should add to a specific body of
              multi-disciplinary regional work that can be applied to models for trajectories
              of social change in the later prehistory of the Great Hungarian Plain. While
              regionally specific, the results of this research are also expected to help
              refine models for small-scale, semi-sedentary agricultural, autonomous village
              societies elsewhere in the world.


This international archaeological
              research project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
              knowledge by enabling experts in the Untied States and Central Europe to
              combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
              mutual interest and competence. 
