Title       : Evolutionary History of Subfossil Lemurs as Determined by Ancient DNA Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0296138

Award Number: 0296138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne D. Yoder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this research is to derive a molecular evolutionary history
              of Madagascar's extinct giant lemurs using DNA from the maternally-inherited
              mitochondrion (mtDNA).  The subfossil lemurs represent extremes in body size
              and morphology and are thus evolutionary enigma.  All of the species to be
              included in the study have been extinct for approximately 1000 years, leaving
              only their skeletalremains for scholarly analysis.  Recent studies have shown
              that if the preservational environment has been favorable, DNA often persists
              for many thousands of years and can be retrieved for phylogenetic analysis. 
              These "ancient DNA" techniques will be employed to generate mtDNA sequence data
              from two protein-coding genes (cytochrome b and cytochrome oxidase subunit II)
              and from the mitochondrial control region (D-loop).  The acquired sequences
              will be analyzed both as separate data sets and as a combined mtDNA data set. 
              As a long-term goal, the genetic data will be combined with morphological data
              and analyzed with maximum parsimony.  This strategy for phylogenetic resolution
              has proven to be highly informative for extant Malagasy primates and thus
              promises similar resolution for the extinct taxa.  

The results of the study
              will be significant for reconstructing the biogeographic history of Madagascar
              as well as for understanding morphological and ecological evolution in one of
              the world's most diverse assemblages of mammals.  Moreover, the technical
              challenges and successes specific to this study will add to the growing body of
              knowledge germane to ancient DNA methods.  Preliminary activity has
              demonstrated that intrinsic DNA, though highly-fragmented, exists in sufficient
              quantities to be extracted, amplified, and sequenced in many if not all
              subfossil lemurs. The legitimacy of these data has been confirmed in an
              independent laboratory.  Most significantly, the promise of clear evolutionary
              resolution is evident from analysis of these preliminary data.



