Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY--INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Models and meta-networks for
               interdisciplinary research in biodiversity risk assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0296181

Award Number: 0296181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96036              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Nyhus p_nyhus@fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gayl D. Ness  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Lacy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip S. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frances Westley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      P O BOX 3003
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1366,1608,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Growing evidence indicates that activities associated with our increasingly
              urban-industrial society are causing global environment change and may not be
              sustainable.  One of the major impacts is the decline of many animal and plant
              species.  An interdisciplinary group of biologists and social scientists will
              work together to better understand how roads, disease, pollution, war, hunting,
              and other activities affect the long-term survival of endangered species. 
              Computer models and other research tools will be developed in a series of
              workshops to better understand and explain these relationships.  An important
              goal is to build an international network to encourage future research and
              application of these new tools and concepts. 
	
This project has national and
              international significance. To conserve the world's most threatened species it
              is necessary to understand how they can survive in landscapes dominated by
              people.  Historically, biologists studying plants and animals have not often
              worked closely with social scientists.  This project is a valuable opportunity
              for researchers from different disciplines to share their expertise and to
              develop tools that can be used to create effective and sustainable conservation
              strategies for endangered species in the United States and around the world. 

