Title       : EPSCoR: South Carolina Science and Technology Infrastructure Improvement
               Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0296165

Award Number: 0296165
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry E. Druffel druffel@scra.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard M. Crawley  (Principal Investigator former)
              Peter W. Kalivas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Latour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. Little  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Bruce Dunlap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Carolina Research Au
	      PO Box 12025
	      Columbia, SC  29211    803/799-4070

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will enhance the research infrastructure in the state of South
              Carolina's three major academic research institutions.  The three universities
              will focus on faculty development activities through the recruitment of
              thirteen tenure-track positions.  The University of South Carolina will
              diversify their core of nanoscience faculty in the Department of Chemistry and
              Biochemistry with six of seven new hires to be made outside the department in
              the areas of nanobiology and nanoscale photonics, electronics, and chemical
              engineering.  The Medical University of South Carolina plans to transition
              their Signal Transduction program into new related areas by making four new
              hires in the area of molecular and cellular basis of neuroplasticity.   Clemson
              University will initiate a materials based biotechnology program by integrating
              the materials science and engineering strengths within their College of
              Engineering and Science and the biotechnology strengths within their College of
              Agriculture, Forestry and Life Sciences through the addition of two new faculty
              in cell biology and tissue engineering.  In addition, the project will support
              initiatives involving collaborative research with minority institutions, summer
              research programs for undergraduates, teachers and high school students, and
              industrial research traineeships for graduate students.

The state's strategy
              to effect infrastructure improvements has as its goal the establishment of
              specialized centers of research, poised to compete nationally, in partnership
              with other institutions or the private sector, for individual investigator
              proposals, program projects, shared instrumentation, research training awards,
              and center grants.  The state's goal is consistent with the NSF EPSCoR program
              goal to increase the national competitiveness of the researchers in the EPSCoR
              states. 

