Title       : CAREER: MASSIVE REPLICATION OF RF/MICROWAVE MEMS PASSIVES MODULES
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  2001   
File        : a0296018

Award Number: 0296018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 18,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeong-Bong Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              0093549
Lee

An integrated research and education program that is centered on
              the development of novel RF/microwave MEMS passive components and a method of
              their integration onto circuit containing substrates is proposed.

Since the
              demand for wireless communication is ever increasing, very small communication
              channel spacings are desirable to ensure increased capacity in limited
              bandwidth.  High performance passive elements are key components of wireless
              communication systems.  Traditionally, off-the-chip passive components were
              used for RF/microwave applications mainly due to their high performance. 
              However, they are bulky and power consuming.  MEMS technology enables
              innovative high performance integrated RF/microwave passive elements that were
              not possible by traditional technologies.  South's only synchrotron radiation
              source, the Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices is located and
              belongs to the PI's institution.  Using such unique facility, high performance
              novel high aspect ratio RF/microwave passive components will be developed by
              LIGA and/or LIGA-like techniques.  They include 3-D on-chip solenoid inductors,
              tunable capacitors, microstrip lines, coplanar waveguides.  Unconventional high
              aspect ratio microstructures could yield high quality factor, high coupling
              efficiency passive components, and 3-D integration which will save precious
              real estate in many portable wireless communication system applications. 
              Massively parallel passive component transfer techniques using plastic
              replication techniques will be developed to integrate high performance
              RF/microwave MEMS passive element modules onto circuit containing substrates in
              low cost mass production manner.  Wafer-level flip-chip assembly technology
              will also be developed to integrate multiple numbers of high performance
              RF/microwave components.

The educational component of the proposal is
              centered on the development of web-based interactive educational materials for
              MEMS education.  Specifically, Java Applets for MEMS fabrication processes and
              modeling of a variety of MEMS sensors will be developed and they will be
              disseminated through the internet.  Such educational resources will provide
              active interfaces for students to learn MEMS technology.  Development of a
              senior/graduate laboratory class with collaborators in other departments is
              also planned.  Such class will give students hands-on design and fabrication
              experience on LIGA and/or LIGA-like MEMS technology for multidisciplinary
              applications.  Development of an industrial short course with collaborators in
              other departments is also planned to give participants first-hand processing
              experience on LIGA-based MEMS technology and its applications to RF MEMS and
              biomedical MEMS (BioMEMS).  An extensive use of computer-aided modeling will be
              introduced to traditional instructional courses in graduate and undergraduate
              levels to enhance the quality of the classes and prepare the students to meet
              today's leading edge industrial needs.








