Title       : Water Economy of Neo-Tropical Savanna Ecosystems: The Impact of Hydraulic Lift,
               Partitioning of Soil Water and Changes in Land Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0296174

Award Number: 0296174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo H. Goldstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick C. Meinzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

00-75235
Goldstein

Water economy of neo-tropical savanna
              ecosystems: The impact of hydraulic lift, partitioning of soil water and
              changes in land use

Roots can directly affect the distribution and
              availability of water in the soil profile by hydraulically lifting water from
              deep soil layers to shallow soil layers where water may be limiting. Hydraulic
              lift can have a significant impact on the water cycle of dry tropical savannas,
              because deeply rooted trees can lift water to within 1 m of the surface where
              herbaceous plants are rooted. Current land-use practices are reducing the
              abundance of trees in Brazilian savannas, the second most extensive ecosystem
              in South America after the rain forests. Tree removal, and the associated
              reduction in hydraulic lift, may result in a substantial fraction of the deep
              soil water and nutrients being lost from ecosystem recirculation processes.
              This study will characterize the regulation of water in Brazilian savannas and
              evaluate the impact of hydraulic lift on the distribution of water in the soil,
              on total evapotranspiration and on partitioning of water consumption among
              woody and herbaceous plants. The results of this study will provide new
              insights on the nature of interactions between woody and herbaceous plants and
              on the consequences of current land management practices in tropical savanna
              ecosystems.

