Title       : Antarctic Network of Unattended Broadband Integrated Seismometers (ANUBIS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0296200

Award Number: 0296200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sridhar Anandakrishnan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                OPP 9615147  Anandakrishnan    Abstract    The Antarctic crust and mantle
              composition and geometry are  poorly known.  The primary methods for studying
              the crust, upper  mantle, and the deeper asthenosphere is interpretation of
              seismic  data; either OactiveO through use of explosives or OpassiveO  using
              natural sources and interpreting various earthquake phase  arrival times and
              amplitudes.  Integrating passive and active  seismology can result in efficient
              use of resources to produce  detailed images of the lithosphere.  This award
              supports  development of a passive seismic network for the Antarctic  interior.
                 The Antarctic is a gaping hole in the rapidly improving field of  global
              seismic imaging and tomography.  On this huge continent  (surface area of 14
              million square km) there are only eight  broadband seismic observatories. 
              Further, with the exception of  South Pole, all of those stations are along the
              margins of the  continent and none are in the West Antarctic.  By contrast,
              there  are 200 permanent stations worldwide in the FDSN (Federation of  Digital
              Seismograph Networks) and on the order of a thousand in  national networks not
              yet integrated into the FDSN.  There have  been innumerable temporary
              deployments (1 to 5 years) through  PASSCAL (Program for Array Seismic Studies
              of the Continental  Lithosphere), but which have rarely been attempted in the 
              Antarctic.  The obvious reason for this lack of data from the  interior is the
              need to supply power continuously and store data  on-site during the dark
              winter months.    This project will develop and deploy eleven long term
              broadband  seismic stations on the continent itself.  Because 98% of the 
              continent is ice covered, these stations will be installed at the  surface of
              the ice sheet.  The body-wave data thus recorded from  regional and teleseismic
              earthquakes can be analyzed at each  station for local crustal thickness,
              lamination, Poisson's ratio  (a measure of crustal composition), crust and
              mantle anisotropy  (a measure of  current and former stress regimes), and 
              identification of rift zones and crustal block boundaries.  In  addition, the
              data from all the stations (including the existing  peripheral ones) can be
              used for seismic tomographic analysis to  detail lateral variations in these
              properties.    Six of the stations will be installed at existing Automated 
              Geophysical Observatory sites (in East Antarctica) which will  provide heat and
              power for the data loggers.  The remaining five  stations will be in the West
              Antarctic and will be powered and  heated by wind turbines during the austral
              winter.  The wind-  powered stations are an experimental undertaking that will
              extend  our capabilities for installing seismic stations anywhere in the 
              Antarctic.    The stations on the periphery of the continent (and other 
              stations in the high southern latitudes---most notably the  stations of the
              French GEOSCOPE network) have been used to  measure surface wave dispersion
              functions for different paths  that cross the Antarctic.  These data have been
              successful in  measuring mantle properties, but the resolution (both horizontal
               and vertical) achievable by this technique is limited compared to  body-wave
              analysis.  Nonetheless, this is a valuable existing  tool that would be greatly
              enhanced by the presence of data from  within the continent that will be
              available after successful  implementation of the unattended seismometers under
              this project.
