Title       : Energy Coupling in Quinol Oxidases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0296198

Award Number: 0296198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353604             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy W. Larsen rlarsen@chuma1.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9904713
Larsen
One of the central questions in the biophysics of respiration
              is the mechanism of redox linked proton translocation associated with specific
              respiratory enzymes in aerobic organisms.  Since defects in the respiratory
              chain can result in lower energy production it is important to uncover the
              mechanism through which the various respiratory enzymes couple the oxidation of
              foodstuffs to cellular energy production. It has now been shown that cytochrome
              c reductase (CcR) and various terminal oxidases (cytochrome c oxidase (CcO) in
              mammals, and the bacterial quinol oxidases (QO)) convert redox free-energy into
              a membrane potential by coupling electron transfer to the translocation of
              protons across a membrane barrier. However, despite intensive research efforts,
              detailed mechanisms of energy transduction within these enzymes and how such
              mechanisms vary among the energy transducing proteins has not been elucidated.
              The overall goal of this project is to identify the magnitudes and time scales
              of volume changes and thermodynamics associated with two physiologically
              relevant processes in the energy transducing terminal oxidase of Eschericia
              coli (cytochrome bo or Cbo). Conformational changes associated with ligand
              binding to the active site, and electron transfer between various metal centers
              within the enzyme will be examined using variable temperature/pressure
              transient absorption spectroscopy and novel photothermal methods. Photothermal
              methods are proving to be powerful techniques for measuring volume changes and
              thermodynamics of photo-initiated reactions on a nanosecond to millisecond
              time-scale. Utilizing these techniques the magnitude and time scales of
              transient conformational changes required for energy transduction in terminal
              oxidases can be elucidated.

Basic cellular respiration is a key process in
              all living organisms from fungi to mammals. In humans, respiration is a complex
              process in which foodstuffs are converted to carbon dioxide and oxygen is
              converted to water. This process results in the synthesis of energy storing
              molecules known as ATP (adenosine triphosphate). These energy storage molecules
              can then be used by cells to make proteins, replicate, move, etc.. In mammals
              this conversion takes place in small structures known as mitochondria that
              reside inside the cell. These mitochondria contain a series of four major
              enzymes (known as the respiratory chain) which couple the degradation of
              foodstuffs to the reduction of oxygen to water. It is clear that the failure of
              any part of the respiratory chain will have lethal consequences to the
              organism.  Improving our understanding of the mechanisms of cellular function
              on a molecular level is essential for enhancing our knowledge of cellular
              function.  In addition, studies of simpler bacterial enzymes may provide key
              information on the evolutionary aspects of respiration. This project focuses on
              understanding the terminal step in respiration (reduction of oxygen to water)
              using a bacterial enzyme that is related to but much simpler than the mammalian
              enzyme.  The PI will measure how the enzyme changes size/shape (changes in
              enzyme volume) with time while the enzyme performs its physiological function
              and how such changes are related to the overall function of the enzyme. This
              study represents one of the most significant steps towards understanding the
              fundamental events of basic cellular respiration. 




