Title       : ITR: Development and Evaluation of a Model Information Technology Training and
               Education Program for Rural Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0296091

Award Number: 0296091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anthony B. Maddox                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1669872            (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Melvin Ustad gustad@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1653,1661,9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA - 0086076
Ustad, Melvin G.
Dakota  State University

Title:  ITR: 
              Development and Evaluation of a Model Information Technology Training and
              Education  Program for Rural Communities
   
The objective of the five-year
              project is to develop and implement a model IT-education/training/economic
              development program for rural areas utilizing distance education and
              telecommunications technologies for education and employment of IT-workers. 
              The project will (1) train adult IT-workers, (2) facilitate expansion of
              IT-employment opportunities to rural areas, (3) encourage K-12 students to
              pursue IT-careers in their community, (4) and to evaluate the education,
              economic and social impact of the IT-education/training/ economic development
              program.  The project will impact the entire state of South Dakota with the
              involvement of three State Universities, three Native American Community
              Colleges, a consortium of thirty-three rural schools and communities, and
              several information technology businesses and rural communities in Nebraska,
              North Dakota, New Mexico, and Idaho.  A specific emphasis will be placed on
              Native Americans, with the involvement of K-12 schools with high Native
              American populations and Native American Community Colleges.  

The proposed
              research project involves the development and implementation of an IT-education
              program for K-12 students and adults in rural areas to help meet the current
              information technology worker shortage.  The project will involve development
              of an IT-education program for K-12 schools to prepare students to move into
              IT-careers and an intensive IT-training program for adults in rural areas.  
              The adult IT-worker training program will identify residents in rural areas who
              have an aptitude for IT-work and a desire for a career in information
              technology.  The project team will work with IT-employers to design an intense
              training program for these adults.  Upon successfully completing the
              IT-training program, IT-business partners would either locate a facility in the
              rural community or allow the workers to telecommute. 

Year 1 of the project
              will involve three primary efforts (1) development of the IT-worker training
              program for rural residents, (2) identification and testing adults for
              participation in the IT-training program, and (3) development of the K-12
              IT-education program.  Years 2 through 4 will involve implementation of the
              IT-education program into the thirty DIAL Consortium communities in South
              Dakota.  In Year 5 the program will be disseminated to other South Dakota
              communities as well as Nebraska, North Dakota, and Idaho. 

Through out the
              project period the social, economic, and educational impact of the IT-education
              program will be evaluated.  A special focus of the evaluation will be to study
              the impact of the program on the Native American community members involved in
              the project.  Based on the results of the project, the IT-education and
              training programs will be extended to other rural communities throughout the
              United States.  The proposed model will have a significant impact on the
              economies of rural communities and will  reduce the IT-worker shortage in the
              United States.  




