Title       : An Intelligent Microscope for Transmission Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a0296063

Award Number: 0296063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 21,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570114             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton S. Potter cpotter@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Kriegman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bridget O. Carragher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              



Molecular microscopy can provide unique information about biological
              structure from the molecular to the cellular level. These structures will yield
              significant insight into biological function. One of the principal bottlenecks
              to this technique is that enormous number of images must be acquired for the
              structural analysis. Currently, the field is constrained by manual data
              acquisition methods that are slow, labor-intensive and result in a very low
              percentage of suitable images.  Macromolecular structure analysis using
              electron microscopy requires the acquisition of large numbers of good quality
              images at high magnification. Because of the effects of radiation damage of
              biological specimens, the quality of high magnification micrographs can not be
              judged prior to making the decision to acquire the high magnification image.
              The decision to acquire an image must be made based on the appearance of the
              specimen at low magnification. A good microscopist has the ability to link
              features in the low magnification image to the quality of the high
              magnification image. However, it is difficult for microscopists to maintain
              precision in their judgements between sessions at the microscope. Also, since
              this is empirical knowledge it is difficult to transfer this knowledge to new
              or inexperienced operators of the instrument. Finally, since there are
              substantial delays between acquiring the high magnification image and
              evaluating the quality, it is difficult to systematize the evaluation and
              improve the decision making process. 

An intelligent microscope that
              integrates instrument control, feature recognition algorithms and machine
              learning techniques would vastly improve both the quality and quantity of data
              collected and has the potential to revolutionize the field.

The goal of this
              project is to develop a system which is capable of performing the same task as
              an expert microscopist in linking the scales, i.e. identifying relevant
              features in a low magnification field of view and learning to refine this
              choice based on assessment of the subsequently acquired high magnification
              image.

The project will develop, test, and implement an intelligent software
              system for the acquisition of images from a transmission electron microscope.
              This system will provide state-of-the-art quantitative image acquisition and
              analysis capabilities for the molecular microcopy community.  Issues such as
              quantifying and modeling the quality of the image at high magnification and
              representation and modeling at low magnification  the features that result in
              an acceptable quality image at high magnification will be addressed. The system
              will initially be tested in the development of structural models for the motor
              proteins, in particular muscle filaments and microtubules. Once the system has
              been implemented successfully it will be made generally available to the
              biological community.

