Title       : Collaborative Research: Retirement Decisions After Job Loss
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0296201

Award Number: 0296201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory N. Price                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41496              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sewin Chan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
SBR-9907824

This project investigates the effects of late career
              job loss on earnings, wealth and employment, then uses these
              displacement-induced changes in the relative returns to work and retirement to
              cast new light on the nature of the retirement decision. While previous work on
              job loss outcomes has often ignored older workers and the burgeoning literature
              on retirement has similarly ignored involuntary job separations, this project
              will confront a number of important yet unanswered questions in both the
              literatures on displaced workers and on retirement decision-making. Proceeding
              in two stages, the first stage ofthe project involves reduced-form
              investigations ofthe effects of job loss on older workers' earnings,
              employment, and wealth, including pension wealth. In the second stage, the
              estimated effects of job loss are incorporated into a structural model of the
              retirement decision.
In the first stage, data from the Health and Retirement
              Survey (HRS) are used to estimate the effects of job loss on earnings,
              financial wealth, pensions, employment and retirement expectations of workers
              aged 50 and over. While there is a large literature on the effects of
              displacement, much of the recent research has focused solely on "prime-age"
              workers. In addition, virtually no research exists on the effects of
              displacement on wealth, including pension wealth, or on workers' expectations
              regarding future employment and retirement. These omissions are particularly
              troubling given the dramatic increase in the incidence of job loss among older
              workers in recent years. Preliminary results show substantial damage to wages,
              financial assets, and future employment as a result of late career job
              loss.
The second stage of the project builds on these reduced-form studies,
              and examines the effects of displacement-induced changes in earnings and wealth
              on actual and expected retirement, using the framework of a dynamic retirement
              model. Most empirical implementations of retirement models do not allow an
              explicit role for assets or saving in the retirement decision, nor for
              liquidity constraints, features that are particularly important for job-losers
              given preliminary findings that wealth is significantly damaged by job loss and
              that this substantially affects subsequent transitions into and out of
              employment. In this project, the well-known "option value" retirement model is
              modified to allow for saving, assets and liquidity constraints, and the model
              is estimated using HRS data on actual and expected employment.
Beyond the
              fundamental interest in job loss itself, the substantial within-person
              variation in the future returns to work and retirement generated by the job
              loss provides a unique opportunity to examine more general issues of
              retirement. In addition to the usual cross-sectional data on observed
              retirement, the longitudinal data on retirement expectations allows for the
              estimation of fixed-effects versions of the option value model. Because
              previous applications of these models have implicitly used differences across
              individuals in future returns to work and retirement, this project, in
              identifying this within-person source of variation, offers an important
              contribution to the empirical literature on retirement decisions.

