Title       : CAREER: RUI: Temporal/Multi-dimensional Reasoning with Imprecision and
               Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0296042

Award Number: 0296042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150068             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debasis Mitra dmitra@cs.fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this project is to develop algorithms for the purpose of reasoning
              with time and other higher   dimensional space.  Reasoning with time and
              three-dimensional space is ubiquitous in our daily life as   well as in
              computer systems.  For example, a detective would often check the temporal
              consistency of an   alibi of some suspects. A system for packing boxes in a
              container would reason with space. For about the   last  two decades some
              researchers within the artificial intelligence community have been engaged in  
              studying this area. The PI has been involved in critically analyzing some of
              the existing algorithms and   developing new efficient algorithms for temporal
              reasoning.  A particular area of interest in this  project is on studying
              temporal reasoning under uncertainty. If the input information is not
              completely   known and is ringed with uncertainty, then how does it affect the
              reasoning process? How is it possible to   determine possible causes for events
              from the available temporal information?  These are the types of   questions,
              which are being investigated in this work. Viewing temporal (or higher
              dimensional)   information as constraints, an algorithmic approach for
              constraint propagation is being employed in the  research. A deeper
              understanding of dimension related reasoning and more efficient mechanisms for 
               doing it computationally will emerge from this project.   
              http://stallion.jsums.edu/~dmitra/str.html
