Title       : Foliations, flows, and 3-manifolds: Topology and geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a0296139

Award Number: 0296139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98793              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio R. Fenley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-0071683
Project title: "Foliations, flows and 3-manifolds:
              Topology and geometry"
PI: Sergio R. Fenley

ABSTRACT: Reebless foliations
              are a basic and fundamental object in the study of 3-manifolds. They yield deep
              results on 3-manifold topology and are also related to the geometrization
              conjecture for 3-manifolds.  An important tool is the universal circle
              associated to a foliation with hyperbolic leaves (the generic case).  Using
              this tool, the PI has recently proved that in the case of R-covered foliations,
              then either the manifold is toroidal or there is a pseudo-Anosov flow
              transverse to the foliation. Such a flow has excellent dynamical properties and
              this gives a strong relationship with the topology of the manifold. One
              objective of this project is to analyze the universal circle construction for
              various families of foliations and to search for transverse pseudo-Anosov
              flows. A second goal is to study foliation and transverse flows as dual objects
              and to understand the deep consequences of their joint dynamical structure. The
              project aims to study general pseudo-Anosov flows and the additional structure
              imposed by a transverse foliation. A third goal of the project is to understand
              geometric behavior of foliations and transverse flows in hyperbolic 3-manifolds
              - the generic case.  The focus will be on the large scale geometric behavior in
              the universal cover. An important question to be analyzed is whether the
              pseudo-Anosov flows transverse to foliations are quasigeodesic - that is,
              whether they measure distances well. This property has been proved by the PI
              (and Lee Mosher) in the case of a flow transverse to a Reebless finite depth
              foliation. One objective of this study is to use the quasigeodesic property for
              flows to derive information about the asymptotic geometric behavior of the
              foliation transverse to the flow. This is specially promising in the case of
              general finite depth foliations.

A 3-manifold is an object that locally has
              3-dimensions, like 3-dimensional Euclidean space. A 2-dimensional foliation of
              a3-manifold is a decomposition of the manifold into 2-dimensional objects, much
              like the pages of a book. Good foliations exist in large classes of 3-manifolds
              and they yield very useful information about the manifold. The goal of the
              project is to understand the relationship of the foliation with geometric and
              topological structures of the manifold. Geometry measures distance and roughly
              topology measures the structures of "holes" in the manifold. It is best to look
              at the universal cover of the manifold: for example the universal cover of a
              cylinder is obtained by unrolling it into an infinite carpet.  Universal covers
              are unbounded objects but they carry a lot of information about the manifold,
              contained in the "folding" allowed to recover the manifold. One important goal
              of the project is to analyse the foliation in the universal cover. Of
              particular interest is the large scale properties of the "leaves" of the
              foliation.  We will concentrate in the case where the manifold is hyperbolic
              -this is the generic situation. Finally there is a dual object to a foliation
              which is a transverse flow to the leaves of the foliation.  The flow and
              foliation jointly produce a rich dynamical structure in the manifold with many
              deep consequences. There are many cases when there is a "tightest" amongst all
              possible transverse flows.  The tightest flow should give information about the
              structure of the foliation and connections with the manifold. The tightest flow
              is called a pseudo-Anosov flow.

