Title       : Enhanced 3D Processing of Spherical and Non-Spherical Virus Structures at High
               Resolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0296107

Award Number: 0296107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan C. Marinescu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9986316
Dan C. Marinescu
Purdue University
Enhanced 3D Processing
              of Spherical and Non-Spherical Virus Structures at High Resolution

	Although
              advances in X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy have made it possible to
              routinely obtain atomic resolution structures of small to medium sized
              biological macromolecules, there have not been equivalent advances in high
              resolution structural studies of large macromolecular complexes.  For example,
              the structure determination of a virus by cryo-transmission-electron microscopy
              typically takes weeks or months to complete, produces relatively low resolution
              electron density maps, and has mainly been limited to particles with high
              symmetry.  High resolution structures of such large complexes are essential for
              understanding cell biology. 

With support from the National Science
              Foundation, methods to increase the speed of three dimensional image
              reconstructions and to generalize the techniques to particles with low symmetry
              will be developed.  These new computational techniques will take advantage of
              advances in image acquisition combined with high performance computing and
              parallel computer algorithms.  A scaleable computing solution capable of coping
              not only with existing imaging technology but also with its projected evolution
              over the next decade will be developed.  Parallel algorithms for the
              determination of the orientation of particle projections and for
              three-dimensional reconstruction will also be developed.  Finally, algorithms
              and programs for detecting particle positions in electron micrographs will be
              improved.  All of these programs will be developed for inexpensive clusters of
              personal computers. 

	Development of these algorithms will provide
              biologists with a computationally fast method to obtain high resolution
              structures of large macromolecular complexes.  A more complete understanding of
              life processes at the molecular level awaits high resolution analysis of
              hundreds if not thousands of such complexes.  This award will also support the
              training of computer scientists in biological imaging.  



