Title       : Collaborative Research on Bacterioplankton Biology and Biogeochemistry at the
               Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Station: An Oceanic Microbial Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a0296061

Award Number: 0296061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig A. Carlson carlson@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative Microbial Observatory project focuses on one of the largest
              microbial ecosystems on the planet: the ocean surface layer. Microorganisms in
              the ocean surface layer play an integral role in carbon transport from the
              atmosphere to the deep ocean. This "biological carbon pump" has global
              biogeochemical significance. The Bermuda Atlantic Time series study Site (BATS)
              is a subtropical gyre characterized by winter water column mixing events,
              spring phytoplankton blooms, and highly stratified summer periods of extreme
              surface oligotrophy. BATS has been a testbed for the development of advanced
              molecular techniques for measuring microbial diversity, and is the site of the
              longest time-series study of oceanographic variables on the planet.  The
              overall goal of this project is to understand the cell biology and
              biogeochemical activity of seven major uncultured bacterioplankton groups
              -SAR11, SAR86, SAR202 and SAR116, marine actinobacteria, SAR324, and SAR406, by
              applying new technologies that integrate cell culture and environmental
              genomics, and by enhancing technologies for the long term monitoring of these
              species. This program will support the transfer of tested technologies for
              monitoring microbial diversity from Oregon State University (Dr. Stephen
              Giovannoni, Award 9977930) to the Bermuda Biological Station for Research (this
              award), and promote the development of new technologies with the goal of
              defining bacterioplankton biology.  The foremost objective of this effort will
              be to grow these microorganisms in culture for the first time by employing
              novel high-throughput detection and genetic screening approaches that were
              designed for exploring a large number of medium variables and for detecting
              positive and negative biological interactions among organisms.  Fundamental
              questions about the genomics and population genetics of these species are being
              explored by linking studies of large-insert genomic DNA libraries with
              chromosomal painting procedures. This approach is designed to establish
              cellular linkage groups among genes that play key roles in biogeochemical
              processes, and to provide new in situ hybridization strategies for detecting
              and counting cells. These data will help us understand how elemental cycling
              and energy flux have been partitioned among species by evolutionary processes.
              The work will be conducted in the context of ongoing biogeochemical studies at
              the BATS site, and will be linked to an annual summer course, Research
              Experience for Undergraduates program, and active World Wide Web activities
              supported by the Bermuda Biological Station for Research.
