Title       : A p-Adic Riemann-Hilbert Correspondence and A p-Adic Theory of Mixed Hodge
               Modules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0296095

Award Number: 0296095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79324              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Emerton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for Emerton-NSF 0070711

In this project the investigator and his
              collaborator intend to develop an analogue in the p-adic setting of the
              Riemann-Hilbert correspondence between perverse sheaves and D-modules on
              algebraic varieties over the complex numbers.  The Hilbert  correspondence
              generalizes De Rham theory, and establishes a deep connection between the
              topology of a given complex algebraic variety (as encoded in the category of
              perverse sheaves on the variety) and the behavior of systems of differential
              operators defined on the variety (which are encoded as D-modules on the
              variety;  that is, as sheaves of modules over the sheaf of rings of
              differential operators on the variety).  The  proposed p-adic analogue would
              perform a similar function for varieties over the p-adic numbers.  It would
              yield an equivalence between the (currently conjectural) category of
              ``crystalline perverse sheaves'' on such a variety, and the (again conjectural)
              category of weakly admissible filtered D-modules equipped with a Frobenius
              operator.  The category of crystalline perverse sheaves is believed to carry
              both geometric and also arithmetic information about the variety  to which it
              is attached, and would for example be a natural ingredient in a p-adic analogue
              of Beilinson's theory of regulators.  This gives some hint of the important
              role that such a category of sheaves can be expected to play in the local
              analysis at p of systems of Diophantine equations.

The problem of solving
              equations is one of the most basic in mathematics, going back at least to the
              mathematicians of ancient Greece, such as Diophantus.  He studied the problem
              of solving equations in whole numbers; such equations are now known as
              Diophantine equations. Since the work of Descartes and Fermat, it has been
              understood that geometry provides a powerful tool for analyzing systems of
              equations, even if one is at first more interested in the equations from an
              arithmetic point of view.  For this reason, the development of powerful
              geometric tools is important for progress in the theory of Diophantine
              equations.  In this project, the investigator and his collaborator intend to
              develop such tools, by extending known techniques in the usual so-called
              archimedean geometry to the context of non-archimedean, or p-adic, geometry.
              This geometry, which has a strong arithmetic  flavor, provides a crucial
              geometric setting for the analysis of Diophantine equations, and these
              techniques are expected to yield several new developments in that analysis. 
              Such developments are important not only because they enrich what continues to
              be one of the center pieces of the mathematical tradition, but because the
              theory of Diophantine equations has deep interconnections with the theory of
              discrete processes, and especially with the theory of codes, so that progress
              in theory of Diophantine equations can be expected to yield progress in these
              fields.



