Title       : Anharmonicity and Phase Transitions of Mantle Phases Using Simultaneous High
               Pressure-High Temperature Raman Spectroscopy in the Laser Heated Diamond Cell
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0296205

Award Number: 0296205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anastasia Chopelas chopelas@phys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Chopelas
EAR-0106120

Measurement of vibrational modes at simultaneous high
              pressures and temperatures offers many important opportunities to expand the
              state of the art in Raman spectroscopy in geophysics.  First, phase boundaries
              can be quickly determined in situ.  Second, new unquenchable phases can be
              easily detected, with probable structures or space groups identified based on
              spectral patterns.  Third, these experiments directly measure the intrinsic
              anharmonicity, a value required for extrapolating important parameters such as
              thermal expansivity from 1 atm to deep earth conditions or calculating
              densities of a material in P-T space using the Mie-Gruneisen equation of state.
               Earth temperature, compositional, and dynamical models generally rely on
              extrapolation of these properties of candidate minerals to deep Earth
              conditions.
Our current capabilities include a nearly identical experimental
              arrangement as those in Mainz: Raman double monochromator with CCD camera and
              photomultiplier tube, diamond cells, and excitation laser.  Preliminary data
              from the Mainz laboratory using a CO2 laser for heating show that this method
              is feasible.  A CO2 laser is requested in this proposal.  We propose to extend
              the current Raman spectroscopic capabilities in our laboratory at UNLV to
              simultaneous high temperatures and pressures using CO2 laser heating in the
              diamond anvil cell.  
Once the laboratory is upgraded, the study will first
              focus on the two geophysically important minerals forsterite and magnesium
              silicate perovskite, both important mantle phases.  Prior Raman studies of
              these at either elevated temperatures or elevated pressures are available for
              comparison.  First results will focus on providing direct constraints on the
              Mie Gruneisen equation of state and on thermal expansivity at mantle conditions
              using a Maxwell relation.

