Title       : Efficient Marking Techniques for Differentiated Services in the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2001   
File        : a0296034

Award Number: 0296034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasant Mohapatra prasant@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The best-effort service model of the current generation Internet is not
              adequate for evolving and expanding applications such as continuous media,
              real-time applications, and e-commerce environments.  These applications
              require certain quality of service (QoS) assurance that could be provided
              through service discrimination in the Internet.  Differentiated Services
              (DiffServ) have been proposed as a viable solution for providing service
              differentiation in the Internet.  DiffServ operates on the aggregate traffic on
              a per-hop basis and thus avoids the scalability problems associated with the
              integrated service model.  A major component of the DiffServ architecture is
              the markers that mark packets based on the service level agreements between
              adjacent Internet domains (interdomain makers) or between the end node and its
              ver first domain (leaf markers).  The Internet core routers route packets
              discriminatley based on their marking. Thus the marking technique affects the
              performance of DiffServ significantly.  This proposal focusses on the design
              and implementation of efficient marking techniques for differentiated services
              in the Internet.                   The proposed research targets the marking
              issues at both the interdomain markers and the leaf markers. Our ongoing effort
              on the marking scheme for interdomain marker addresses random and early
              demotion and promotion of packets to improve the bandwidth utilization while
              maintaining fairness between different flows.  This approach employs a
              three-color marking scheme and uses a modified leaky bucket technique for flow
              control.  A detailed performance study, impact of various parameters, usage of
              multiple precedence levels, and flow control techniques will be investigated
              using the ns simulator.                                                        
              In the context of leaf markers, we propose to integrate the marking scheme with
              the TCP layer at the end nodes.  Thus in addition to the aggregte level flow
              control at the interdomain layer, we will also achieve some degree of
              flow-level service differentiation.  Our approach is based on splitting the TCP
              congestion window logically on the basis of the desired levels of services. 
              During congestion, the splits of the congestion window gets affected
              corresponding to their relative service level agreements.  Such an approach
              would also make the flow control fair across multiple flows with different
              service level agreements.  Maintenance of proportional fairness has been
              observed as a difficult task in several prior research.  We propose to evaluate
              the impact of the proposed leaf marker through an experimental implementation. 
                                                                                       The
              outcome of the proposed research will have a broader impact on the Internet
              infrastructure and on its users.  Specifically, the proposed techniques will
              improve the bandwidth utilization in the Internet while providing
              differentiated services.  At the local level, the research will have a positive
              educational impact on the students of Michigan State University.
