Title       : Measurement and Modeling of Flow and Transport in Macroporous Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0296158

Award Number: 0296158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 20,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Binayak P. Mohanty bmohanty@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. T. Van Genuchten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Agricul Exp Sta
	      The Agriculture Program
	      College Station, TX  778432147    979/845-4761

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0106956
Mohanty


	Characterization of preferential flow and transport
              through soil macropores and fractures is one of the biggest challenges in
              vadose zone hydrology.  Several conceptual models have been developed with
              different levels of complexity (e.g., equivalent continuum, dual porosity, and
              dual permeability approaches) to describe the macropore flow-transport process.
               However, no congruent conceptual model with a corroborating measurement
              technique is available to precisely describe this process.  As gravity and/or
              capillary forces dominate the transport processes in the porous medium near
              saturation, various factors contribute to the initiation of macropore flow and
              its intensity, including pore geometry, distribution, and continuity.  In
              addition soil energy status, the nature of top and bottom boundary conditions
              and textural layering, play important roles.  We propose to quantify the
              effects of many of these factors on preferential flow and transport in a series
              of carefully controlled colunm experiments using novel designs.  Concurrent
              measurement of soil water content, water potential, and concentration across
              distinct "macropore" and "no-macropore" regions, as well as of the volume and
              concentration of inflow and outflow with high temporal resolution, are some of
              the new features of our proposed study.  Artificial macropores with known
              geometry, distribution, and initial/boundary conditions will make the data
              analysis and interpretation more thorough and meaningful.  Several existing or
              newly developed conceptual models will be tested with the new data sets,
              ultimately leading to the formulation of more realistic preferential flow
              models that contain physically-based and measurable parameters.  Findings of
              this research in ten-ns of different combinations of initial conditions,
              boundary conditions, macropore geometry and continuity, and other (controlled)
              flow and transport conditions that trigger, sustain, accelerate/decelerate or
              discontinue the fast flow-transport phenomenon will be valuable for better
              understanding and quantification of hydrologic and environmental processes at
              different scales.

