Title       : Operational Methods in Semiconductor Manufacturing: Methods for Modeling
               Stochastic Processes in Semiconductor Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0296096

Award Number: 0296096
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 16,  2001       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee W. Schruben schruben@ieor.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
               This award provides funding to investigate how the random elements of
              semiconductor manufacturing impact overall factory productivity.  Algorithms
              will be created and tested for simulating dependent, transient random processes
              such as product demand, tool reliability, operator availability, and step
              yield.  Statistical procedures will be developed for determining the types and
              amount of data that are needed to accurately represent these processes in
              factory queueing models and simulations.  A central part of the research
              program will be designing efficient experimental procedures for optimizing the
              performance and validity of factory models. Experimental and analytical
              techniques for using these models to support the optimal timing of resource
              investments such as tool purchases and personnel cross-training will also be
              developed.   If successful, this research will provide engineers in the
              semiconductor industry with fundamental knowledge necessary for the creation of
              valid models and efficient analytical tools useful in designing semiconductor
              fabrication facilities. A key to improving the cycle times and throughput of
              these multi-billion dollar factories is the identification and control of the
              random factors of production. Conventional semiconductor factory models assume
              that independent and identically distributed random input processes produce
              steady-state output processes with known performance objectives, economic
              parameters, and constraints.  The realities of semiconductor fabrication are
              quite different. In the semiconductor industry, capacity requirements, product
              demands, and competitive cycle times are always changing, as are the very
              products, processes, and personnel skills involved.  Currently, factory-level
              models are overly optimistic because they ignore many of the transient
              dependencies in the random phenomena found in real semiconductor manufacturing.
              This consistent optimism has had serious economic consequences.  Valid factory
              models based on this research will be critical  to the continued economic
              health of this vital industry.  Furthermore, the costs of data collection are
              enormous. This research will provide guidelines for estimating how much data is
              necessary and how it should be used in engineering design. The modeling
              methodologies developed in this research will also help engineers to determine
              optimal settings of critical factory operating parameters that can make the
              difference between financial success and disaster.
