Title       : Organic Free Radical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a0296027

Award Number: 0296027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Newcomb men@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With this renewal award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              continues to support the work of Dr. Martin E. Newcomb in the Department of
              Chemistry at Wayne State University.   The major focus of the work is to
              understand the mechanistic details of radical reactions that are involved in
              organic synthesis and in biological systems.  Radicals are very reactive
              odd-electron species which are intermediates in many chemical reactions, and
              which may last only for nano or picoseconds  (billioniths or trillioniths of a
              second).   The radicals are generated by a very short duration laser flash.  
              The mechanistic information obtained is valuable to synthetic organic chemists,
              and to biochemists interested in the DNA cleavage, involving radical reactions,
              effected by several anti-cancer agents.   In the course of the work Dr. Newcomb
              is providing excellent training for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
              students, several of whom are hispanic or Afro-American.

Much of Dr.
              Newcomb's research involves carbon- or other atom-centered radicals generated
              by laser flash photolysis, from precursors made to provide the desired radicals
              for study.   Of particular interest are uv absorbing radicals whose
              unimolecular cyclization reactions can be measured in real time - providing
              'radical clocks' which can then be used to measure, through competition
              experiments and product analyses, rates of reaction of other radicals which are
              not uv absorbing.  In addition to extending his radical clock work, Dr. Newcomb
              plans to extend his studies to include Lewis acid catalysis, reactions of
              beta-ester radicals, and organometallic reactions.
