Title       : Testing the Effects of Technological Distortions in Political Spots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2001  
File        : a0296092

Award Number: 0296092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan E. Sieber                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynda Lee Kaid lkaid@jou.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will advance work on ethical issues raised by technological
              distortions in political television ads. This project is important to the
              understanding of how video and computer technology raise ethical concerns in
              our political system.  Audiovisual manipulations are powerful social phenomena
              that influence perceptions and information.  This research provides data that
              can help to understand the implications of accelerating developments in
              communication technology that can affect political life.  The underpinnings of
              democracy may be threatened, if information provided by the most pervasive
              electoral communication format is distorted and misleading. Earlier phases of
              the research have documented, through content analysis, that a substantial and
              growing percentage of ads, particularly negative ads, contain distortions
              created by video and computer technology. These may include editing, computer
              and digital alterations, special effects, sound effects, dramatizations, and
              other visual manipulations. Such distortions can mislead voters and interfere
              with the rational decision making process in the selection of candidates.
              Preliminary research, under the previous NSF support, has provided evidence
              that these distortions may affect voters' responses to candidates and their
              opponents.  This project will extend the testing of spot distortions with the
              following objectives: (1) to test experimentally the effects of technological
              distortions in political spots on voters; (2) to determine in the experimental
              testing if any identified effects are dependent upon the valence of the spots
              (positive, negative); and (3) to determine in the experimental testing what
              receiver/voter characteristics (such as gender and visual literacy level) may
              be related to the effects of technological distortions in political spots. The
              project will employ experimental testing of distorted versus non-distorted
              spots.  In addition to traditional measurement techniques, the study will use
              computer automated dials to assess viewer responses. To enhance dissemination
              of information about ethical concerns in technological distortion in political
              spots, the investigator will produce and distribute project results to
              academic, public and media audiences.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
