Title       : Dissertation Research: The Evolution of Reproductive Isolation in Neotropical
               Costus (Costaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0296106

Award Number: 0296106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8749               (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Schemske schem@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              0104847
Schemske

The proposed research investigates the mechanisms that
              contribute to species boundaries in two closely related, Neotropical gingers.
              The study species live in the same tropical forests in Central America, flower
              at the same time and are pollinated largely by the same species of hummingbird.
              Yet they differ in a number of leaf and flower characters, and never produce
              hybrid offspring. What keeps these species distinct? The research will use
              experimental crosses, field observations and molecular genetic techniques to
              answer this question. The information gathered thus far suggests that crosses
              in one direction fail because pollen growth is inhibited, while reproductive
              failure in the other direction is caused by the inability of the pollen to grow
              far enough to produce seeds. The research findings will ultimately show the
              subtle, but effective means that allow different species to coexist.  

One
              of the great mysteries of Nature is how species retain their distinctive
              characteristics. Without mechanisms to prevent interbreeding, the diversity of
              species would be far less than what we see today. Understanding how these
              reproductive barriers function in natural populations provides insights useful
              for both the development of new agricultural varieties and for the conservation
              and management of biodiversity.  

