Title       : US-South Africa Cooperative Research: Nuclear Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0296069

Award Number: 0296069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Steven Whisnant whisnacs@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 1502
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              0079949
Whisnant

This award supports a new research collaboration between C.
              Steven Whisnant, Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of South
              Carolina, and Simon Connell, Schonland Research Center for Nuclear Sciences
              (SRC) at the University of the Witwatersrand (WITS), Johannesburg, South
              Africa.  During the course of the three-year award, the researchers will
              collaborate on theoretical and experimental nuclear physics research on nucleon
              and meson interactions using photon beams.  With separate funding, a recent
              graduate of WITS will work as a postdoc on the project.

Professor Whisnant's
              experimental photonuclear physics program is conducted at the Laser Electron
              Gamma Source (LEGS) at Brookhaven National Laboratory, and with the Large
              Acceptance Spectrometer (CLAS) at the Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator
              Facility at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (Jlab).  As part
              of the NA59 collaboration at the European Laboratory for Particle Physics
              (CERN), the researchers at WITS are pursuing a complementary program studying
              the internal structure of the nucleon through meson photoproduction at very
              high photon energies.  The NA59 collaboration has developed techniques for
              producing and analyzing the degree of polarization of circularly polarized
              photon beams that can provide valuable direct information on the beam
              polarization at LEGS and Jlab.  Conversely, the polarized target technology
              developed for LEGS can significantly enhance the CERN program.  The theoretical
              input provided by the researchers in South Africa spans both energy regions and
              will be a valuable aid in data analysis and the design of new experiments.

 
              

