Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Shoot Apical Meristem Development in Arabidopsis
               thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0296068

Award Number: 0296068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Kathy Barton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0080853
Barton

The Earth's primary producers, plants and algae, capture
              sunlight and use it to make the biomass that all other organisms on the planet
              use to survive.  Much of plant growth occurs at the tips of branches, where
              regions of undifferentiated, dividing cells, called meristems, are located. The
              shoot meristems produce new leaves, stems and flowers.  Dr. Kathryn Barton's
              lab studies how shoot meristems work. Using the small weed Arabidopsis as a
              model system, her lab studies the genes and proteins that direct meristem
              function.  

The work in this proposal focuses on regulation of the SHOOT
              MERISTEMLESS (STM) gene product of Arabidopsis.  When the STM protein is
              lacking, the plant is not able to make a meristem, and conversely, when the STM
              protein is supplied in excess, the plant produces a mass of meristems that
              covers the leaves and results in a highly deformed plant.  From these
              observations it follows that the STM gene must be carefully regulated.  

The
              BOBBER gene is required to prevent the expression of STM in the seed leaves; 
              in bobber  mutants, the seed leaves inappropriately express STM.  bobber 
              mutants also arrest growth during embryogenesis.  To understand the mechanism
              of STM regulation by BOBBER,  the BOBBER gene will be molecularly cloned and
              characterized.  bobber  mutant embryos will be carefully analyzed to determine
              the extent to which they are defective in the development of cotyledons and
              shoot apical meristem.  The role of BOBBER in repressing STM  in leaves will
              also be determined and the cis-acting sequences through which BOBBER  acts will
              be defined. 

These, and other experiments, are leading to improvements in
              our understanding of basic plant biology, information that will ultimately
              improve the way in which we manage our crops, woodlands and other natural
              resources.



