Title       : SBIR Phase II: Clinical-Scale Suspension Bioreactor for Primary Hematopoietic
               Culture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0296135

Award Number: 0296135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd A. McAdams lcfarrar@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montec Research
	      1901 South Franklin
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/723-2222

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1491,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project describes
              the
development of a disposable, highly  efficient suspension bioreactor for
              
primary hematopoietic (blood cell-forming) cell culture. The unique
              
challenges (heterogeneous nature, donor variability, and
              shear-sensitivity)
of these cultures render traditional flask or suspension
              cultures unable to 
economically and consistently produce large quantities of
              cells. In Phase I, 
the feasibility and characteristics of a disposable
              suspension bioreactor was 
demonstrated. In Phase II, a scaled-up prototype of
              a large, agitated 
disposable bioreactor designed for clinical use (stem cell
              transplantation)
 will be constructed, characterized, and tested for
              reliability and durability. 
Gas and mass transfer correlations established in
              Phase I will be verified 
and extended. The use of medium optical density as a
              surrogate measure 
for cell density will be investigated.

The final product
              will be a system that combines the simple, disposable nature 
of flask culture
              with the control and monitoring capabilities of a suspension 
bioreactor. The
              resulting system will enable the cost-effective production of 
large numbers
              of primary hematopoietic cells and will improve the effectiveness
and decrease
              the cost of medical procedures in the fields of transplantation,
              
immunotherapy, and gene therapy.

