Title       : Evolution of an Allotetraploid Genus: Relationships among North American Species
               of Elymus (Poaceae:Triticeae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2001   
File        : a0296047

Award Number: 0296047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta J. Mason-Gamer robie@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9974181
Mason-Gamer
	The process of speciation is usually characterized as a
              splitting, during which populations within a species diverge from one another,
              eventually accumulating enough differences to be classified as separate
              species. However, new species can also arise when two divergent lineages come
              together, or reticulate, creating a hybrid lineage. Such reticulation of
              distinct lineages appears to be far more common in plants than in animals. The
              most common mechanism of hybridization in plants, polyploidy, involves additive
              combinations of entire sets of genomes (of chromosomes) from two parents. The
              resulting polyploid hybrids therefore have more chromosomes than either parent.
              Polyploidy is rare in some groups of plants, but extremely common in many
              others. In the grass family Poaceae, for example, which includes the species
              examined in this research by Dr. Mason-Gamer at the University of Idaho, about
              70% of all species appear to be polyploid. Furthermore, polyploidy is involved
              in the origin of many important crops in the Poaceae, including the wheats,
              oats, and sugarcane.
	Because it is so common in many groups of plants,
              polyploidy deserves increased study to clarify patterns of polyploid origin and
              diversification. The grass genus Elymus, a member of the wheat tribe Triticeae,
              serves as a useful system for the study of polyploidy. First, it is an
              extremely widespread and diverse group of plants, and so illustrates well the
              evolutionary potential of polyploid species. Second, the genomes of its
              presumed progenitors are well characterized, particularly for the North
              American taxa in the diploid genera Critesion and Pseudoroegneria; therefore,
              the genomes of Elymus are likely to have recognizable origins. Studies of
              nuclear and chloroplast DNA markers from the North American species of Elymus
              will further understanding of several questions. Do all North American species
              of Elymus have the same or similar combinations of genomes? The answers will
              help to establish the taxonomic and evolutionary boundaries of the genus. Have
              similar polyploid genome combinations arisen more than once? In other words,
              can a single species or genus have multiple origins? The idea that one species
              may have multiple origins adds yet another level of complexity to our views of
              how species originate, persist, and diversify. While the specific features of
              polyploidy in Elymus may not necessarily apply to all plants, understanding the
              processes that have shaped this complex genus will advance knowledge of plant
              evolution and diversity.

