Title       : A Continuing Empirical Analysis of the Admissibility of Expert Testimony:
               Investigating the Effects of Kumho Tire v. Carmichael
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a0296125

Award Number: 0296125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Penrod spenrod@jjay.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY John Jay College
	      444 West 56th Street
	      New York, NY  100193602    212/489-5183

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                       The Supreme Court's decision in Daubert v. Merrell Dow
              
Pharmaceuticals (1993) determined the standards under which scientific
              
evidence may be considered by courts and juries in all federal cases and
              
has been adopted by many states. Such scientific evidence is involved in a
              
range of cases including medical malpractice, criminal prosecution, and
              
toxic environmental pollution. The Court's recent decision in Kumho Tire
              
Co. v. Carmichael (1999) extended Daubert's standards to all types of
              
expert testimony.  Technical and specialized testimony, which potentially
              
includes everything from the proper construction of tires to psychiatry and
              
banking, now fall under this standard.  Because specialized and technical
              
experts cover such a broad range, the Kumho decision has the potential to
              
exert a powerful influence on the nature and extent of evidence that juries
              
and courts hear and to influence what types of cases will be tried
              
successfully.  The present research extends prior studies of the 
effects of
              the Daubert decision to an investigation on the effects of 
Kumho.  To date,
              the discussion of expert testimony in almost 3000 federal 
and state appellate
              court decisions has been evaluated through coding by the researchers of 126
              aspects of those decisions.  The present research will examine an estimated
              2700 additional federal and state appellate court decisions which address the
              admissibility of expert testimony.  
       Among the major questions to be
              addressed are: 1) will Kumho lead to an increased or a decreased exclusion of
              non-scientific expert testimony? 
2) how will the courts distinguish between
              testimony which is scientific and non-scientific? 3) which domains of expert
              testimony will be most affected by the decision? 4) will Daubert continue to
              have an impact on the admissibility of expert testimony?  Empirical
              investigation of these effects will inform potential litigants, the legal
              community, and the community of experts, both scientific and 
non-scientific,
              on how courts are responding to expert evidence in the 
aftermath of
              Kumho.


