Title       : MRPG: Word Domains in Athabaskan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0296142

Award Number: 0296142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17760              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Alderete   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this planning grant is to provide infrastructure for long-term
              research on Athabaskan languages, with a focus on Tahltan, a critically
              endangered language of northwest British Columbia. A set of data collection,
              organization and analysis activities are proposed to study the structure of
              verbs. Verb forms are fundamental in the study of Athabaskan languages because
              they provide crucial information about the structure and interpretation of
              sentences (i.e., the syntax and semantics). They are also important in the
              description of sound structure (or the phonology) because the different domains
              in an Athabaskan verb represent different sound systems. Verbs are thus
              fundamental to subsequent documentation of Tahltan, i.e., dictionaries, texts,
              grammars, and theoretical hypothesis testing, all of which fall within the
              scope of this long-term research program.

Verbs in Athabaskan languages are
              made up of a stem, which contributes the principal meaning of the word, and two
              classes of prefixes, namely the disjunct and conjunct prefixes. The disjunct
              prefixes form a class with stems because they are lexical items and have the
              full range of phonological structures. These properties distinguish disjunct
              prefixes and stems from the conjunct prefixes, which are not lexical items and
              have a highly restricted set of phonological structures. One chief aim is to
              give a natural account of the differences between these two morphological
              classes, for both the lexical/non-lexical distinction and their different
              phonologies. A set of hypotheses are developed in Optimality Theory that
              explain this correlation in terms the adherence of different morpheme types to
              their underlying representation. A host of predictions are made concerning the
              range of possible phonological structures and the types of processes expected
              in each word domain.

The research plan begins with the study of Navajo
              verbs, both to evaluate the optimality theoretic analysis in a well-documented
              Athabaskan language, and as a way to provide a framework for primary linguistic
              documentation of Tahltan. Existing sound recordings of Tahltan will be
              digitized, and the fieldnotes and word lists associated with them will be
              incorporated in a database of large corpora that can be searched
              electronically. This database will clarify specific research questions and
              provide a guideline for additional data collection. Three trips in the field
              are planned to confirm the data and generalizations of previous work and to
              supplement the study of verb forms. The resulting relational database and
              grammatical sketches will provide the first complete description of verbs and
              materials for testing specific hypotheses about the morphological and
              phonological structures of verb forms. In addition, the lexical database will
              make possible a variety of other research and teaching activities that extend
              beyond the scope of verb structure.
