Title       : CAREER: Interplay of Disorder and Quantum Effects in Low Dimensional Magnets and
               Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2001  
File        : a0296119

Award Number: 0296119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kara M. Beauchamp kbeauchamp@cornellcollege.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell College
	      
	      Mount Vernon, IA  52314    319/895-8811

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9733848  Beauchamp    This  is  a CAREER award to a female scientist at a
              predominantly  undergraduate institution.  The research will explore the 
              static  and  dynamic  properties of magnetic and superconducting  systems 
              which  exhibit quantum effects and disorder. One system  consists  of  random 
              ferromagnetic or antiferromagnet quantum spin  chains  which  can  be 
              described by a one-dimensional, S=1/2  Heisenberg  Hamiltonian with quenched
              disorder. The second system consists of  ordered  and  disordered
              two-dimensional Ising  antiferromagnets,  with  both  short  range  and long
              range interactions.  The  two-  dimensional  Ising system in a transverse field
              is  the  simplest  system  which is expected to exhibit a quantum phase 
              transition.  The  third  magnetic system is consists of magnetic  vortices  in 
              thin  superconducting  films containing  ordered  and  disordered  arrays  of
              holes. The disordered system can be described  by  the  random site, random
              field Ising model (RS/RFIM) in which particle  interaction  strength  is 
              controlled  by  simply   changing  the  applied  magnetic  field. The critical 
              properties  of  the  spin  systems  will  be  probed  via measurements  of  low
               temperature  susceptibilities as a function of temperature and magnetic field.
               The   local  static  configurations  of  the  vortices   in   the 
              superconductors  will be examined using Bitter decoration,  while  the  local 
              dynamic motion of the vortices will be measured  with  Hall probe arrays. The
              educational component of this CAREER award  will  support  development of an
              undergraduate  research  course,  entitled  "From  the  Minute  to  the 
              Macroscopic:  Probing  the  Properties  of  Atoms, Molecules, and Solids".  The
               course  will  focus  on experimental techniques in atomic and condensed 
              matter  physics,  emphasizing  the continuum in  electronic  and  thermal 
              properties  from  atoms to solids, and drawing  on  the  research  experience
              of the physics faculty at Wesleyan.  %%%  This  is  a  CAREER award to a female
              scientist at a predominantly  undergraduate  institution. Physicists have  been
               successful  in  developing  a  detailed understanding of electronic and 
              magnetic  properties  in  a  wide  range  of  materials.  However,  certain 
              materials have not yielded to such an understanding owing to  the  presence of
              disorder and strong electronic interactions. A deeper  understanding of such
              materials should aid in the development  of  advanced  technological 
              applications of  these  materials.  This  project  will  focus  on the role of
              disorder  and  interparticle  interactions in three magnetic systems. Two of
              these involve  the  magnetism produced by spins of electrons. The third is  a 
              system  of   magnetic   flux   tubes,  called  vortices,   occurring   in 
              superconducting thin films with intentionally fabricated defects.  The  grant 
              will also support the development of an undergraduate  research  course, 
              entitled "From the Minute to the  Macroscopic:  Probing  the  Properties of
              Atoms, Molecules,  and  Solids".  The  course  will  focus  on  experimental
              techniques  in  atomic  and  condensed  matter physics. It will emphasize the
              common  physical  concepts  that  are applicable from relatively  simple  atoms
               to  complex  solids. The course will draw on the research  experience  of  the
               physics  faculty at Wesleyan. The course  will  also  be  offered  to  high
              school teachers enrolled as summer students  in  the  Graduate  Liberal Studies
              Program at Wesleyan.  This  course  will prepare both undergraduates and high
              school teachers to work  in  the  research labs either during the school year
              or during  a  subsequent summer.  ***
