Title       : Teaching Computer Ethics with Workshops and the Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0296155

Award Number: 0296155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 8,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Miller miller.keith@uis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tracy K. Camp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah G. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie A. Smith King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Ill at Springfield
	      PO Box 19243
	      Springfield, IL  627949243    217/206-7409

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

People who make technical decisions must be educated to
              make good ethical decisions. Many computer science departments do not
              explicitly teach computer ethics, professional ethics, or computers and society
              issues. Not enough CS faculty are willing and able to teach such courses.
              Another glaring problem in computer science education is the discipline's poor
              record for attracting and retaining women students and faculty. This project
              educates and supports computer science faculty who want to teach computer
              ethics and who are concerned about the gender imbalance in the field of
              computer science.
.
Web-based materials for teaching computer ethics to
              undergraduate computer science majors are being developed.  The materials are
              being closely integrated with the upcoming third edition of Computer Ethics by
              Deborah Johnson. The materials are designed for classes that are online or face
              to face, semester or quarter, and at any undergraduate level. The materials
              emphasize computer ethics theory and analytical skills, professional ethics,
              and gender issues. These materials do not duplicate existing materials, but,
              with permission, link to existing materials.  This project is working
              collaboratively with DUE 9980768, which is developing case studies based upon
              the ImpactCS Project guidelines for learning objectives.

Each summer for
              three years, a week long summer workshop is being conducted to enable
              participants to use the Web materials and WebCT to prepare their computer
              ethics class. Faculty participants are learning ethical theory and practice
              skills in ethics teaching, online education, and evaluation and assessment
              techniques. During the academic year, faculty have access to the investigators.
              Faculty participants are using materials provided by the investigators and
              materials they develop themselves. The investigators and faculty participants
              are collaborating in evaluation of materials as they are used with students. 
              

Formative and summative evaluations are being conducted by an evaluation
              expert to assess the ease of use of web-based materials developed on a common
              platform, the integration of materials with the textbook, the level of
              confidence of faculty to teach the new material, and the student learning as
              measured by tests, projects and ethical attitude surveys.  Dissemination is
              being accomplished through the faculty workshops, the web site, and commercial
              publication of the materials in conjunction with the textbook.  

