Title       : Adaptive Multiple-Scale Meshfree Method for Geo-Mechanics and Earth-Moving
               Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2001   
File        : a0296112

Award Number: 0296112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiun-Shyan Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Conventional finite element methods exhibit a number of shortcomings in
              analyzing problems that involve large deformation, high gradient, material
              separation, and multiple-scale phenomena.  These difficulties are partially due
              to the regularity requirement of the finite element mesh.  In agricultural and
              construction industries, designs for high productivity earth-moving equipment
              are highly desirable.  The understanding of soil motion during excavation,
              hauling, and dumping is critical to the design of high productivity
              earth-moving equipment.  Soil motion during the earth-moving process exhibits
              excessive plastic deformation in conjunction with failure mechanisms.  Finite
              element methods have not been successfully applied to the analysis of
              earth-moving
primarily due to an inability to effectively model large material
              distortion and separation.
There is also a fundamental difficulty associated
              with the numerical solution of strain
localization that often exists in
              analyzing earth-moving processes.  Grid-based numerical methods such as finite
              element methods introduce a length scale, i.e., the mesh size, in a bifurcation
              problem. As a result, the numerical solution can be sensitively dependent on
              the mesh size.  The multiple-scale nature of shear-band formation in
              geotechnical materials also adds considerable complication to conventional
              finite element approaches.
The objective of this research is to develop a
              practical simulation method capable of predicting large deformation, shear-band
              formation, damage evolution, and material separation in geotechnical materials
              with applications to earth-moving processes.  Special emphasis will be given to
              the development of an adaptive multiple-scale meshfree method that allows an
              interactive and continuous h- and p- model refinement in the simulation of soil
              motion.  The local shear-band and damage mechanisms are critical to overall
              soil motion in earth moving processes.  The ultimate goal is to capture the
              fine-scale local shear-band and shear/tensile failure mechanisms embedded in
              the overall soil response.  A collaboration with Caterpillar will enable
              research effort on experimental validation of the employed constitutive model
              and the proposed meshfree methods.  The major objectives of this research are:
              
1. Based on the PI's previous research progress on meshfree methods for
              geotechnical
materials, develop meshfree multiple-scale formulation and h- and
              p- adaptivity methods for application to earth-moving simulation.
2. Develop a
              stabilized conforming nodal integration for accelerated meshfree
              large
deformation analysis of geotechnical materials.
3. Develop an enhanced
              regularization method for analysis of material instability in
              strain
localization.
4. Collaborate with Caterpillar to verify the
              performance of the employed material models and the proposed meshfree methods
              by comparison with experimental data provided by Caterpillar.
This proposed
              multiple-scale adaptive meshfree method extends the development from
              an
ongoing collaboration with Caterpillar Inc. The commitment from 
              Caterpillar to aid in validation of the soil constitutive and damage models and
              meshfree methods will assure the applicability of the proposed meshfree methods
              for practical use in analyzing industrial earth-moving problems.

