Title       : Band-gap Materials, Mesoscopic Structures, and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a0296150

Award Number: 0296150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Kuchment   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072248
Mathematical Sciences: Band-Gap Materials,
              Mesoscopic Structures, and Related Topics


Abstract

0072248 
              Kuchment


The aim of the project is to develop and advance analytic and
              numerical methods for studying 
wave propagation in a band-gap or mesoscopic
              medium. Issues under study include graph 
models for mesoscopic band-gap
              materials and circuits of quantum wires, unusual spectral 
properties of such
              materials discovered previously, effects of localized impurities in a periodic
              
medium, waveguiding properties of linear defects, and spectral properties of
              periodic materials.

BAND-GAP MATERIALS have attracted considerable attention
              since the idea was suggested
in 1987.  A photonic crystal is a low-loss
              dielectric material, consisting of a periodic structure of 
regions with
              different values of the dielectric constant (for example, air bubbles placed
              
periodically into an optically dense dielectric).  Under appropriate
              conditions such a material can 
exhibit band gaps, that is, ranges of
              frequencies in which electromagnetic waves cannot 
propagate through the
              material.  Acoustic, elastic, metallic, and magnetic analogs of photonic
              
crystals are also important, although much less studied.  Band-gap materials
              have impressive 
applications to high efficiency light sources, antennas, low
              threshold lasers, mirrors, optical 
information transmission lines, quantum
              computers, sound attenuation, heat insulation, and in 
many other areas. 
              MESOSCOPIC SYSTEMS are extremely thin (as narrow as 2nm) surfaces 
(quantum
              walls), wires (quantum wires) or dots (quantum dots) carved out of
              semi-conductors or 
super-conductors. These objects enjoy a wealth of
              applications even more striking than the ones 
of band-gap materials.  This
              project is an investigation of the intricate mathematical problems, in 
many
              cases similar for the two types of media, that arise in modeling the creation
              of these 
materials and in studying their properties.

