Title       : Development of GRAMM Method and Software for Protein-Protein Docking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a0296003

Award Number: 0296003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309152             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilya A. Vakser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The main goal of this project is to obtain a method  which will produce an
              accurate model of a protein-protein  complex from two separate, flexible, and
              possible inaccurate  protein structures.  A distinguishing feature of this new 
              docking procedure is that it searches through the  conformation of each protein
              in addition to the relative  positions of the two proteins.  This project
              involves the  further development of GRAMM (Global RAnge Molecular  Matching)
              docking methodology and software for protein  docking.  GRAMM is used at low
              resolution to predict the  structures of complexes in the non-redundant
              database of  protein complexes using both actual individual structures  from
              the complexes and their models.       The flexible docking procedure is
              expected to be more  accurate and more robust with respect to the inaccuracies
              in  the initial approximate structures of the interacting  proteins than are
              the currently prevalent rigid docking  procedures.  The approach will be
              especially useful in view  of the rate of advance in the human genome project,
              since it  will allow a rapid evaluation  of functions for a large  number of
              predicted protein structures.  Thus, the  combination of protein structure
              prediction and protein  docking is expected to increase greatly the usefulness
              of  molecular modeling.
