Title       : Deformations of hyperbolic 3-manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2001   
File        : a0296025

Award Number: 0296025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth W. Bromberg bromberg@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS-0072062


Abstract:
Professor Bromberg plans to study spaces
              of hyperbolic metrics on a fixed
3-manifold. Two types of questions will be
              investigated. The first of
these is a study of hyperbolic cone-manifolds.
              Finite volume
cone-manifolds arise naturally as a link between cusped
              hyperbolic
3-manifolds and closed hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Bromberg's goal is
              to
parameterize spaces of infinite volume hyperbolic cone-manifolds and
              use
this parameterization to understand non-singular hyperbolic
              structures.
The second question involves the topology of deformation spaces
              of
complete, infinite volume metrics on open 3-manifolds. Anderson and
              Canary
have shown that the space of such metrics on a manifold of fixed
              homotopy
type has a very complicated topology akin to that of the Mandelbrot
              set
studied in complex dynamics. In joint work with J. Holt, Bromberg
              has
shown that this complicated behavior persists even if the
              deformation
space is restricted to metrics on a 3-manifold of fixed
              homeomorphism type
generalizing work of McMullen. Complex projective
              structures naturally
appear in both of these topics. Bromberg also plans to
              study projective
structures with a given discrete holonomy representation.
              

This project lies in the field of low dimensional topology and
              geometry.
The main objects studied are three-manifolds which are spaces with
              one
more dimension than a surface (a 2-manifold). Three-manifolds,
such as
              the space that we live in, are some of the most basic
objects in mathematics
              yet there are many simple questions about them that
we cannot answer. A metric
              is a way of measuring distance on a 3-manifold
and a hyperbolic metric is one
              of a special class of metrics such that at
every point and in every direction
              the geometry locally looks the same.
The work of W. Thurston has shown that
              "most" 3-manifolds carry a
hyperbolic metric and earlier work of Ahlfors, Bers
              and others has shown
that an open 3-manifold that has an infinite volume
              hyperbolic metric will
in fact have many hyperbolic metrics. There is a vast
              program to
understand all such metrics of which this project is a piece.

