Title       : The Role of Mating Preferences in Shaping Interspecific Divergence in Mating
               Signals in Mollies (Poeciliidae: Poecilia: Mollienesia).
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0296173

Award Number: 0296173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $461000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret B. Ptacek mptacek@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The role of mating preferences in shaping interspecific divergence in mating
              signals in mollies (Poeciliidae: Poecilia: Molliensia).  Margaret B.
              Ptacek

The importance of female mating preferences in shaping the features
              of male mating signals within a species is well established.  However, the
              influence of female mating preferences within a species on the divergence of
              these mating signals between species is just beginning to be explored.  This
              project is designed to explore the role of female mating preferences in
              generating and maintaining the behavioral and morphological changes associated
              with divergence between sailfin and shortfin mollies (Poeciliidae: Poecilia:
              Mollienesia).  Mollies are an ideal model system for such a study because they
              exhibit enormous diversity in male secondary sexual characteristics and mating
              behaviors both within and between species.  Differences in the two major
              species complexes of mollies (sailfin and shortfin species) are associated with
              divergence in their mating systems.  Males of sailfin species have a greatly
              enlarged dorsal fin that they fan in front of females in a characteristic
              courtship display used to elicit female cooperation in mating.  Males of
              shortfin species show neither the enlarged dorsal fin nor perform courtship
              display behavior.  Previous studies have shown that females of sailfin species
              use particular features of the enlarged dorsal fin and courtship display to
              distinguish both between different males of their own species and between males
              of their own species and males of shortfin species. Such a pattern of similar
              female mating preferences at both the intra- and interspecific levels argues
              that sexual selection may have played an important role in promoting the
              divergence in these traits between sailfin and shortfin species of mollies.  In
              addition, the phylogenetic (genealogical) relationships of the entire molly
              group have been determined.  This phylogeny will provide a framework upon which
              to study the origin and direction of change in male secondary sexual traits and
              behaviors as well as the origin of female preferences for these traits in a
              number of sailfin and shortfin molly species.
	The research proposed here will
              determine how female mating preferences can shape the divergence of male mating
              signals both within and between species.  Few tests of the relationship between
              sexual selection and species recognition have been performed and mollies offer
              an ideal system in which to investigate this link.  The results of the proposed
              studies will provide an important model for how sexual selection might lead to
              the evolution of premating reproductive isolating mechanisms and eventual
              speciation in a group of poeciliid fishes for which much is already known about
              behavioral, ecological and life history trait evolution.

