Title       : Stress-Induced DNA Duplex Destabilization in Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0296186

Award Number: 0296186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $461543             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig J. Benham cjbenham@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Previous theoretical work by this group has suggested specific roles for
              stress-induced DNA duplex destabilization (SIDD) in several essential
              biological activities. These include the mecha-nisms of activation of two
              families of superhelically regulated genes in prokaryotes (those regulated by
              integration host factor (IHF) binding, and those of the SOS system), and in the
              attachment of eukaryotic chromosomal DNA to the nuclear scaffold. Experiments
              performed by collaborators have verified our predictions and documented the
              role of SIDD in these (and other) regulatory events. This entirely new approach
              has provided crucial insights into the mechanisms of regu-lation of several
              biological processes. In particular, it has resolved a long-standing dilemma by
              elucidating the molecular basis for several regulatory mechanisms whose active
              sites exhibit no clear sequence homologies. This success has sparked a growing
              interest in examining whether SIDD may play roles in other events for which the
              molecular basis is not completely understood at present.

The currently
              proposed research program will build on these efforts in three directions. To
              enable scientists at other academic institutions to efficiently assess the SIDD
              properties of genomic regions, we will develop a Web site where researchers can
              submit sequences for automated analysis. This will require substantial
              modifications to the existing analysis programs to maximize their
              applicability, flexibility and user-friendliness. We will extend our ongoing
              collaboration with Dr. Wes Hatfield (UC Irvine) to investigate the roles of
              superhelicity and SIDD in prokaryotic transcriptional regulation. And we will
              continue to investigate the role of SIDD in eukaryotic scaffold attachment in
              collaboration with Dr. Jurgen Bode at the GBF in Braunschweig, Germany.

In
              the latter collaboration we will determine how the amount of destabilization
              experienced and the extent of the destabilized region correlate with the
              experimentally measured strength of scaffold binding. This will elucidate the
              precise SIDD properties that are involved in bind-ing. We will test the
              valldity of these conclusions by predicting binding activities from the SIDD
              properties of destabillzed sites in the human IFN gene cluster, then comparing
              these results to the experimentally measured binding strengths. Using these
              results we will develop computa-tional methods to search genomic DNA sequences
              for scaffold attached regions (SARs) based on their SIDD properties. This will
              provide the first method for inferring chromosomal organization directly from
              DNA sequence.

The ongoing collaboration with Dr. Wes Hatfield will extend
              our original studies of the role of superhelical DNA destabilization in the
              activation of the IHF-regulated ilvPG operon promoter. We will investigate
              whether other IHE-regulated genes have the SIDD properties found to be central
              to the mechanism of activation of this operon. And we will investigate the
              destabilization properties and other attributes of all the genes in the E. coli
              genome that expression chip experiments (to be performed by Dr. Hatfield) show
              are regulated either by IHF or by superhelicity. This will provide the first
              complete assessment of the range of mechanisms by which DNA superhelicity
              exerts transcriptional regulatory effects in
              prokaryotes.












1

