Title       : Atmosphere-Land Surface Interaction Over A Midwest Watershed: CASES-97
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0296159

Award Number: 0296159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret A. LeMone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NorthWest Res Assoc Inc
	      14508 NE, 20th Street
	      Bellevue, WA  980093027    425/644-9660

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This renewal project seeks to understand the interaction between the land
              surface and the atmosphere.  It continues the analysis of data collected in a
              month-long field expedition conducted in the spring of 1997.  The overall
              objective of this project is to observe the effect of surface processes on the
              evolution of the atmospheric boundary layer over the course of a 24-hr period
              (diurnal cycle).  Though observational in nature, the project is closely allied
              with on-going work in atmospheric boundary layer modeling and parameterization
              of boundary layer effects in large-scale models.  It is unique in several
              respects: (a) it concentrates upon a mesoscale watershed with moderately
              complex terrain (Kansas); (b) it focuses upon fair weather situations with no
              lower clouds and only scattered cirrus; (c) intensive observing periods covered
              4 complete and 2 partial diurnal cycles with varying degrees of soil moisture
              and plant maturity.  

Specifically, the current objectives are:  

o  
              Extend atmospheric sensible heat and moisture budget computation for two
              intensive observing periods (IOP) from the morning period to the evening period
              and include entrainment from the atmosphere on top of the boundary layer.

o 
               Complete budget computations for the rest of the IOPs and investigate the
              effect of' observed variations in soil moisture and land cover.

o Compare an
              evapotranspiration algorithm to measured 5-cm soil moisture and eddy
              correlation evaporation.

o  Investigate the characteristics of the nocturnal
              boundary layer. 

Through interaction with atmospheric modelers, this
              observational project will contribute to the improvement of boundary layer
              parameterizations within large atmospheric models. 

