Title       : Design of Machines Organized as Processor-and-Memory Hierarchies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2001    
File        : a0296005

Award Number: 0296005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Yavuz Oruc                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose A. Fortes fortes@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A processor-and-memory hierarchy is an extension of the familiar notion of
              memory hierarchy that consists of including processors into one or more levels
              of the memory hierarchy. Assuming that the top (i.e. first) level of the
              hierarchy is the fastest, any given memory level is extended with processors
              that are slower, less expensive and in larger number than those in the
              preceding level.

Previous work led to evidence that processor-and-memory
              hierarchies are well suited for many applications and have better
              cost-performance than conventional designs.  Early research concentrated on
              message-passing designs and scientific applications. This project investigates
              shared-memory solutions and extends the applications under consideration to
              include commercial applications in general and data mining software in
              particular. Also underway is work towards the incorporation of data
              input/output capabilities into processor-and-memory hierarchies.

There is
              considerable evidence that forthcoming hardware technologies and application
              performance demands will lead to computer chips that combine large amounts of
              memory and multiple processors.  This research shows how to combine these
              systems to build larger, highly powerful and yet cost-efficient
              multiprocessors.  Conversely, it also identifies features that are desirable
              for chips useful for implementing processor-and-memory hierarchies. The overall
              contribution of the project consists of techniques and designs for computing
              machines that are faster and cheaper than those currently available.


