Title       : CAREER: Integrating Research and Education on Arsenic Removal from Drinking
               Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a0296109

Award Number: 0296109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374782             (Estimated)
Investigator: Baolin Deng DengB@Missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Arsenic is a toxic and carcinogenic metalloid that presents a major human health
              threat. The potentially very high cost of meeting the new U. S. Environmental
              Protection Agency standard necessitates the development of more cost-effective
              methods for arsenic removal.

The research objective of this CAREER proposal
              is to develop an innovative arsenic removal process using membrane-enhanced
              sorption with iron-based materials (IBM) as sorbents. The hypothesis is that
              membrane-induced concentration polarization effects will concentrate arsenic
              species in the concentration polarization layer and the higher arsenic
              concentration will result in more sorption onto an iron-based material. The
              proposed system could result in significant cost savings for arsenic treatment
              due to less chemical use, prolonged operation between backwashes, and less
              wastes for handling and disposal.  Experimental and modeling work will be
              completed in order to select the most suitable membrane and a particulate
              iron-based material, and a bench-scale pilot system will be optimized for
              effective arsenic removal and cost analysis.

The integrated CAREER
              educational activities focus on K-12 science teacher training for the State of
              New Mexico through an integrated teaching-research-curriculum development
              program. Science teacher training for those from historically underrepresented
              groups in science and engineering or those who teach students from those groups
              is critically needed in New Mexico. Since science and engineering are best
              taught to the K-12 science teachers and their students through hands-on,
              inquiry-based experiences, laboratory and field projects on arsenic measurement
              and treatment will be implemented as part of the program. In addition, New
              Mexico Tech has a high percentage of minority undergraduate and graduate
              students. While all students would benefit form research participation, the
              CAREER support will provide historically underrepresented minority students
              with critically-needed research opportunities in science and engineering.

