Title       : Optimal Design of Materials, Structures, and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a0296064

Award Number: 0296064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Lipton lipton@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project addresses a suite of structural optimization problems unified by
              their  mathematical formulation.  The problems treated in this project come
              from several application areas including the design of gradient coils used in
              magnetic resonance imaging, catalysis design, the design of damage tolerant
              bridges, and nonlinear optics.  Presently there is no systematic design
              methodology that addresses these problems.  The first goal of this project is
              to extend the mathematical theory of homogenization so that one can
              systematically describe minimizing sequences of designs.  The second goal is to
              use the homogenization theory to develop numerical methods for the systematic
              solution of these design problems.


This research project focuses on areas
              of technological interest that require new mathematical and computational
              techniques for the simultaneous optimization of material properties and
              structural form.  The problems treated in this project come from several
              application areas including the design of gradient coils used in magnetic
              resonance imaging, catalysis design, the design of damage tolerant bridges, and
              nonlinear optics.  These problems, although diverse in nature, can be
              formulated along similar mathematical lines.  The goal of this project is to
              develop a mathematical and computational tool box for the systematic solution
              of problems requiring the simultaneous design of material and structure.

