Title       : Behavioral Consequences of Relaxation and Restoration of Mammalian Predation as
               a Selection Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0296164

Award Number: 0296164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Berger jberger@wyoming.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wildlife Conservation Soc
	      2300 Southern Boulevard
	      Bronx, NY  104601099    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT


Proposal Number:  9809938

PI:  Berger,
              Joel

Most of the Earth's ecosystems are more likely to lose than to gain
              large carnivores.  Because most animals evolved under some form of predation,
              our currently altered environments are missing dominant selective forces and
              the biological importance of behavior may be under or over emphasized. This
              project tests predictions of a simple model to enhance knowledge of
              consequences of a predator-prey disequilibrium.  The responsiveness of an
              assemblage of prey species will be contrasted in systems where the demographic
              effects of predation vary.  Study goals include understanding of: 1) prey
              retention of predator-recognition abilities once predation has been relaxed and
              restored; and 2) how anti-predatory behavior changes. Cues associated with
              past, present, and novel carnivores as well as neutral stimuli will be used
              during experimental field playback trials. 

Most reserves and protected
              areas in the USA and elsewhere have lost large mammalian predators.  Because
              public pressure is great to restore wild carnivores, it is prudent to enhance
              fundamental knowledge about how prey respond to potential changes in their
              ecological communities.  This study will contribute to present knowledge by
              testing assumptions about the importance of predation, interactions between
              species, and prey memory of predators.  This information which is critical for
              understanding basic processes in animal behavior and for the restoration of
              natural communities.

