Title       : Analysis of Steep Angle Seismic Reflections from Earth's Inner and Outer Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a0296078

Award Number: 0296078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leigh S. House                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 20,  2001    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80196              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith D. Koper koper@eas.slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Abstract for proposal EAR0087330 (PH # 17x)

Title: Analysis of Steep Angle
              Seismic Reflections from Earth's Inner and Outer Core

PI: Keith D. Koper,
              University of Arizona

The proposed research focuses on seismic constraints
              of global variations in topography on the inner core-outer core boundary (ICB)
              and the core-mantle boundary (CMB). Variations in steep angle (S,P)KiKP-(S,P)cP
              differential travel times will be used to estimate the ellipticity of the inner
              and outer core, to search for short-wavelength topography on these boundaries,
              to provide observational bounds on the homogeneity of the liquid outer core,
              and to search for evidence of differential rotation of Earth's inner core.
              Variations in steep angle outer core differential travel times, primarily
              ScP-PcP, will also be used to quantify global variations in vertical mantle
              profiles of bulk sound velocity. 

An unprecedented number of steep angle
              differential core reflection data are available from the seismicity catalog
              produced by the prototype International Data Center (pIDC). Approximately 20 of
              the globally distributed stations that report data to the pIDC consist of
              arrays of short period vertical component seismometers. Array stations are
              markedly more sensitive to steep angle core reflections than traditional three
              component stations, and the azimuth and slowness observations made by array
              stations greatly reduce phase misidentification. By considering the
              differential travel times of pairs of such reflections the effects of
              earthquake mislocation and upper mantle heterogeneity are substantially reduced
              and seismic structure at the CMB and ICB is revealed.


