Title       : Macdonald Polynomials, Diagonal Harmonics, and the Geometry of Hilbert Schemes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0296203

Award Number: 0296203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Haiman mhaiman@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: Macdonald polynomials, diagonal harmonics, and the geometry
of
              Hilbert schemes.

Professor Haiman is working to complete the proof of a
              series of conjectures involving Macdonald polynomials, the so-called
              "n-factorial" conjecture, and the character formula for diagonal harmonics. 
              The methods involve a detailed algebraic geometrical study of the Hilbert
              scheme of points in the plane and related algebraic varieties.  In earlier work
              Professor Haiman showed that certain hypotheses on the singularities and sheaf
              cohomology of these varieties would imply the desired algebraic results (and
              with Garsia, showed that the latter imply related combinatorial results).  The
              current work is to establish these geometric hypotheses.

Macdonald
              polynomials are a new family of symmetric functions.  Their discovery by
              Macdonald in 1988 was a surprising development in the theory of symmetric
              functions, which is a fundamental and classical part of mathematics with roots
              in the work of Euler, Jacobi, and Cauchy over a century ago.  Macdonald
              polynomials have since been found to have important applications in a wide
              range of areas including geometry, representation theory, and even theoretical
              physics.  At the time of their discovery, Macdonald conjectured that certain
              coefficients associated with his polynomials should be positive integers, the
              proof of which remains the most important unsolved problem in this area.  The
              successful completion of this project will solve this problem, proving the
              "Macdonald positivity conjecture," along with a related
              representation-theoretic conjecture of Garsia and the investigator known as the
              "n-factorial" conjecture, some related combinatorial conjectures, and strong
              new geometric properties of Hilbert schemes, which are likely to have further
              applications in geometry and representation theory.

