Title       : Planning and Workflow Management for a Virtual Laboratory for Structural Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2001   
File        : a0296035

Award Number: 0296035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 17,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $904382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan C. Marinescu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We propose to create an infrastructure, a Virtual Laboratory, to support sharing
              of knowledge in structural biology, to plan an experiment, and to facilitate a
              rigorous process of scientific discovery. We call it a virtual laboratory
              because it will allow an individual sitting in front of a computer connected to
              the Internet, to control an experiment, to follow the most relevant aspects of
              an experiment conducted in the past by a well established group, or to get
              advice at a critical junction. The process of discovery in structural biology,
              and other natural sciences like physics or chemistry is fairly complex, it
              involves some tedious and time consuming activities, sharing of knowledge,
              analysis of the results, backtracking. The virtual laboratory will
allow
              structural biologists to reduce the time to obtain the results, improve the
              quality of the results, and restructure the human involvement by allowing a
              scientist to concentrate on the experiment and the discovery process. To reduce
              the time to obtain results we need efficient components, fully integrated
              experiment, simulation, and modeling environments, and some form of knowledge
              sharing and management. To improve the quality of the solution we need to fully
              integrate sensors in the feedback loop and to use optimal model parameters.
              Last, but not least, we need to automate simple tasks like data migration,
              format conversion, and selection of optimal running condition for each
              computational task. The high level of sophistication necessary to obtain
              quality results in this field motivates our effort.
Some components of the
              infrastructure are specific to structural biology e.g. the interfaces for
              building the knowledge base, but the basic mechanisms e.g., the planning and
              the workflow enactment engines, are general and can be used for other classes
              of problems with similar characteristics. In this grant application we propose
              to develop agents for 3D structure determination using cryo TEM methods and to
              design an integrated workflow enactment engine based upon a Petri Net model
              with a planning engine and a knowledge management system.
All our programs are
              distributed under open source licenses from our Web site:
              http://bond.cs.purdue.edu. The project will contribute to education and support
              knowledge sharing in structural biology laboratories.
