Title       : Lattices, Trees and Group Actions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0296202

Award Number: 0296202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynne Walling                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa J. Carbone carbonel@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator has determined the necessary and sufficient conditions that
              ensure the existence of tree lattices, that is discrete subgroup of finite
              covolume in the automorphism group of a locally finite tree, giving a complete
              answer to the Bass-Lubotzky conjectures for the existence of tree lattices. 
              The intention is to explore the connections between tree lattices and lattices
              in rank 1 Lie groups over non-archimedean fields.  The investigator is
              interested in making explicit constructions of non-uniform lattices contained
              within  rank 1 Lie groups, comparing them with general tree lattices,
              covolumes, questions of arithmeticity and commensurability, and Hausdorff
              dimension.  Concerning lattices in Lie groups, A. Lubotzky showed that rank 1
              Lie groups over non-archimedean local fields contain uncountably many conjugacy
              classes of lattices.  The investigator has obtainted a topological description
              of Lubotzky's deformation spaces of lattices.  The aim now is to investigate 
              the analytic and algebro-geometric structure of these deformation spaces, and
              to construct infinite dimensional deformation spaces for non-uniform lattices. 
              The investigator and  H. Garland have established that Kac-Moody groups over
              finite fields contain lattices.  The aim is now to show that in rank 2 there
              are deformation spaces of lattices and to investigate the structure of the
              deformation spaces, of fundamental domains for non-uniform lattices, and of
              commensurability groups of uniform lattices in rank 2.  Under consideration
              also is the existence of uniform lattices and spherical buildings in higher
              rank, congruence subgroups, and lattices in non-split and generalized Kac-Moody
              groups.  The investigator and her colleagues aim, following the work of E.
              Rips, to give classification theorems for groups with free or stable actions on
              R-trees by isometries, and by  isometries and homothety.  The strategy is to
              give a classification of the pseudogroups of isometries of R, and then to
              combine  this with a structure theory for reconstructing group actions which
              has recently been developed.

We are studying infinite 'trees', which are
              connected graphs with no closed circuits, and the algebraic structure of their
              symmetries.  The algebraic structures that are 'discrete' and have 'finite
              volume' are of particular importance.  We have established the existence of
              such symmetries, and we are investigating their properties.  This allows us to
              study the interactions of mathematics with physics.  Our techniques also have
              applications in algebra, geometry and topology.

