Title       : The Chemical Ecology of Shallow-Water Marine Macroalgae and Invertebrates on the
               Antarctic Peninsula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0296207

Award Number: 0296207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 5,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bill J. Baker bbaker@fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9901076
BAKER
The proposed research focuses on three questions concerning the
              evolution of chemical defenses and the underlying assumptions concerning the
              costs and benefits of producing defensive secondary metabolites.  The first
              question concerns the Resource Availability Model of chemical defense.  The
              proposed research will examine whether macroalgae grown under carbon (light)
              limitation produce quantitatively higher levels of defensive compounds than
              those grown in an optimal light environment, and whether chemical defenses in
              antarctic macroalgae of the nutrient-rich peninsula region are likely to
              include nitrogen compounds.  The second question addresses the Optimal Defense
              Theory in macroalgae and invertebrates.  The proposed research will determine
              the extent to which chemical defenses are more abundant in reproductive tissue
              or in other tissues with a high energy content, including offspring (larvae). 
              A corollary to this latter objective is a determination of whether
              lecithotrophic larvae have a higher incidence of chemical defense than
              planktotrophic larvae.  Finally, using previous work in the Ross Sea as a
              starting point, the investigation will determine the broad scale spatial
              variation in chemical defenses and begin to address the evolutionary factors
              which might promote variation, if it exists. The program will significantly
              advance our understanding of the evolution of chemical defenses as well as the
              nature and role of bioactive agents in the ecology of antarctic marine
              benthos.

