Title       : Computer Simulation of Geotechnical and Hazardous Waste Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a0296002

Award Number: 0296002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Santi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey D. Cawlfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40) 
Teachers of Geology, Geological Engineering, and
              Civil Engineering are challenged with the task of teaching students how to
              apply geological concepts to solve real-world engineering problems. While
              students receive ample presentation of geological concepts, engineering theory,
              and case histories, they receive very little practice using their knowledge in
              ways required in the hazardous waste and geotechnical industries. This project
              aims to enhance and calibrate a simulator for hazardous waste and geotechnical
              investigations, to test its effectiveness as a teaching tool for undergraduate
              and graduate instruction, and to explore its use as a research tool to
              probabilistically evaluate site conditions. This simulator, called BEST
              DrillSim, addresses the need for students to receive practical experience
              designing subsurface investigations and interpreting the resulting data, using
              the geologic concepts they have learned in class. The simulator uses real or
              simulated hazardous waste or geotechnical sites. The students select locations
              for simulated borings, interpret the data returned by the computer, and prepare
              the next step of investigation. The student's goal is to optimize expenses and
              the number of borings while determining the limits of ground-water
              contamination or the range and variability of geotechnical properties at the
              site. The instructor is provided detailed site information, including
              three-dimensional gif file animations of site geology, static maps of
              containment plumes, ground elevations, ground-water surfaces, and tabulated
              summaries of geotechnical and hydrogeologic parameters for each stratigraphic
              unit. Version 1 of the simulators, called BEST DrillSim, was developed as part
              of a series of Basic Engineering Software for Teaching (BEST) produced by the
              instructional Software Development Center at the University of Missouri-Rolla.
              The three site databases included in Version 1 offer a variety of geological
              environments for students to investigate: meandering stream alluvial sediments,
              coastal and shallow marine deposits, and residual soil over shale bedrock. Each
              site database contains a 700,000 node array, with each node point associated
              with a specific geologic unit. Each geological unit has a defined set of
              geotechnical and hydrogeological properties, which have a random variability
              about a central value, and which vary with depth. Each site also has associated
              surface topography, ground-water topography (for as many as three aquifers),
              and contaminant plume maps. The enhanced version (Version 2) of BEST DrillSim,
              completed under the current project, automatically generates sites.
              Hypothetical sites are generated using geological and site constraints input by
              the instructor, matching the specified conditions to default probability
              distributions of geological, geotechnical, and hydrogeological parameters, and
              then randomly selecting values within these probability distributions. The
              capability to probabilistically generate sites means that an infinite number of
              sites may be produced, without the labor involved in defining individual sites
              as in Version 1. This capability also allows exploration of probabilistic
              simulation of real sites, where various hypotheses about site conditions may be
              evaluated through Monte Carlo simulation. Evaluation of the simulator is taking
              place in three classes at the University of Missouri-Rolla, and by independent 
               ers outside of the university. Electronic copies of the simulator will be
              distributed via CD-ROM through commercial vendors.



