Title       : Collaborative Research: Anonymous Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0296194

Award Number: 0296194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Shields clay@cs.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this work is to support the understanding and development of
              protocols
that can provide personal privacy over the Internet. While there
              have been some protocols
proposed and implemented that hide the IP address of
              network communicators, there has been
no systematic study of such protocols,
              nor have methods of analyzing the anonymity and security
of those protocols
              been developed. A thorough understanding of anonymity is important not
              only
for the development, analysis, and use of anonymous protocols for
              personal privacy, but also for
understanding how network attackers can hide
              their location and for developing methods to track
those attackers. Our
              eventual goal is to develop new techniques and protocols for
              anonymity,
including a \logic of anonymity" similar to those developed for
              authentication protocols that
can be used to describe and analyze anonymous
              protocols.
This proposal considers a number of contributions on this research
              area. Our first contri-
bution will be to take a more general view of
              anonymous communication than previous work
by considering protocols and
              techniques for hiding the identity of a responder from all other
parties, and
              for providing completely anonymous communication in which both the initiator
              and
responder are anonymous to each other and all other parties. The former
              technique is useful
for anonymous web sites (rather than just anonymous web
              browsing); the later technique is
useful for true two-party privacy over the
              Internet. Our second class of contributions will be to
consider generalized
              protocol construction. This extends our past work, which de-coupled
              the
forward and reverse paths of anonymous communication, giving rise to a
              large family of anony-
mous protocols. We will continue investigation of those
              protocols, and examine what network
support is available for anonymous
              communication and what support might best be provided in
the future. Our third
              contribution will be to provide a formalism for anonymous protocols such
that
              beliefs regarding entity identities can be reasoned by stating assumptions and
              deriving log-
ical conclusions from following steps of defined protocols.
              Fourth, we will consider the network
performance of anonymous routing
              protocols in an in-depth fashion, including not only latency
and traffic, but
              also requirements of streaming media applications and traditional
              TCP-based
bulk-data transfer applications. Finally, we will consider
              heretofore ignored security concerns
of existing protocols, initially
              considering path analysis attacks and attacks that cause some
participants to
              be unfairly accused by third parties. The formalism provided by our
              proposed
logic of anonymity will be a foundational component of our security
              analysis work.
Collaboration between these our two institutions will allow us
              to leverage the existing
strength in networking at the University of
              Massachusetts and the existing strength in secu-
rity at Purdue.
1
