Title       : Museum-Related Multimedia and Virtual Environments for Teaching and Learning
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0296001

Award Number: 0296001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1008906            (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Dede Chris_Dede@Harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim X. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin C. Ruess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn A. Fontana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Allison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research project is creating and evaluating multi-user virtual environments
              (MUVEs) that use digitized museum resources to enhance middle school students'
              motivation and learning about science and its impacts on society. MUVEs enable
              multiple simultaneous participants to access virtual architectures configured
              for learning, to interact with digital artifacts, to represent themselves
              through graphical "avatars," to communicate both with other participants and
              with computer-based agents, and to enact collaborative activities of various
              types. The project's educational environments are extending current MUVE
              capabilities in order to study the science learning potential of interactive
              virtual museum exhibits and participatory historical situations in science
              units using the NSF-funded Multimedia and Thinking Skills (MMTS) program, an
              inquiry-centered curriculum engine. George Mason University's (GMU) Virtual
              Environments Lab, the Division of Information Technology and Society in the
              Smithsonian's National Museum of American History (NMAH), and pilot teachers
              from the Gunston Middle School in Arlington, Virginia are co-designing these
              MUVEs and implementing them in a variety of middle school settings. In
              particular, this project is studying how the design characteristics of these
              learning experiences affect students' motivation and educational outcomes, as
              well as the extent to which digitized museum can aid pupils' performance on
              assessments related to national science standards. This research also is
              examining both the process needed to successfully implement MMTS-based MUVEs in
              typical classroom settings and ways to enable strong learning outcomes across a
              wide range of individual student characteristics.

