Title       : Topological Techniques for Computing with Perverse Sheaves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  2001    
File        : a0296011

Award Number: 0296011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail Grinberg grinberg@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aise J. deJong  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              
9971030
Grinberg
     This award supports the research of Mikhail Grinberg,
              a postdoctoral
associate of Professor deJong.  Perverse sheaves are a part of
              algebraic
topology that is about twenty years old.  They have been applied
              with great
success to the study of complex algebraic singularities.  Perhaps
              the most
notable applications have been to spaces and stratifications related
              to
algebraic groups, yielding new insights in representation theory.  Over
              the
next two years, M. Grinberg will work on four research projects
              whose
common goal is to develop the computational techniques of the
              subject.
Specifically, the focus is on computing microlocal invariants of
              sheaves
and stratifications and on computing with nearby cycles sheaves, in
              the
presence of symmetry.  The first problem is to understand the
              microlocal
geometry of the nilcone in a complex semisimple Lie algebra.  The
              second
is to study the geometry of the enveloping semigroup of a semisimple
              group,
recently introduced by E. Vinberg.  The third project is to explore
              possible
applications of quasi-conical symmetry to the microlocal study
              of
stratifications.  The last project, joint with D. Kazhdan, is to study
              the
space of formal arcs of finite codimension in a singular variety. 
              The
common theme throughout this work is to learn to extract the key
              topological
invariants of the singular spaces and maps that arise in the study
              of
algebraic groups, their representations, and invariants.
     Loosely
              speaking, the theory of perverse sheaves is a systematic way
to exploit the
              fact that, for a singular space defined over the complex
numbers, the real and
              the imaginary directions contribute to the topology
in dual ways.  This theory
              is a part of algebraic topology: a branch of
mathematics concerned with the
              properties of higher dimensional spaces
that are preserved under continuous
              deformations.  Most applications of
algebraic topology are based on the
              following key idea: to consider all
objects of a certain kind as points in a
              single ``configuration space''
(sometimes called a ``parameter space'' or a
              ``phase space'').  For example,
all possible states of a mechanical system, or
              all possible situations in an
economic game (e.g., an auction) may be viewed
              as points of an appropriate
configuration space.  The topological properties
              of this space may then be
used to determine qualitative properties of the
              associated objects, such as
whether the mechanical system will evolve towards
              a periodic motion, or
whether the players in a game have optimal
              strategies.
***


