Title       : Nanoengineered Materials: From Polymer Composites to Structured Adsorbents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0085480

Award Number: 0085480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tapan Mukherjee                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1582536            (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna C. Balazs balazs1@engr.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Jasnow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Karl Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

This project is a collaborative effort between scientists at the University
              of Pittsburgh and MIT to investigate the problem of efficient design of
              nanocomposites, polymeric batteries, and adsorbents for hydrogen storage and
              molecular sieves for gas separations. The project takes advantage of a
              comprehensive suite for techniques, ranging from quantum mechanics to
              coarse-grained models to macroscopic finite element methods.  A variety of
              nanoparticles including carbon nanotubes are being investigated.  A possibility
              for prediction of electrical and mechanical properties of polymer/nanotube
              composites will allow the design of materials that exhibit both superior
              strength and high electrical conductivity.

Polymer nanocomposites that
              facilitate the development of lightweight polymeric batteries will also be
              studied as part of this research.  Quantum calculations of metal oxides
              embedded in a polymer matrix will be coupled with coarse-grained models of
              solid/diblock copolymer interactions and finite element methods to predict both
              the morphology and electronic properties of the resulting materials.  This same
              general scheme will be applied to mixtures of diblock copolymers and carbon
              nanotubes.  The combined approach will allow the design of next-generation of
              polymeric batteries from the electronic to the macroscopic levels.

In
              addition, new courses at the undergraduate level in "Computational Science" and
              graduate level courses in parallel code development, computational methods, and
              modeling of nanostructred materials are being developed.  The MIT Center for
              Computational Materials Science is also launching a comprehensive
              graduate-level initiative in Computational Materials Science. 

