Title       : Fresno Systemic Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0085098

Award Number: 0085098
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Celestine Pea                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5274733            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dolphas Trotter  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carole Sarkisian-Bonard czsarki@fresno.k12.ca.us  (Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Fresno Unified Sch Dist
	      Tulare & M Streets
	      Fresno, CA  93721    209/441-3684

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Fresno Urban Systemic Program

Proposal Abstract

The Fresno Unified School
              District (FUSD) proposes to significantly advance the science, mathematics, and
              technology education (SMT) of all K-12 students through the Fresno Urban
              Systemic Program (FUSP).  To accomplish the USP goals, the FUSD will provide
              all of its students with the fundamentals of mathematics and science so that
              their understanding, ability, and academic achievement will enable them to
              perform at or above their peers from around the world.  The FUSD goals are: (1)
              to improve science and mathematics achievement; (2) to increase the competency
              of SMT teachers and administrators; and (3) to strengthen the District's
              capacity to sustain SMT reform. 
 
The proposed plan is based on prior
              accomplishments primarily achieved via the Urban Systemic Initiatives Program
              and the Local Systemic Change Project funded by the National Science
              Foundation.  The District intends to move aggressively to scale up activities
              to ensure that the SMT standards were transformed into classroom practice as
              prescribed by the state.  A differentiated approach to professional development
              will be implemented via embedded day, after school, and summer activities.  The
              District will work with two of its eight feeder patterns during Year 1 to test
              pilot the proposed design model.

The District has taken on the challenge and
              commitment to use resources from multiple entities to upgrade facilities and
              provide state-of-the art improvements in support of a more rigorous course of
              study for SMT.  Existing partnerships with local institutions of higher
              education, educational consultants, cultural organizations, community groups,
              and parents will serve to maximize the USP efforts. 

