Title       : Biosci Ed Net (BEN)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0085840

Award Number: 0085840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yolanda S. George YGeorge@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne W. Carley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marsha L. Matyas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Musante  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), Directorate for
              Education and Human Resources Programs, Science's Signal Transduction Knowledge
              Environment (STKE), and Project 2061 --- with 11 other professional societies
              and coalitions for biology education --- have established the Biosci Ed Net
              (BEN) Collaborative. This Collaborative, through its Coordinating Council, is
              facilitating the development of digital library collections for the teaching
              and learning of undergraduate biology, with users at the center of the
              development. For the long-term, the BEN Collaborative views this initiative as
              a revolutionary approach for transforming undergraduate biology teaching and
              learning. Towards this end, the BEN Collaborative is developing a portal site
              to a collection of resources (tools and products), that adhere to uniform
              standards for the teaching and learning of biology by students at the
              undergraduate level. It is intended that the resources accessible through the
              site will have an impact on learning of the biological sciences by
              undergraduates with diverse interests and career aspirations (i.e., science
              majors, non-science majors, and prospective K-12 teachers). The materials will
              be collected and maintained by respected professional societies representing a
              broad spectrum of biological sciences, from molecular to population levels.
              During the next two years, the BEN Collaborative Partners are developing
              metadata/technical standards, and the American Physiological Society (APS),
              Ecological Society of America (ESA) and Science's STKE are modifying a
              representative sample of existing materials for the collection so that they
              meet these standards. In addition, Stanford University's HighWire Press is
              developing and testing the search engine for the portal site. Undergraduate
              biology educators are participating in development of standards, teaching
              resources, and field-testing of the portal site. Other Partners include Access
              Excellence (The National Health Museum), American Institute for Biological
              Sciences (AIBS), American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
              (ASBMB), American Society for Microbiology (ASM), BioQuest Curriculum
              Consortium (BCC), National Association of Biology Teachers (NABT), National
              Biological Information Infrastructure (NBII), and the Society for Toxicology
              (SOT). 


