Title       : The Geomicrobiology of Vostok Ice: Implications for Life in Lake Vostok
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2002   
File        : a0085400

Award Number: 0085400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $725000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Priscu jpriscu@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Voytek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward E. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Berry Lyons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Buford Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1075      LIFE IN EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Recent studies have revealed a number of subglacial lakes beneath the Antarctic
              ice sheet.  Lake Vostok, lying four kilometers beneath the ice surface is the
              largest of these lakes with a surface area near 10,000 square kilometers and a
              depth exceeding six hundred meters. A permanent ice sheet covered the lake
              about fifteen million years ago, isolating it from the atmosphere.  This
              interdisciplinary project will examine the following:  the physical stresses in
              deep glacial and accretion ice; the role of clathrates on gas dynamics within
              the lake; the origin of microbes in accretion ice; the physiological state of
              ice-bound microbes; the geochemistry of the ice column (bulk and within ice
              veins); and living microbes in ice veins that form at triple junctions in the
              ice crystal matrix.  Collectively, results from this study will provide new
              information on the deepest ice yet collected and allow boundaries to be placed
              on conditions within Lake Vostok.  Considering the enormous financial and
              logistic effort that will be required to obtain uncontaminated samples from
              Lake Vostok, it is imperative that conditions within the overlying ice, which
              presumably supplies the nutrients and biological seed to the lake, be
              understood before any attempt is made to sample the actual lake water.
              Information collected will provide critical background for the development and
              implementation of a sterile sample recovery system. Results from this
              interdisciplinary study will allow meaningful hypotheses to be drawn regarding
              the physical, chemical and biological properties of the Lake Vostok. 
