Title       : NSF/CBMS Regional Research Conference - Arrangements and Mathematical Physics -
               January 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a0085643

Award Number: 0085643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Cohen cohen@math.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hypergeometric functions have been the objects of mathematical study since the
              seventeenth century.  Recent advances in the subject include the development of
              the Aomoto-Gelfand theory of multivariable hypergeometric functions.  This
              theory is of particular interest in mathematical physics, with implications in
              the study of the Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov (KZ) differential equations from
              conformal field theory.  In the Aomoto-Gelfand theory, a significant role is
              played by hyperplane arrangements, finite collections of codimension one affine
              subspaces of a complex vector space.  The study of arrangements is a relatively
              new branch of mathematics on the interface between topology, algebra, algebraic
              geometry, combinatorics,
and analysis.

Professor Alexander Varchenko of the
              University of North Carolina will deliver a series of lectures entitled
              "Arrangements, Hypergeometric Functions, and KZ-Type Equations" at Louisiana
              State University.  As the
title indicates, in these lectures, Professor
              Varchenko will explain the role of hyperplane arrangements in the study of
              hypergeometric functions and equations of KZ-type. The lecture series, and
              surrounding discussion, will serve to crystalize recent research trends in
              arrangement theory deriving from connections with hypergeometric functions, and
              to focus attention on the outstanding important questions in this area and
              their applications.  The lectures should be of interest to experts and students
              in all branches of arrangement theory, and to newcomers to the field as well.
