Title       : Online Transportation Markets: Performance Models and Real-Time Fleet
               Operational Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0085691

Award Number: 0085691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hani S. Mahmassani   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Jaillet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Michael Walton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1607,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Transportation systems involve complex interactions among multiple resources,
              such as humans, vehicles, shipments, information and infrastructure.
              Transportation systems must increasingly operate in a highly dynamic
              environment, characterized by considerable stochasticity and unpredictability,
              to serve customers demanding ever more exacting service levels. For example,
              the kind of customer-responsive, made-to-order manufacturing that has been a
              major factor in the spectacular global success of companies such as Dell
              Computers, has shifted the logistics and transportation process from one that
              relies on long planned lead times to an extremely dynamic, short-term driven
              process. It is well recognized that information and communication technologies
              (ICT) are changing many aspects of the way in which business is conducted,
              though the full implications for transportation systems structure and
              operations continue to unfold. Explosive growth in electronic commerce and
              virtual integrated supply chains through the Internet create huge information
              flows that allow and require dynamic adjustments in the markets underlying the
              physical movement of goods.

A significant change may be taking place in the
              structure of the transportation market, with the development of auction markets
              for transportation services, in the form of Internet sites that match shipments
              (shippers' demand) and transportation capacity (carriers' offer). The
              development of these virtual hubs where shippers and carriers meet may have
              deep implications for the structure and efficiency of the transportation
              system. The complex relations that may emerge from the interaction of shippers,
              carriers, and intermediaries in auction sites may rapidly transform the virtual
              logistic net in the short term, and the way infrastructure and equipment is
              used and operated in the long term. These developments also have implications
              for the kinds of methodologies to both analyze the performance of such systems,
              as well as to incorporate these mechanisms in the operational decisions of both
              carriers and shippers (and/or their agents). 

In addition to analyzing the
              performance of auction markets for transportation services, which would allow
              us to address several questions articulated in the proposal, this research will
              conduct exploratory development of methodological approaches to support fleet
              operators' decision-making processes in this environment, and examine the
              implications for shippers' experienced service levels. These challenges will be
              addressed in the particular context of the dynamic operation of vehicle fleets
              to provide highly responsive service to a general pattern of stochastic
              time-sensitive customer loads. Matching of demands to supply is assumed to take
              place at least partially through an auction market mechanism. These problem
              classes are distinct from conventional static deterministic problems as well as
              their time-dependent and probabilistic extensions. This class of problems
              includes truckload and less-than-truckload trucking, intermodal and integrated
              shipping, as well as traveling repairman and dynamic inventory-routing
              problems. 

This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering
              the Transport Industries (ETI) program solicitation.


