Title       : ITR: Interacting with the Visual World: Capturing, Understanding, and Predicting
               Appearance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0085864

Award Number: 0085864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3499997            (Estimated)
Investigator: Shree K. Nayar nayar@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jitendra Malik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter N. Belhumeur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick M. Hanrahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elli Angelopoulou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,1661,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a five-year continuing award.  This research
              program is geared towards making significant advances to the science and
              engineering of visual information processing, and addresses fundamental
              problems in the fields of computational vision, computer graphics, and
              human-machine interactions.   Today, images and video clips are ubiquitous on
              the internet, digital video is changing the way entertainment is produced,
              distance learning is used in various facets of education, and advanced visual
              interfaces to machines are around the corner.   However, at present there are
              severe limits to the extent to which a user can benefit from visual
              information, because virtually all of this information is presented in its raw
              form, that is, the way it was captured.   The goal of this project is to
              develop the technical tools needed to achieve a variety of complex
              manipulations of visual data.   These tools will enable a user to freely
              explore, interact with, and create variations of the physical world being
              presented. For instance, a user may remove and add objects to an image of a
              scene, vary lighting conditions, change the materials of surfaces, or view the
              scene from a novel perspective.

This project encompasses a comprehensive
              research program for creating the science and technology base required to
              enable such advanced manipulations of visual data.  The general research
              problem may be stated as follows:   Capturing, understanding, and predicting
              the appearance of our everyday world.   Success in this domain of research
              necessitates a unified approach to open problems in two fields:   
              computational vision and computer graphics.   The research effort will focus on
              five pertinent areas:   sensing, modeling, estimation, generation, and
              evaluation.    The tangible contributions will be in the form of sensors that
              provide new types of visual information; complex models of materials,
              reflectances and textures; estimation algorithms that use the team's new models
              to recover scene properties from minimal data; advanced rendering techniques;
              and a set of comprehensive image/video databases for evaluation of work in this
              field.    The results will impact numerous application domains, including
              digital imaging, entertainment, virtual environments, distance learning,
              e-commerce, interactive product design, art restoration, architectural
              modeling, restorative surgery, and surface inspection.

