Title       : 8th van der Ziel Symposium on Quantum 1/f Noise and Other Low Frequency
               Fluctuations, Mainly in GaN, Quantum, or Nanometric Devices on June 5-6,2000 at
               Univ of Missouri St. Louis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0085363

Award Number: 0085363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Handel handel@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               
This proposal seeks funding for the "VIII. International van der Ziel
              Symposium on Quantum 1/f Noise and
Other Low Frequency Fluctuations, Mainly in
              GaN, Quantum, or Nanometric Devices," organized by the author and A. L. Chung
              at the University of Missouri-St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, on June 5-6, 2000. 
              This
International Symposium will bring together researchers from
              universities, industrial and governmental research laboratories, working in the
              field of Quantum 1/f noise and other low frequency fluctuations. This time the
              Symposium is focused primarily on GaN bulk material, thin sheets, quantum
              structures and devices. These are particularly important for opto-electronic
              devices and integration.  Lower quantum 1/f noise is predicted for
              wide-band-gap materials and devices, because of their larger effective
masses
              of the current carriers. This proposal focuses on the description of the
              present state and of the research directions in the field of quantum 1/f noise.
              Funding of this Conference is important, because high technology is becoming
              more and more a race between signal and noise in devices performing previously
              impossible tasks; the lowest noise infrared detectors, SQUIDs, logic boards or
              NMR machines will have the competitive edge. Quantum 1/f noise is a fundamental
              form of quantum chaos present in all physical cross sections and currents,
              which limits the performance of most high-technology devices. Furthermore,
              electronic noise has become important in the quality control of electronic
              devices. The study of electronic noise now represents an important diagnostic
              tool that provides important information on the nature and life time of the
              current carriers, as well as on the nature of the processes which limit the
              mobility of the
carriers. The main objective of the participants at the
              present Symposium is to cooperate in this new
field, in order to further
              reduce the 1/f noise in the known devices, and to extend the application to new
              devices which are now being developed, in particular involving high T c
              superconductors. The Focus of the Symposium also includes further development
              of the quantum 1/f theory in most rigorous terms, and its connection to studies
              of quantum and classical deterministic chaos. Finally, it is expected that this
              Symposium to benefit virtually all high-tech applications, through general low
              1/f noise design and optimization principles, and to improve the understanding
              of the quantum 1/f effect as a technically important fundamental law of
              nature.

