Title       : Research on Control System/IT Design Issues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2000  
File        : a0085135

Award Number: 0085135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108277             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas O. Boucher tboucher@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohsen A. Jafari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1669,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research will provide methods that allow engineers to test and validate
              data acquisition and supervisory control programs during the design phase of
              the manufacturing plant.  A supervisory control module will be developed based
              on finite automata theory.  It will be interfaced with simulation software that
              can be used for modeling the manufacturing plant.  Control methods will address
              normative plant behavior as well as adaptation to unanticipated events in the
              plant, such as machine breakdowns and the failure of sensors and other data
              acquisition systems.  Methods will be developed for re-configurable modes of
              operation within control specifications during periods when components of the
              plant and/or data acquisition system have failed. Experiments using the
              prototype supervisory control module in conjunction with the plant simulation
              module will be run to demonstrate that various control strategies can be
              validated for both their control logic and the resulting performance of the
              controlled manufacturing system.

If successful, the results of this research
              could be used to build a new design tool for engineers.  Currently, in discrete
              parts manufacturing, the simulation of manufacturing system designs do not
              incorporate models of the electronic control systems and data collection
              devices that will eventually drive the operation of the factory that the
              simulation is modeling.  The primary goal of this work is to incorporate these
              design details into the early stages of plant design, when engineers are
              evaluating alternative factory designs through computer simulation. 
              Successfully meeting the objectives of this research can reduce the cost of new
              plant development by reducing the lead time for manufacturing system design and
              test, and by validating the control programs and resulting plant performance
              before the construction and start up phase of the new plant.



