Title       : Implementing an Electronic Peer-reviewed Journal of Earth System Science
               Education Resources (JESSE): A Pathfinder for SMETE Resource Peer Review
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a0085793

Award Number: 0085793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249861             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin J. Ruzek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Space Res Assoc
	      10227 Wincopin Circle Suite 212
	      Columbia, MD  21044    410/730-2656

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project continues the development of a new online Journal of Earth System
              Science Education (JESSE), plans for which were laid with the support of a
              previous planning grant (Award No. 9907764).

The new e-journal is
              emphasizing research and experimentation with the peer review process as it
              establishes, through electronic publication, an orderly collection of reviewed
              resource materials for the broadly defined geoscience and related disciplines
              involved in Earth system and global change education.

The interdisciplinary
              richness of Earth system and global change science provides unusual
              opportunities for research and experimentation with the peer review process in
              advancing science, mathematics, engineering, and technology education (SMETE).
              JESSE is focusing on learning resources and metadata where scientific content
              combined with visualization enriches learning across a broad range of
              disciplinary and interdisciplinary educational efforts. The initial emphasis is
              on creating, implementing, testing, and evaluating a peer review process
              embracing anonymous and open review components for the submission of
              educational resources at the undergraduate level. This research and
              experimentation aims to optimize the efficiency of the review process and the
              quality of the offerings as the digital library's collections are built.

In
              providing for both anonymous and open reviews, JESSE is experimenting with the
              process. Guided by Principal Editors, the anonymous component is to ensure
              credibility of the process and judgments reached through the open review.
              Within the open review process, both editors and reviewers work directly with
              the authors of resources to suggest changes and develop informative commentary
              for classroom and other educational endeavors, while reaching common agreement
              on the acceptability of a resource for publication. JESSE's review criteria
              include those recommended by the Digital Library for Earth System Education
              (DLESE). Review criteria also constitute a topic of research as they are
              applied and adapted for resources from different disciplines and of different
              types. Different types of resources include courses, syllabi and lectures,
              laboratory exercises, interactive models, topical modules, virtual field trips,
              annotated image databases, and electronic texts and monographs. Other types
              include notes, correspondence, and user experiences for review and publication
              within a peer commentary section of the journal. JESSE also intends to publish
              articles and review papers concerning the learning process involved in Earth
              system education. Copyright of all materials reviewed and published by JESSE
              remains with the author, while the peer review process itself and publication
              ensure national recognition for the author.

As part of its research and
              experimentation with the review process, the journal aims to stimulate the
              creativity of educators in the development of quality electronic resources that
              describe both the state and underlying processes governing the Earth system.
              Ultimately, the peer-reviewed collection will provide a holistic perspective of
              Earth system and global change science.

