Title       : A Hybrid Approach to Transport Industry Modeling: A Power System Viewpoint
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0085755

Award Number: 0085755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. A. Pai pai@ece.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian A. Hiskens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1607,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport
              Industries (ETD program solicitation.

With the emerging restructured nature
              of the power industry, there is a need to look at new approaches to modeling as
              well as tools of analysis. Among the transport industries, the power industry
              can both profit from the experience of other deregulated industries, as well as
              offer new ideas in terms of modeling and analysis.

Increasingly, discrete
              events affect the performance of systems in real time. Such events are common
              in the physical system, for example relays, tap changing transformers, and
              FACTS devices. However the rules underlying the market layer also introduce
              discrete events. System performance under these conditions, where continuous
              dynamics and discrete events interact, is the principal focus of the
              proposal,

A major theme is to map formal languages that describe hybrid
              systems, such as Petri nets and finite state automata, into a
              differential-algebraic model structure. A linking strategy will be exploited to
              maximize model flexibility. We shall also focus on trajectory sensitivity
              analysis of hybrid systems. Application areas that build upon trajectory
              sensitivities will be investigated. Trajectory sensitivity analysis entails a
              heavy computational burden. Hence new numerical analysis approaches such as
              iterative solver techniques will be considered. Finally the interaction of the
              market layer with the physical system will be explored,

The results of the
              research will be in the form of formulating new areas of research for the
              restructured power industry.

