Title       : Biology Education Online -- An Interactive Electronic Journal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0085874

Award Number: 0085874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749487             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne W. Carley wcarley@nabt.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              VivianLee Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Assoc Biol Teachers
	      12030 Sunrise Valley Drive
	      Reston, VA  201913409    703/471-1134

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biology Education Online is a peer-reviewed, online journal for teaching and
              learning science. The goal is to bring together developers and users of digital
              resources for biology education that span the range from kindergarten through
              high school, youth and adults in colleges and universities, and life-long
              learners interested in biology. Using a two-tiered, on-line peer-review system,
              Biology Education Online is developing and publishng to the web a collection of
              new, interactive, participatory resources that exemplify the multimedia
              capabilities inherent in the Internet for the advancement of teaching and
              learning science, consistent with the goals and standards inherent in the
              National Science Education Standards and the AAAS Benchmarks for Science
              Literacy. But Biology Education Online is much more than a collection of
              reviewed digital resources. The interactive online journal itself is both a
              teaching and learning resource. The unique features of a two-tiered interactive
              review process with message boards attached to each posted resource allows
              Biology Education Online to be used in professional development of new and
              current teachers as well a nursery incubator for developers and potential
              developers of new materials. For example, instructors in teacher preparation
              programs can incorporate the ongoing review process for Biology Education
              Online materials as part of the development of evaluative and analytic skills
              in their students. In this way, beginning teachers not only have a collection
              of highly peer-reviewed materials to use in developing their teaching
              strategies and portfolios, they also participate in the review process and
              learn how to critically evaluate teaching materials. Biology Education Online
              melds together users and providers. The development process for materials and
              the resources themselves promotes easy use by the community and encourage users
              to become developers by creating a nursery incubator where users can present,
              test, revise and publish new ideas and material in a non-threatening community
              setting. As a peer-reviewed online journal, Biology Education Online is being
              developed through an iterative process that requires two levels of online,
              interactive review prior to publishing to the formal Web site. Biology
              Education Online creates a synergy between a strong, well-developed audience
              for digital teaching and learning resources and a proven operational program
              for delivering those resources. The National Association of Biology Teachers
              and Access Excellence are collaborating in this endeavor.
