Title       : An Earth System Scientist Network for Student and Scientist Partnerships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0085385

Award Number: 0085385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamara Ledley tamara_ledley@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0085385
Ledley

The National Science Education Standards (National Research
              council 1996) emphasize the importance of students engaging in an inquiry based
              approach to learning science (Science Content Standard A Science as Inquiry)
              and of students understanding the concepts and processes that shape our
              understanding of the natural world (Science Content Standard D Earth and Space
              Science).  One method of having students learn science through an inquiry
              approach is to involve them in student and scientist partnerships.  In order to
              develop a successful student and scientist partnership there are a number of
              issues that need to be addressed.  The main requirement is that both sides need
              to benefit from the partnership.  This means that the scientist needs to be
              able to see the advantage of having students work on his/her project, and the
              students and teachers need to see that the students contribute to the project
              and develop the skills in inquiry and the content knowledge in geoscience that
              are desired.  This project will address both of these issues by developing an
              Earth System Scientist Network for Student and Scientist Partnerships.  The PIs
              have identified scientists and will identify others who have projects that
              would benefit from the help of students, and recruit them to participate in the
              program.  The scientists will work with the principal investigator, to first
              completely define their project, determine what role the students would have in
              the project, and map out the scientific protocols that the students will follow
              and the background and support materials to facilitate students successfully
              participating in their project.  The scientists will also work with the
              principal investigator to identify issues in Earth system science, relevant to
              their data, that the students and teachers could use as a guide to help develop
              student's investigative skills and content knowledge in the geosciences.  When
              the student and scientists partnerships are implemented students would
              contribute to the investigation that the scientist is conducting; however, if
              the scope of the project is too large or the content knowledge required too
              difficult, students will investigate these issues and thus still have the
              opportunity to develop their inquiry skills and content knowledge in
              geosciences.  This project will also make use of the opportunity provided by
              the development of the Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE) to
              facilitate student and scientist partnerships.  DLESE will be a place through
              which the scientists, students, and teachers will be able to access the data
              they need and the tools and resources that will facilitate students
              participating in research, developing their inquiry skills, and increasing
              their knowledge in the geosciences.

