Title       : Focused Ion Beam Lift Out Cross Sectional Transmission Electron Microscopy of
               Polymer Nanostructured Films Ordered on Attractive Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0085698

Award Number: 0085698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry J. White hwhite@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9136,9161,9232,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A two component polymer system, such as a homopolymer blend or a block copolymer
              melt, in the vicinity of an interactive surface is an inherently inhomogeneous
              system.  The difference in chemical affinity between the components and the
              substrate induces a preferred orientation in the system.  In most studies of
              this nature, silicon has been the substrate of choice since it can be obtained
              in single crystal form with an atomically smooth surface.  Furthermore, it is
              used extensively in the semiconductor industry where numerous procedures have
              been developed to modify the surface energy and apply both chemical and
              topographical patterns.  Most of what is known today on the orientation of
              polymers at surfaces has been obtained by neutron and x-ray reflectivity
              methods or dynamic secondary ion mass spectrometry.  These methods work best
              when the orientation occurs normal to the surface and is symmetric in the plane
              parallel to the surface.  Transmission electron microscopy studies of thin
              polymer films ordered on atomically smooth silicon have been very difficult for
              cross-sectional specimens.  It was not possible to directly section heard
              silicon crystals by ultramicrotomy and ion milling is a long and tedious
              process with uncertain results.
%%%
This award under NSF 94-147 "Minority
              Research Planning Grant" provides initial funding to establish a polymer
              nanostructured electron-microscopy program at SUNY Stony Brook and to
              investigate compatibilization of homopolymer blends ordered on attractive
              surfaces.  The following issues will be addressed in this initial study: (a)
              Can the focused ion-beam lift-out procedure be used to produce cross sections
              of novel thin films ordered on silicon?  (b) Can uniquely tailored polymer
              nanostructures induce miscibility in hompolymer blends?

