Title       : Element 1: Improving Data and Information Literacy in the Geosciences Using GPS
               Geodesy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0085432

Award Number: 0085432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81171              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela E. Jansma pjansma@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glen S. Mattioli  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0085432
Jansma

In an increasingly technologically complex world tied
              together by rapid dissemination of information on the Internet, the amount of
              data available for analysis in any discipline grows exponentially each day. 
              Critical skills for undergraduate students who will become "knowledge workers,"
              therefore, are the ability 1) to distinguish between data that are relevant to
              solving the problem at hand and data that do not constrain what is asked, 2) to
              identify data trends that are statistically significant, 3) to retrieve
              appropriate data from a variety of sources, and 4) to use the data to solve
              complex problems and make informed judgments about technical issues. 
              Unfortunately, concepts of precision, accuracy, variance, periodicity, and
              error analysis often are left to the domain of introductory statistics and
              underemphasized in the geosciences at the undergraduate level.  Undergraduate
              geoscientists, therefore, frequently are unaware of the limitations and sources
              of data, which are the foundation for interpretation and essential to the
              development of a well-prepared scientific professional.  The PIs will use
              Global Positioning System (GPS) geodesy to improve data and information
              literacy among undergraduate students.  The objectives are: to address data and
              information literacy; to promote communication skills; to enhance critical
              thinking; and to build teamwork.  The intent is not to replace a traditional
              introductory statistics course, but to illustrate important statistical
              concepts and techniques relevant to the geosciences that will encourage
              undergraduates to enroll in statistics courses.  GPS geodesy is ideal for
              illustrating data literacy concepts.  Data precision and accuracy depend upon
              several factors, including type of equipment, environmental conditions, length
              of occupations, monument design, site location, configuration of the geodetic
              network, and processing strategies.  All of these can be varied, allowing the
              students to learn the trade-offs among cost, time, and quality and to determine
              the most efficient methodology for specific problems.  In addition, precision,
              accuracy, and errors govern the interpretations that can be made and the
              potential to distinguish among competing models.  The focus is to create an
              outcomes-based WWW-module that uses GPS geodesy in real-world applications and
              also requires integration of GPS data into oral presentations and written
              reports that incorporate resources found both through the WWW and traditional
              avenues, such as the library.  The module is for use both by other educators in
              their own curricula and for undergraduate students to learn basic concepts
              independently. The PIs will develop the module by teaching a course and
              subsequently transferring all materials to the WWW, including video of student
              presentations, team discussions, and equipment demonstrations.  In the course,
              students will work in teams on "cases" that pose hypotheses for testing. 
              Research suggests that working in groups in a cooperative setting produces
              greater growth in achievement than straining for relative gains in a
              competitive environment.  The structure of the course will emphasize
              independence and self-reliance within the context of the collaborative team. 
              Three of the four cases are derived from on-going research projects and take
              advantage of on-line continuous GPS (CGPS) data as well as archived campaign
              data.  The case studies are: 1) Is the Puerto Rico-Virgin Islands Block rigid?;
              2) Do inflation/deflation cycles in Montserrat correlate with faster dome
              growth?; 3) Does slip occur in the New Madrid Seismic Zone?; and 4) What is the
              surface deformation field in Nicaragua?  The first two studies are mature
              research projects for which much data already are available either on-line
              (CPGS) or in our archives.  The third case study is included to give students
              an example of a controversy where two groups of scientists have come to
              opposite conclusions based on the same dataset and to force students to search
              the WWW and journals for the data.  The fourth case is a research project in
              its infancy.  Finally, a pilot project involving a field trip to a volcano in
              Nicaragua is included.  The trip serves two purposes: 1) testing if students
              can take what was learned in the course and apply it to a "real-life"
              situation, thereby assessing the efficacy of the course; and 2) providing video
              of students in the "real-life" situation for use on the website.

