Title       : SGER: Parent-of-Origin Gene Expression in a Viviparous Arthropod?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a0085335

Award Number: 0085335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73674              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Zeh zehd@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanne A. Zeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Known definitively from only mammals and angiosperms, autosomal genomic
              imprinting is a form of non-Mendelian inheritance in which methylation and
              expression of an allele depend on whether it is inherited through sperm or egg.
               Imprinting disruption has been implicated in a growing list of embryonic
              abnormalities, unstable DNA diseases and cancers.  Numerous hypotheses, ranging
              from chromosomal surveillance to maternal/paternal genome conflict over
              resource transfer from mother to embryo, have been proposed to explain
              imprinting, and virtually all invoke viviparity as crucial to its evolution. 
              Unfortunately, evidence of imprinting in animals is currently restricted to
              mammals, thus limiting the scope for rigorous testing of alternative
              hypotheses.  The aim of the proposed exploratory research is to establish
              whether genomic imprinting occurs in the pseudoscorpion, Cordylochernes
              scorpioides, as indirect evidence suggests.  Allelic message display approach,
              a technique that utilizes RT-PCR to screen cDNA libraries for genomically
              imprinted genes will be used.  To distinguish between maternal versus paternal
              allelic expression, polymorphic transcripts will be visualized in reciprocal
              hybrid and pooled backcross progenies from crosses between two C. scorpioides
              populations known to exhibit extensive DNA sequence divergence.  Investigation
              will focus on the transcriptional activity of the embryonic pumping organ (a
              specialized mouth precursor responsible for sequestering nutritive fluid from
              the mother's reproductive tract) as the organ most likely to exhibit
              parent-of-origin gene effects.
If imprinting is found to occur in C.
              scorpioides, this pseudoscorpion will provide a model viviparous arthropod
              system for investigating the importance of genomic imprinting in biological
              processes ranging from evolution to epigenetic-mediated disease.

