Title       : Development of a Remote Coil Magnetoelastic Stress Sensor for Monitoring Steel
               Cables and Tendons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0085204

Award Number: 0085204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276892             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming-Liang Wang mlwang@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Development of a Remote Coil Magnetoelastic Stress Sensor for Monitoring Steel
              Cables and Tendons

ABSTRACT

Despite the increasing popularity of
              cable-stayed bridges, no accurate or simple method is available for directly
              measuring the stresses (forces) in the cable stays. The measurement  of  the
              forces is important for monitoring excessive wind or traffic loadings, to gage
              the redistribution forces present after seismic events, and for detecting
              corrosion via loss of the cross section.  It is planned to develop a remote
              (portable)  magnetoelastic sensor for the direct measurement of stress in steel
              cables and tendons.
A magnetoelastic sensor based on a cylindrical solenoidal
              geometry, which is suitable for installation at the time of construction or
              winding in-situ for existing cables has been developed at the University of
              Illinois at Chicago. The technique is based upon the dependence of the magnetic
              properties of structural steels directly related to the state of stress. The
              magnetic properties are measured by subjecting the steel to a pulse or periodic
              magnetising field. Changes in flux through circuits surrounding or adjacent to
              the steel allow the magnetic properties to be measured.  Accuracy within 1%
              (against a load cell) in the temperature range of -40 (F) to 140(F) are
              routinely achieved with different sizes of sensor below the elastic limit.
              These sensors have been accepted for field testing during the construction of
              several projects. This project will investigate avenues to extend the
              magnetoelastic measurement principles to a new sensing circuit which does not
              require winding it around the cable. It is portable and reusable. It is highly
              desirable to perform the stress measurement using  this coil geometry  in the
              post-yield regime for damage assessment of cables due to unanticipated
              loadings.





