Title       : GOALI: Statistical Quality Control Methods for Health Systems Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0085262

Award Number: 0085262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224278             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Benneyan benneyan@coe.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Goldmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research objectives of this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
              Industry (GOALI) award are to develop new statistical quality control for
              healthcare adverse events, such as medication and laboratory errors,
              hospital-acquired infections, and other preventable problems and mistakes.
              Three new methods will be control rare events based on inverse binomial
              sampling and mixtures of non-identical distributions, to incorporate logistic
              regression and other approaches into a general risk quality control framework,
              and to combine these control methods simultaneously. Numeric programs will be
              developed and used to investigate the statistical performance and operating
              characteristics of these methods, and an optimization search algorithm will be
              developed implemented to determine the optimal economic and
              statistical-economic designs of methods. Developed methods also will be
              validated empirically using large database drug events, needle stick injuries,
              and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aurous at two academic
              hospitals.

If successful, the benefits of this research will lead to
              improved surveillance methods and reduce the occurrence of preventable adverse
              healthcare events, estimated to result to 2 million patient injuries, 45,000 to
              98,000 deaths, and $8.8 billion in costs annual nationwide. The developed
              methods will provide greater statistical power to detect changes in the
              occurrence rates of infrequent adverse events and will accurately account for
              aggregation homogeneous patients. Determining the operating characteristics and
              optimal design of each method will help reduce the time to detect problems and
              the associated costs. Results will be used to compare proposed and traditional
              hospital surveillance methods, identify conditions under which each method
              performs better than others, and develop design and selection guidelines. The
              proposed research also will benefit similar quality control problems in high
              yield manufacturing and other industries.

