Title       : Improving Knowledge Transfer: Prioritizing Content Creation in Digital Libraries
               Using Competitive Intelligence Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0085713

Award Number: 0085713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Atwood Michael.Atwood@cis.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce W. Char  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Shelfer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In order to learn effectively, people need to know how to independently find the
              right information, in the right format, at the right time. Digital libraries
              provide access to a wide range of networked resources, but there are two
              potential problems: (1) people will be intimidated by the scope of the
              information and be reluctant to use it, or (2) they will attempt the journey
              alone and become "lost in hyperspace."

This project is exploring new ways to
              make relevant information easier to get and easier to use. High-end multi-agent
              collaborative competitive intelligence systems are able to mine data from a
              wide variety of internal and external sources to support the decision processes
              of managers. This project is testing the feasibility of also using such systems
              to transfer knowledge from experts to novices.

The focus of the study is on
              creating and testing a digital library as support for instruction in
              introductory computer programming courses. These courses are part of the push
              toward online delivery of core content for distance or on-campus asynchronous
              learning, and are likely to benefit from the availability of a topical digital
              library. This is the first known effort to automatically capture, process, and
              associate relevant cross-disciplinary digital content into topically related
              libraries designed to support traditional research and learning environments.
              The project team expects to develop a framework that supports a taxonomy of
              learning practices that will help to integrate the disparate literature in the
              various domains.

The major technical challenges addressed by this study are
              how to:
-- identify and synthesize the knowledge discovery processes of
              experts, students, and non-specialists;
-- customize access to relevant
              sources and forms of digital content;
-- support the capture, maintenance, and
              sharing of knowledge among a community of users; and
-- evaluate the related
              cost-benefit issues.

