Title       : Behavioral Models for Microscopic Traffic Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0085734

Award Number: 0085734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Moshe E. Ben-Akiva mba@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1607,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research aims to develop a new generation of microscopic traffic simulation
              with driving behavior models that capture strategic behaviors of drivers and
              utilize high performance computational methods. 

Flexible simulation tools
              are needed to conduct experiments of innovative Intelligent Transportation
              Systems (ITS) including dynamic traffic management technologies and traffic
              control and routing algorithms. More reliable simulation tools are also needed
              to study traffic impacts such as congestion, safety, energy consumption and air
              pollution. These applications require detailed and accurate models of drivers'
              behavior.  Online and offline applications to large networks and increasingly
              complex models and traffic management systems require the use of more efficient
              computational methods.  

The most notable driving behavior models are
              acceleration (or car following) and lane-changing models. State-of-the-art
              models will be enhanced to include more realistic behaviors such as:
              
Proactive anticipatory behavior: Drivers create opportunities to undertake
              their desired maneuvers by anticipating future traffic conditions and acting
              upon them. This is contrasted with existing models in which drivers passively
              react to present traffic conditions. 
Extended field of view: Drivers'
              decisions are based on traffic conditions in their extended neighborhood as
              opposed to simply following a leader or reacting to the adjacent
              vehicles.
Interdependent decisions: Interdependencies exist across different
              decisions (e.g. the effect of lane changing on acceleration) and within one
              decision over time (e.g. the effect of past lane changes on future ones). These
              dependencies are ignored in existing models: lane-changing models assume that
              once a driver decides to change lanes, s/he will passively consider available
              gaps as they appear in the traffic stream - the driver does not adjust his/her
              acceleration in order to change lanes. As a result, capacities of merging,
              weaving and similar facilities are not captured correctly.

The development
              of high performance computing implementations will extend the applicability of
              microscopic traffic simulation. Using coarse-grained parallel and distributed
              computing platforms will allow for the development of portable codes using
              public domain inter-processor communication software libraries.  We will review
              the state-of-the-art in network decomposition methods, thus creating a basis
              for follow-up research. 

The focus of the project will be the development
              and calibration of innovative driving behavior models capturing the intelligent
              behavior principles mentioned above.  Calibrated models will, in the future, be
              implemented in MITSIMLab, a microscopic traffic simulation laboratory developed
              at MIT.  Simulations will be conducted to test the models and to suggest
              further refinements.

This award is made under the Exploratory Research on
              Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI) program solicitation.


