Title       : CPT Liquefaction Investigations, Adapazari, Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0085259

Award Number: 0085259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74995              (Estimated)
Investigator: T.Leslie Youd tyoud@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Liquefaction-induced building settlement and loss of bearing strength were major
              causes of damage during the 17 August 1999 Kocaeli, Turkey earthquake.  The
              area primarily affected was within the city of Adapazari where hundreds of
              buildings settled and tipped by varying degrees due to liquefaction of
              subsurface sediment layers.  With so many buildings affected, Adapazari
              provides a natural laboratory for the study of effects of liquefaction on
              building performance and development of improved design procedures to prevent
              future damage.  Design of buildings to resist effects of liquefaction is a
              major issue in structural design in the US and other seismic areas.  Because of
              the importance of this problem and the lack of adequate criteria in engineering
              practice, results from this study will likely be immediately and widely used in
              foundation design practice.  

Following the 17 August earthquake, NSF funded
              several reconnaissance investigations to Turkey, including a rapid deployment
              of an Earthquake Engineering Research Institute (EERI) reconnaissance team lead
              by the principal investigator (T.L. Youd) and follow-up geotechnical
              investigations organized through the Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research
              Center (PEER). These investigations produced a large and detailed inventory of
              settled and tipped buildings, the most extensive and complete inventory of such
              buildings following any earthquake to date. This building damage and the
              compiled inventory provide an important and unique opportunity to generate
              numerous documented case histories of building performance, complete with
              subsurface sediment stratigraphy and soil properties.  These case histories are
              essential to the development of evaluation criteria and design procedures for
              prevention of liquefaction-induced building settlement and tilting due to
              liquefaction. 

The primary objective of this study is the compilation of
              stratigraphic cross sections and soil property data from an array of cone
              penetration soundings (CPT) to be conducted in areas of Adapazari most affected
              by building settlement and tilting.  Soil samples will be extracted either by
              this project or through related projects for sediment classification and
              testing.  A second major objective of this study is to prepare data files for
              distribution on the web and other venues for use by geotechnical and earth
              science professionals in the US and abroad.  These data should be sufficient
              for analysts to develop and test procedures for predicting building settlement
              and loss of bearing strength at liquefaction-prone sites.  A third objective
              will be to analyze the compiled data along with similar data from previous
              earthquakes to develop empirical procedures for evaluating building settlement
              and tilting hazard.



