Title       : SGER: Subadult Mortality and Life History Evolution in Medieval Denmark: A
               Molecular Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0085819

Award Number: 0085819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19883              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Paine paine@anthro.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis H. O'Rourke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Mortality patterns in early agrarian populations indicate that adult males had
              higher survivorship than adult females, possibly as a result of increased
              female mortality associated with childbirth.  Two problems have stood in the
              way of testing this hypothesis: 1) lack of knowledge about sex differences in
              mortality prior to reproduction, and 2) uncertainty regarding the accuracy of
              distinguishing male from female
skeletons.

The characteristics used to
              determine sex of skeletons are adult secondary sex characteristics and are not
              reliable for sexing subadult skeletons. We propose to extract ancient DNA from
              skeletons and adapt newly developed molecular methods for determining sex to
              prehistoric samples.  We will attempt to improve upon these methods and develop
              them into an efficient and reliable method for sexing skeletal samples.  The
              improved methods will permit us to study sex differences in mortality among
              ancient
subadults.

Adult skeletons from Tirup, a rural Medieval cemetery in
              Denmark, show the same female survival disadvantage found in other early
              agricultural skeletal series from northern Europe.  By examining subadult
              mortality patterns at Tirup with molecular methods, we will test the hypothesis
              that sex differences in adult death relate to the dangers of reproduction for
              early agrarian women generally.  We will also provide a
test of sex estimates
              based on bone characteristics of adults.

