Title       : Breaking the Metadata Generation Bottleneck
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0085837

Award Number: 0085837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366293             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth D. Liddy liddy@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Woojin Paik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart A. Sutton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project uses natural language processing and machine learning to
              investigate methods for breaking the human metadata generation bottleneck that
              has plagued projects providing access to educational resources on the Internet.
              Breaking the metadata generation bottleneck is necessary if access to National
              SMETE Digital Library (NSDL) resources is to scale appropriately to the
              Internet. Comporting fully with emerging international standards for
              educational metadata, the project demonstrates the feasibility of automatically
              generating metadata for the NSDL through the processing of full-text
              collections from the Eisenhower National Clearinghouse on Science and
              Mathematics. The metadata generated enhances the GEM metadata repository, a
              nationally recognized finding tool for educational resources, and provides the
              technical means for the automatic generation of educational metadata from
              text-based resources. There are five research goals for this project: (1)
              develop a sublanguage and discourse model for science and mathematics
              educational materials; (2) extend an automatic metatagger to these materials,
              using machine learning, the GEM metatag set, extended metatag sets, and
              heuristics based on the sublanguage and discourse model; (3) extend a
              sophisticated information extraction technology that can simultaneously extract
              event-specific relational information as well as domain-independent concepts
              and relationships;(4) identify appropriate controlled vocabularies and thesauri
              for science and mathematics educational materials, and incorporate them into
              the registry used by the automatic metatagger; and (5) evaluate automatic vs.
              manual metatagging, in both quantitative and qualitative terms. An innovative
              array of experimental methods is used to achieve these goals.

The project
              includes a qualitative analysis to understand the role of human inconsistency
              within the manual process and quantitative analysis of the results through the
              metrics of precision and recall. This project is designed to apply natural
              language processing and machine learning to the task of automatic metatagging
              to scale to the needs of the NSDL and to provide access to a far greater number
              of educational resources.

