Title       : ITR: Information Access to Spoken Documents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0085940

Award Number: 0085940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1430579            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Picone picone@isip.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mari Ostendorf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene Charniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick Jelinek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,1661,9150,9218,9251,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a four-year continuing award.  This project
              addresses issues relating to the construction of a system for answering
              questions about information contained in a collection of spoken documents.   It
              focuses on the key scientific questions that arise in the integration of
              prosodic information, speech recognition and parsing in the retrieval of spoken
              documents, but will not involve implementation of a complete system.  There are
              four key themes in the research:   utilizing parsing in information retrieval; 
               integrating prosodic information in parsing spoken language;    incorporating
              uncertainty in parsing to handle speech recognition errors;    and improvements
              to speech recognition of spontaneous speech.   All  components will share a 
              probabilistic formulation, thereby affording a systematic framework for
              integrating the information they provide.    A primary project goal is to
              better understand how information provided by one of these components might be
              effectively utilized to improve he performance of other components in the
              information retrieval task.   Absent a corpus tailored to the information
              retrieval topics the PI and his team plan to study, progress will be evaluated
              using existing annotated text collections such as Switchboard and LDC's
              Broadcast News collections.   The work will lead to advances in information
              extraction from telephone messages, conversations, university lectures, or from
              any text (such as encyclopedias),  and should potentially serve as the basis
              for a sorely needed sophisticated web browser technology and data mining
              applications, which in turn would enable people who currently under-utilize
              computers to become full participants in the information revolution.
