Title       : ITR: Computational Techniques for Applied Bioinformatics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a0085910

Award Number: 0085910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tao Jiang jiang@cs.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Clegg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1660,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for a collaborative project involving two computer
              scientists and a plant geneticist who will develop new methods, efficient
              algorithms, and software tools for several important problems in the field of
              bioinformatics. This supported work includes research into computational
              paradigms such as quartet methods, interactive systems, and approximation
              algorithms as applied to the evolutionary analysis of gene sequences, gene
              duplication, and horizontal transfer events in the genomes of chloroplasts, a
              DNA-containing organelle found in all plants.  Additional studies will examine
              the information content of genomes by improving and testing a recently
              developed sequence entropy estimator and a distance metric for genomic
              sequences.  Work in this area will include the application of the improved
              methods to sequence data from the genomes of mitochondria, viruses,
              chloroplasts and bacteria. Other efforts will address the important problem of
              simultaneous multiple sequence alignment and evolutionary tree reconstruction.
              The multiple sequence alignment approaches to be developed are based on the use
              of conserved blocks that have few or no gaps, and multiple alignments within a
              constant band. Work in a fourth area will develop efficient algorithms for
              computing short and long interspersed nuclear elements (SINES and LINES) in
              genomic sequences of lengths up to billions of nucleotides. Because of the
              large amounts of data that must be analyzed, this will require the development
              or adaptation of appropriate external memory algorithms. 

Biological,
              biomedical and pharmaceutical research is undergoing a major revolution as new
              analytical technologies produce unprecedented amounts of genetic data. The
              exploration of this information is critically dependent upon the development of
              advanced computational and software techniques for data analysis, storage and
              retrieval. From this dependency, a new interdisciplinary research field,
              bioinformatics (or computational molecular biology) has emerged in recent
              years. The work supported through this award is expected to make both
              fundamental and applied contributions to the field. The fundamental research
              will explore and explicate new ideas and methods for solving algorithmic
              problems in bioinformatics and the applied research will involve the
              development and evaluation of software tools in the practice of plant genomics.
              Although the efforts are aimed at improving the understanding of the evolution
              of chloroplast genomes, the approaches should be readily extensible to analysis
              of all other genomes.

