Title       : ITR: Technologies for Sensor-based Wireless Networks of Toys for Smart
               Developmental Problem-solving Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2000  
File        : a0085773

Award Number: 0085773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1841143            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mani B. Srivastava mbs@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eva L. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abeer A. Alwan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard R. Muntz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miodrag Potkonjak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1661,4095,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Despite enormous progress in networking and computing technologies, their
              application has remained restricted to conventional person-to-person and
              person-to-computer communication. However, the Moore's Law driven continual
              reduction in cost and form factor is now making it possible to imbed networking
              - even wireless networking - and computing capabilities not just in our PCs and
              laptops but also other objects. Further, a marriage of these ever tinier and
              cheaper processors and wireless network interfaces with emerging micro-sensors
              based on MEMS technology is allowing cheap sensing, processing, and
              communication capabilities to be unobtrusively embedded in familiar physical
              objects. The result is an emerging paradigm shift where the primary role of
              information technology would be to enhance or assist in "person to physical
              world" communication via familiar physical objects with embedded (a)
              micro-sensors to react to external stimuli, and (b) wireless networking and
              computing engines for tetherless communication with compute servers and other
              networked embedded objects. 

The proposed research seeks to explore wireless
              networking, middleware, and data management technologies for realizing the
              above vision. The problems of ad hoc structure, distributed nature, unreliable
              sensing, large scale/density, and novel sensor data types are characteristic of
              such deeply instrumented physical environments with inter-networked physical
              objects. This requires one to rethink current architectures, protocols,
              algorithms, and formalisms that were developed for different needs. Further, to
              provide a concrete problem domain, we propose to use and evaluate our
              technologies in a "smart kindergarten" driver application targeted at
              developmental problem-solving environments for early childhood education. This
              is a natural application as young children learn by exploring and interacting
              with objects such as toys in their environment. Our envisioned system would
              enhance the education process by providing a childhood learning environment
              that is individualized to each child, adapts to the context, coordinates
              activities of multiple children, and allows unobtrusive evaluation of the
              learning process by the teacher. This would be done by wirelessly-networked,
              sensor-enhanced toys with back-end middleware services and database techniques.
              

The main information technology contributions of this research would be:
 
               Wireless protocols for networks using short-range radios, with focus on highly
              unstructured, dynamic, and dense networks of embedded devices, and problems of
              energy efficiency and quality of service needs of sensor data.
   Network
              architectures designed for naming, addressing, and routing by object
              capabilities and attributes, as opposed to id based approaches in conventional
              networks.
   Efficient techniques and algorithms for identifying, locating,
              and tracking users and objects in instrumented environments, particularly
              indoors.
   Middleware architecture providing services such as special
              communication patterns, context-aware network resource allocation and
              scheduling under attribute and capacity constraints, power-aware operation,
              media processing using shared background servers, and context discovery,
              tracking, and change notification.
   Data management methods to handle data
              from multiple heterogeneous, unreliable, noisy sensors in a highly dynamic
              environment, with support for real-time sensor data interpretation and fusion,
              and off-line mining.
   Automated mining of user profiles from sensor data,
              and their use in task planning and execution of actions in the instrumented
              environment 
   Techniques for sensor-assisted automatic speech recognition of
              children's speech.

Complementing the above will be the driver application
              where a Smart Kindergarten for developmental problem solving will be prototyped
              based on the above ideas, and evaluated in a real classroom setting. Various
              objects, particularly toys, will be wirelessly networked and have sensing and
              perhaps actuator capabilities. A wireless network, with radios and protocols
              suitable for handling a high density of proximate objects, will interconnect
              the toys to each other and to database and compute servers using a toy network
              middleware API. Sensors embedded in toys and worn by children will allow the
              database servers to discover and track context and configuration information
              about the children and the toys, and also orchestrate aural, visual, motion,
              tactile and other feedback. The system will enhance the developmental process
              by providing a problem-solving environment that is individualized, context
              adaptive, and coordinated among multiple children. It will also allow
              monitoring and logging for unobtrusive paper-free assessment by teacher or
              parent.

The project team is interdisciplinary, with researchers from UCLA's
              CS and EE Departments for the technology component of the project, and from
              UCLA's Graduate School of Education and Information Sciences (GSE&IS) for the
              application component. GSE&IS operates a reputed laboratory elementary school
              on campus, which will be used for real-life evaluation of 

