Title       : ITR: Hierarchical and Reconfigurable Schemes for Distributed Control over
               Heterogeneous Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0085917

Award Number: 0085917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3410000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamer Basar tbasar@decision.csl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geir E. Dullerud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Seth Hutchinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Petros Voulgaris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1661,4095,4096,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Research proposed here deals with the problem of reliable control of
              geographically distributed complex real-time systems over a heterogeneous
              communication network. It is aimed at developing thefoundations of
              network-based control, from theory to applications. The overall objectives are:
              

 the design, analysis, implementation, and performance characterization of
              distributed and decen-
tralized control algorithms and middleware that are
              affected through hierarchical and heteroge-neous networks comprised of wired
              and wireless subnets, and
 the specification and implementation of network
              services and support required for the development and deployment of distributed
              control algorithms over hierarchical heterogeneous networks, and demonstration
              of efficient and fault tolerant remote control using such networks for a number
              of emerging commercial and scientific/engineering applications.
Our research
              agenda will cover the following domains:
 Research toward a network based
              control theory that emphasizes and accounts for decentralized, distributed and
              delay aspects of information transmission dictated by speciffic network
              structures, and bandwidth limitations.
 Basic research to leverage the latest
              developments in distributed robust fault-tolerant control, and to build a new
              theory for multifaceted control of remote objects over heterogeneous networks,
              using also the framework of dynamic games.
 Development of dynamic and
              adaptive methods for representation of large systems and computation of
              associated control strategies, using of hierarchical, adaptive graphs and
              distributed agents.
 Design and implementation of algorithms and middleware
              that will interact with the host-node communication protocols and provide the
              necessary support for the implementation of coordinated distributed control
              applications. Furthermore, design and implementation of an embedded real-time
              operating system kernel which will support hard deadlines and stringent QoS
              guarantees.
 Development of a demonstration prototype to be deployed on a
              small-scale heterogeneous hierarchical network comprised of a wireless
              subnetwork and campus-wide nodes of local area and Internet hosts.
In addition
              to the development of new analytical paradigms and approaches, a component of
              the research program is the development of reusable simulation and design
              software, so that the research output can be parlayed to other researchers,
              practitioners, and industry. We envision numerous future scenarios where the
              results from this research program will apply. Among these are satellite
              control, air traffic control, congestion control over highways, remote guidance
              of airplanes, power networks, electronic commerce, and remote surgery.

