Title       : Enterprise-wide Simulation and Analytical Modeling of Comprehensive Freight
               Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0085720

Award Number: 0085720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen L. Hancock hancock@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anna Nagurney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1607,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The proposed work will develop a multimodal network analysis to simulate
the
              effects of e-commerce and different freight supply chain costs on the
movement
              of goods. Major physical actions, including information exchange,
and
              decisions required to move goods from source to destination will be
simulated.
              A method will be developed for simulating large numbers of
individual freight
              shipments by vehicle and for assigning them to specific
links in the US
              truckrailwaterair freight transportation network.  Within a
supplychain
              management framework, information and cash flow will be
incorporated into the
              network analysis.  Created in the 1960's, the
Internet has become an open
              access, inexpensive, and globally available
means for rapid correspondence
              with the rest of the world.  On-line
Internet trading is now a major form of 
              business activity. What this rapid
transition to e-commerce ultimately implies
              for the U.S. transportation
sector remains to be seen. It is likely to
              initiate some profound changes
in both domestic and international product
              supply chains, leading to some
important new patterns of freight movement
              which can only be modeled by
inter-relating the physical and information
              networks.  The focus of this
research will be on the development of a sound
              theoretical base using
information in the literature as a guide to proof of
              concept instead of an
empirical analysis.

This award is made under the
              Exploratory Research on Engineering the
Transport Industries (ETI) program
              solicitation.
 
