Title       : MATHDL: A Library of Online Learning Materials in Mathematics and Its
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0085861

Award Number: 0085861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $856257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence C. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene A. Klotz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Albers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Assn of America
	      1529 18th St NW
	      Washington, DC  200361358    202/387-5200

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MATHDL is an online library of independently reviewed mathematics
              learning
materials at the undergraduate level. MATHDL is a collaborative
              project of the
Mathematical Association of America (MAA) and the Math Forum.
              The MAA 
provides content oversight, materials acquisition and selection,
              policies, and general
administration. Math Forum oversees development of the
              user interface and manages all
platforms needed to host MATHDL content and
              serve pages. Math Forum plans to host
moderated discussion groups for each
              unit listed in the library. Significant co-funding of this project is being
              provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate
              of Mathematical and Physical Sciences in recognition of the importance of a
              digital library collection of learning resources in the mathematical
              sciences.

MATHDL is divided into three parts: The Library of Online
              Mathematics and Its Applications (LOMA), The Journal of Online Mathematics and
              Its Applications (JOMA), and The Library of Commercial Products (LCP). LOMA
              contains free online learning materials that have been class tested and
              reviewed. These materials have been tested with students, submitted with a peer
              review, and provided with a second review by the LOMA editors. Each unit has a
              site for the reviews and substantive comments by users and authors, a file of
              adopters, and a link to a moderated discussion group focused on these
              particular materials. JOMA is the journal of the library. It is a scholarly
              online journal that contains innovative new Web-based learning materials in
              mathematics, articles on the design and use of such materials, articles on
              student learning using online materials, surveys of existing online materials,
              and other related articles. LCP is a listing of commercially available learning
              materials in mathematics and its
applications. Each listing includes
              publication information, a short description of the
product, a table of
              contents (where appropriate), and a link to the publisher's site for more
              information. The MATHDL Project works closely with other digital libraries. In
              particular, the close association with Math Forum connects MATHDL to Project
              NEEDS, ENC, and a host of others. Through the multi-track work of the SMETE.org
              alliance, MATHDL plans to offer federated searches, user profiling, and common
              metadata. They plan to cooperate with these organizations in the search for
              solutions to the problem of curation of aging material.

