Title       : Bacteria in Glaciers: A Mechanism for Bacterial Speciation in an Extremely Cold
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0085589

Award Number: 0085589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Mitchell dmitchell@sprd1.mdacc.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wade H. Jeffrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas MD Anderson Ctr
	      1515 Holcombe, Box 202
	      Houston, TX  77030    /   -

NSF Program : 1075      LIFE IN EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1075,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The presence of bacteria in glaciers has generated considerable public and
              scientific interest in recent times. Bacteria are deposited from above on
              wind-borne dust particles and aerosols, overlayered by thousands of years of
              deposition and accretion, and finally returned to the coastal marine
              environment by glacial calving and melting.  Bacteria have been detected in and
              cultured from glacial ice ranging from a few hundred to many thousands of years
              old.  Evidence suggests that glacial ice cannot support bacterial growth but
              rather traps these organisms for considerable lengths of time in an anabolic
              state.  This research will test the hypothesis that bacteria sustain
              significant levels of DNA degradation and damage (base damage) during glacial
              entrapment and that this base damage leads to mutations.  Ice core samples
              representing a wide range of geographical locales and age distributions will be
              obtained from the National Ice core Laboratory (NICL).  Current and emerging
              molecular biology tools will be used to analyze bacteria and bacterial DNA
              extracted from these ice cores.  A diverse array of bacteria extracted from
              glacial ice will be cultured, preserved, and characterized.  A recently
              developed technology to detect and quantify base loss and deaminations in
              single bacterial cells using damage-specific endonucleases and visualization of
              double-strand breaks using microgel electrophoresis will be employed.  The
              lethal effects of glaciation on bacteria using clonability, transcription,
              protein synthesis, and fluorescence  hybridization using rRNA probes as
              biological endpoints will be examined.  Relative mutation frequencies in
              bacterial isolates will also be estimated by comparing sequence homologies
              within conserved and nonconserved regions of the 16S rDNA genes.  From the
              proposed work, insight will be gained into understanding basic mechanisms of
              mutagenesis that may be relevant to bacterial speciation, diversity and the
              evolution of life on earth as well as in extremely cold environments found
              elsewhere in our solar system. 
