Title       : Surfactant Flow and Foam Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0085751

Award Number: 0085751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Dennin mdennin@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS_0086751
M. Dennin
University California @ Irvine

This
              research is a study of the flow behavior of Langmuir monolayers using a
              combination of optical and rheological techniques.  It consists of two sets of
              experiments:  a study of the effects of the multivalent ions in the water
              subphase on the flow behavior of Langmuir monolayers; and a study of the flow
              behavior of mixed surfactant systems.  The focus is on systems and their flow
              properties that directly impact foam and emulsion stability.

Lagmuir
              monolayers are intrinsically two-dimensional and consist of amphiphilic
              molecules that are confined to the air-water interface.  The Langmuir trough
              used in this work consists of two concentric cylinders that are oriented
              vertically.  The inner cylinder is fixed and the outer cylinder is free to
              rotate.  The top surface of the water is free, and the monolayer is placed on
              this surface.  As such, the monolayer models the gas-liquid interfaces in a
              standard aqueous foam.  The inner cylinder consists of two parts.  A stationary
              cylinder in the water subphase, and a torsion pendulum that just makes contact
              with the water surface.  The dc viscosity is measured by rotating the outer
              cylinder and measuring the stress on the inner cylinder with the torsion
              pendulum.  The ac viscosity is measured by holding the outer cylinder fixed and
              oscillating the torsion pendulum.  Additional information about the flow
              properties of the monolayer is obtained by direct observation of velocity
              profiles and domain dynamics with a Browser angle microscope.

There has been
              a renewed interest in the theology of Languor minelayers, in part, due to the
              elucidation of their liquid condensed (LC) phases.  The LC phases are
              two-dimensional analogs of three-dimensional smectic  liquid crystals.  They
              posses hexatic order, and in phases where the molecules are tilted with respect
              to the surface, the tilt azimuth exhibits orientational order.  Because LC
              phases are ubiquitous in Langmuir monolayers, understanding their reheology has
              relevance to a range of processes that involve surfactant monolayer flow at
              interfaces.  The focus of recent work has been on fatty acid monolayers, as
              their phase behavior has been thoroughly studied, and a wide range of
              interesting flow phenomena has been observed.  Despite this, even the flow
              behavior of the pure fatty acid monolayers is not completely understood.  The
              work here proposes to extend these measurements to fatty acid salts (fatty acid
              monolayers in the presence of ions in the water subphase) and mixed fatty
              acid/ester system.  A number of  fundamental question will be addressed.  What
              is the connection between the structure of the equilibrium phases and the
              viscoelastic properties of the monolayer?  How do interactions between charged
              monolayers and multivalent ions affect the flow properties of the monolayer? 
              How do flows in the subphase impact the structure of the monolayer, and what
              effect does this have on the bulk flow?

The motivation for choosing these
              two systems is their role in foam stability.  The presence of ions in solution
              is often found to stabilized foams.  On the other hand, fatty acid salts can
              also be used to decrease foaming.  The study of fatty-acid salts proposed here
              will help elucidate this dual role of electrolytes as foam stabilizers and
              destabilizes.  It may even result in a method for controlling foam stability as
              a function of time.  Fatty acid/ester mixtures are often used as foam
              stabilizers.  Also, there is a correlation between surface viscosity and foam
              stability.  However, there is no fundamental understanding of the stabilizing
              mechanism.  It may be a simple relationship between viscosity and stability, or
              it may involve non-Newtonian properties of the LC phases.  The use of mixtures
              allows one to alter the phase of the system and the corresponding flow
              behavior, for a fixed temperature and pressure.  Preliminary studies the
              interaction between subphase flows and the monolayer will be made.   



