Title       : Collaborative Research: Shear Wave Velocity Profiling by SASW Method at Selected
               Strong-Motion Stations, Liquefaction Sites and Sites of Building Damage: 1999
               Turkey Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0085300

Award Number: 0085300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Stokoe k.stokoe@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen M. Rathje  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS0085300
Title: "Collaborative Research: Shear Wave Velocity Profiling by
              SASW Method at Selected Strong-Motion Stations, Liquefaction Sites, and Sites
              of Building Damage: 1999 Turkey Earthquakes"
PI: K. Stokoe
Institution:
              University of Texas at Austin

Abstract:
The 1999 Kocaeli and Duzce
              earthquakes in Turkey have generated important information and data at: (1)
              stations where strong ground motions were recorded, (2) sites where significant
              soil liquefaction occurred, and (3) localized areas with widely varying
              building damage.  One key variable in investigating the earthquake response at
              these three types of sites is the shear stiffness profile of the foundation
              soils.  A joint study will be conducted by researchers at Utah State University
              (USU) and the University of Texas at Austin (UTA) to characterize selected
              sites in each category using seismic measurements made in the field.  A total
              of about 20 sites will be investigated.  The seismic measurements will be used
              to develop small-strain shear modulus profiles, some one-dimensional and some
              two-dimensional, over critical depths at the sites.  Profiling depths will
              range from 9 to 60 m, with liquefaction sites generally requiring the
              shallowest profiles and strong motion recording stations requiring the deepest
              profiles.
To perform the seismic measurements, a non-intrusive seismic testing
              technique involving Rayleigh-type surface waves will be used.  This technique
              is called spectral-analysis-of-surface-waves (SASW) testing.  The technique is
              non-intrusive because both the source and receivers are placed on the ground
              surface.  Measurement of surface wave dispersion (i.e. surface waves of
              differing wavelengths travelling at different velocities) is performed in the
              field and forward modeling is used in the laboratory to evaluate the shear wave
              velocity profile at the site.  Researchers at UTA have been successfully using
              SASW testing at geotechnical sites on land for the past 18 years.  During the
              1990's, UTA researchers completed numerous investigations in California at
              liquefaction sites, solid-waste landfills, and strong motion stations shaken by
              the 1989 Loma Prieta and 1994 Northridge earthquakes.  In Turkey, this previous
              experience will be used to optimize profiling at the selected sites.  For
              instance, a bulldozer, which will be rented locally near the strong-motion
              sites, will be used as a source for deep profiling.  A drop-weight source,
              which can be readily fabricated in Turkey, will be used in profiling the
              shallower depths.
The proposed project is critical because it provides
              extensive shear wave velocity characterization of important sites shaken by the
              Kocaeli and Duzce earthquakes.  SASW testing is the most cost-effective method
              for evaluating shear wave velocity profiles.  The shear wave velocity data
              obtained from this study will be shared with the earthquake engineering and
              seismological communities and will prove invaluable to future research
              projects.

