Title       : A New Search for Amino Acid Precursors on Icy Solar System Objects with Improved
               Spectroscopic Parameters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0085614

Award Number: 0085614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270338             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eliot Young   (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie A. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Max P. Bernstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William N. Grundy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Research Inst
	      6220 Culebra Road
	      San Antonio, TX  782385166    /   -

NSF Program : 1075      LIFE IN EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0085614
Young

Amino acid precursors (AAPs) have been detected on meteorites,
              in comets, and in the
interstellar medium (ISM). In addition, these precursors
              (HCN, NH 3 , and CH 3 OH) have
been irradiated with UV photons in a 10 K water
              ice matrix to form glycine without
any aqueous chemistry taking place. Dr.
              Eliot Young at the Southwest Research Institute will lead a project that will
              conduct a survey on 16 of the icy bodies in the solar system to look for AAPs.
              The goal is to assess the distribution of AAPs throughout the icy bodies of the
              solar system and determine under what conditions AAPs can survive and
              participate in prebiotic chemistry.

Dr. Young expects that this telescopic
              survey will be more sensitive to the presence of AAPs
than any previous
              survey.  The research team's efforts are concentrated in three areas: 1.
              Observations at 3 - 5 Mm using NIRSPEC. The 3 - 5 Mm spectral range contains
              the
fundamental transitions of the AAPs. These are an order of magnitude
              stronger than
the overtone transitions which have been customarily observed.
              The breakthrough is
NIRSPEC, a 1 - 5 Mm spectrograph on the Keck telescope on
              Mauna Kea, Hawaii, that will acquire targets as faint as Charon. 2. New Optical
              Constants: Interpretation of spectral data requires accurate optical constants.
              The team will generate sample AAP ices under a variety of temperatures and in
              water and nitrogen host matrices. 3. More Accurate Spectral Modeling:
              Modifications to a current Hapke code based on the Monte Carlo results will be
              developed. This will allow more accurate fits to bright ices in which the
              scattering is non-isotropic and to cases in which the imaginary index is close
              to 1.  This program of observations and analysis is expected to discover many
              new constituents throughout the solar system, including many molecules with
              prebiotic significance. Taken as a whole, the results of the survey will help
              us to understand the conditions in which AAPs can survive in surface ices. 
              This project is funded through the Division of Astronomical Sciences for the
              NSF's Life in Extreme Environments program.
***



