Title       : LEXEN: Thermoadaptation in B. stearothermophilus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a0085475

Award Number: 0085475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311601             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil E. Welker thermoph@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1075,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Microorganisms adapted to growth at high temperature (thermophiles) have evolved
              a variety of unique mechanisms to cope with these extreme conditions. This
              demands a repertoire of "adaptation" mechanisms to cope with fluctuating
              environmental temperature ("adaptability"). There have been numerous reports
              suggesting that thermophilic microorganisms (e.g. Bacilli) exhibit a variety of
              biochemical adaptations in response to a change in the growth temperature. This
              is accomplished by employing a variety of adaptation mechanisms whose
              components are encoded by genes that are differentially regulated by
              temperature (temperature-responsive genes). Temperature-responsive gene
              products can include one or more enzymes for catabolic reactions, for energy
              generation, or for the formation or modification of lipids and/or other cell
              components which exhibit increased temperature stability or which allow the
              cell to survive or exhibit enhanced growth at the higher temperature (extrinsic
              protection of critical cell macro molecules). This was confirmed by genetic and
              biochemical studies on the unique glutamine transport operon (glnQH) of the
              genetically well characterized Bacillus stearothermophilus NUB3621. The normal
              temperature-regulated transcription pattern for glnQH is inactive at low
              temperature (50 degrees C) and active at high temperature (65 degrees C). One
              of the goals of this project is to determine the molecular mechanisms of
              temperature-regulated transcription of glnQH. Reporter gene technology in
              combination with deletion analyses, site specific mutagenesis, gel mobility
              shift analysis, and DNAase I footprint analysis will provide detailed knowledge
              about the elements (promoters and transcription factors) that function in the
              differential regulation of this operon. Another goal of this project is to
              identify other genes/operons that are differentially expressed by temperature.
              The identification and characterization of other loci that are
              transcriptionally regulated by temperature will establish if there is more than
              one mechanism for the regulation of temperature-responsive genes. and enhance
              our understanding of the thermoadaptation mechanisms that allow B.
              stearothermophilus to survive at high temperature. This will be accomplished by
              subtraction differential hybridization and by Tn9 17-mediated operon fusions
              that place a reporter gene (bgaB) under the transcriptional control of
              contiguous genes. The temperature-responsive genes will be characterized using
              reporter gene technology, in silico analyses, and by the phenotype of null
              mutants.  Thermoadaptation studies with B. stearothermophilus have opened up a
              relatively unexplored area of gene regulation.  This is a challenging frontier
              of current biology that will have wide spread interest in both the scientific
              and the biotechnology communities. Research on thermoadaptation in the moderate
              thermophile B. stearothermophilus will not only contribute to our understanding
              of how this organism has adapted but will serve as the paradigm for studies
              with microorganisms that exist near the temperature extremes of planetary
              conditions. The long-term goal of this project is to find the right tools and
              approaches so that this knowledge can be applied to these novel microorganisms.
              
