Title       : Geospatial Data, Visualization, and Discovery in Support of a Digital Library
               for Earth Systems Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0085482

Award Number: 0085482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra F. Moore moore@geology.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dogan Seber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Muawia Barazangi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0085482
Moore

Analysis of spatial data has always been a key component of
              geoscience research.  The relatively recent acquisition of large digital data
              sets is revolutionizing our understanding of the dynamic Earth system.  Use of
              these data by geoscience educators and students has lagged behind the research
              community because significant barriers confront inexperienced users of
              geospatial data.  Geospatial data will be an important element in the design
              and construction of a Digital Library for Earth System Education.  In order for
              all users to fully exploit these resources, well-designed and
              simple-yet-powerful data visualization and analysis tools must accompany
              digital data archives.  We propose to use the experience acquired in the
              construction of Cornell University's Solid Earth Information System (SEIS), a
              digital archive of solid Earth datasets originally compiled for the geophysical
              research community.  These data are web-accessible through the use of data
              search, query and display tools developed for SEIS that allow universal access
              to all users regardless of expertise.  Cornell University and the
              Paleontological Research Institution will modify and extend the capabilities of
              the SEIS system for educational purposes.  They will take advantage of the
              underlying data structures and query and display functions of the current
              system to develop an improved interface for on-line analysis of geospatial
              data.  They will prototype and test this system with feedback from university
              and K-12 students.  The system will allow students to access, view, combine,
              and analyze a wide variety of geospatial data in an interactive way.  They will
              develop educational user scenarios that utilize global, regional, and local
              scale data, and will help educators take better advantage of the same data sets
              and tools used by the world's leading researchers.  Through ready access to
              comprehensive data and easy-to-use tools, students and the general public can
              learn about the Earth through hands-on discovery with original data.

