Title       : Development of Novel In-Situ Tests and Modeling for Integrated MEMS Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0085122

Award Number: 0085122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Murphy kdm@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew R. Begley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Agency: 	NSF - Civil and Mechanical Systems (Alison Flatau)

PI's:		Kevin D.
              Murphy and Matthew R. Begley
		University of Connecticut

Proposal
              #:	0085122

Title:	Development of Novel In-Situ Tests and Modeling for
              Integrated MEMS Research and Education


300 WORD PROJECT SUMMARY

	The
              performance of micro-electro-mechanical-systems (MEMS) is strongly influenced
              by adhesive forces and surface energies. In some regimes, these quantities
              cause device failure, when components come into sticking contact and cannot
              continue to perform their designated task. In order to identify acceptable
              operating regimes, significant advances are needed in our ability to quantify
              close range attractive forces and adhesion energies.
	This program will
              develop (i) novel experimental techniques to characterize these quantities
              in-situ and (ii) physics-based models to predict component performance when
              adhesion and stick-release events are critical factors. Both quasi-static and
              dynamic behavior of a model MEMS system will be studied, with an emphasis on
              the transition between sticking and no-stick regimes. These studies will
              determine if and when dynamic excitation may be used initiate and control
              stick-release events. Such information may be used to design novel vibratory
              assembly processes used to manufacture complex MEMS.
	A state-of-the-art
              nanoindentation facility will be integrated with an idealized MEMS device to
              directly measure forces and displacements at the micron level.  In addition to
              established dynamic measurement techniques used in nanoindentation systems, a
              combination of electronic and optical measurements will be implemented.
              Adhesive energies, electrostatic forces, and the dynamic response of the MEMS
              device will be quantified during both mechanical and electrical excitation. The
              measured MEMS behavior will be used to validate a combination of analytical and
              numerical models that incorporate electrostatic forces and surface energies.
              These models will be used to predict a priori transient dynamic response,
              including stick and stick-release events. 
	The proposed program integrates
              research and education through the development of a MEMS test facility. 
              Graduate and undergraduate research assistants will design and fabricate test
              rigs and will contribute to model development.  Students will also spend time
              collaborating with the Micro-Technology Group at the Lawrence Livermore
              National Laboratory.
	


