Title       : ITR: Collaborative Rsearch: Scalable Quality-of-Service Control for the Next
               Generation Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0085824

Award Number: 0085824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1255045            (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi-Li Zhang zhzhang@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1661,4095,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Today's Internet owes its great success to the simple, "hour-glass" IP
              network protocol architecture laid out twenty-five years ago. With rapid
              advances in networking technologies and explosive growth of rich multimedia
              content in recent years, the networking community finds itself at an important
              crossroads: what should be the next generation Internet architecture for
              controlling network resources and provide the quality of service (QoS) needed
              by emerging multimedia applications? There is a multidimensional spectrum of
              possible approaches to providing QoS guarantees. The choice of a QoS solution
              for the next generation Internet will have a substantial impact on both the
              evolution of the Internet itself, and on what it enables.  Making the "right"
              choices requires the development of a fundamental understanding of the
              scalability of QoS controls and the impact of these controls on the efficacy of
              QoS provisioning.
     The goal of the proposed research is to develop a
              comprehensive, quantitative understanding of the fundamental trade-offs
              involved in various approaches toward providing scalable QoS guarantees. To
              this end, we will develop coherent theories to systematically address the issue
              of scalability in QoS controls.  The research program divides broadly into four
              areas:
     Aggregate network calculus for guaranteed flows: To gain a
              thorough  understanding of the fine time-scale(e.g., packet-level) behavior of
              a network system in providing QoS performance guarantees, the researchers will
              develop an aggregate network calculus to study the impact of aggregate QoS
              control mechanisms on the performance and complexity of data plane operations.
              This theory is developed for guaranteed flows - flows which require the network
              to commit, either at a per-flow or an aggregate level, a certain amount of
              resources (e.g., bandwidth and buffer) throughout their life time, regardless
              of the network congestion status. The aggregate network calculus will provide a
              mathematical framework to quantify the impact of aggregate QoS controls on the
              fundamental trade-offs in QoS provisioning. It will also yield insights into
              the design of scalable data plane QoS control mechanisms.
     End-to-end QoS
              controls for responsive flows:  The researchers will develop fluid models to
              study the impact of aggregate QoS control mechanisms on the end-to-end
              performance of responsive flows. A responsive flow responds to signs of network
              congestion, such as loss, by adapting its transmission rate. These models will
              enable us to develop a better understanding of the behavior of responsive flows
              such as
TCP coupled with different aggregate QoS mechanisms and to design
              end-to-end QoS services for responsive flows.
     QoS control laws and
              control plane aggregation rules. We will develop QoS control laws for capturing
              the slow time-scale, system-wide behavior of a network and aggregation rules
              that address the perfor-mance and complexity of control plane operations under
              aggregate QoS controls. These QoS control laws and aggregation rules will lead
              us to the design of distributed and centralized algorithms for scalable control
              plane operations.
     Scalable QoS mechanisms and service architectures As an
              integral part in developing these theories, the researchers  will also design
              effective and scalable QoS mechanisms, and tools and techniques for quantifying
              and evaluating the trade-offs of various QoS solutions. Based on the results
              from these efforts, the researchers will study how various QoS solutions can be
              combined to construct meaningful end-to-end services.
     The research will
              blend formal modeling/analysis, experimentation/implementation, and evaluation.
              The
understanding and insights gained as a result of our research will lead to
              the establishment of the theory,
design principles, and guidelines for
              building scalable QoS controls for the future Internet. This, in turn,
will
              allow reasoned and informed choices to be made as the next generation Internet
              takes shape.

