Title       : ITR: Multimodal Human Computer Interaction: Toward a Proactive Computer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0085980

Award Number: 0085980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3152068            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas S. Huang huang@ifp.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Kriegman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George W. McConkie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,1661,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a five-year continuing award.   This project
              is based on the belief that, to be more accessible to the general population,
              computers must be more proactive in their interactions with people.   In human
              interaction, someone who waits for each command before making any communication
              attempt would be regarded as uncooperative and unhelpful.   In order for a
              computer to be more proactive and, thus, to bear its part of the burden of
              initiation in interactions, it must have (1) much more real-time information
              about its user, and (2) algorithms that select actions based on this
              information rather than simply on user commands.   The computer needs
              information about the user's current and past emotional, motivational and
              cognitive state as well as the state of the task at hand.    A theory, is
              needed to guide the development of algorithms that select appropriate actions
              based on user and task state.  This research constitutes the next steps in an
              attempt by the PI's multidisciplinary team to develop this
              capability.

Proposed research includes:    (1) further development of
              methods to sense user postures, movements, expressions and speech;    (2)
              analysis and fusion of this information to identify and track user states;   
              (3) task state tracking;    (4) creating a corpus of emotion- and
              action-labeled videotapes for use with computer learning;    (5) further
              development of affective communication; (6) development of the basis for
              human-centered state-based action decisions;   and (7) evaluation of computer
              proaction on human behavior and response.    The testbed is an environment for
              hands-on education in science and engineering, using the Lego Mindstorms
              construction and robotics environment, with children of middle school age.   
              An emphasis will be on developing proactive computing methods for encouraging
              interest and conceptual development of minority children and females, who often
              show lower achievement in science.    Although the work will be conducted
              within an educational environment, the methods developed and studied will be
              broadly applicable, and this project should serve as an exemplar of the type of
              work that is needed in other computer-aided situations.

