Title       : LExEn: Evolution of Climate on Terrestrial Planets: Exploring the Limits of
               Habitability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0085378

Award Number: 0085378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358300             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Grinspoon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Bullock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Research Inst
	      6220 Culebra Road
	      San Antonio, TX  782385166    /   -

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1075,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0085378
Grinspoon

Dr. David Grinspoon and colleagues at the Southwest
              Research Institute are developing a program of modeling the evolution of planet
              climates that will lead to a greater understanding of the stability of climates
              against geologically induced episodes of climate change. It will help to define
              the range of planetary size, composition and location that can lead to stable,
              habitable environments on terrestrial-type planets in the universe. A systems
              approach has been applied to studying the climate of Venus which simulates the
              interactions between interior, surface, atmosphere and clouds. Several
              improvements will be made to this model which will turn it into a powerful tool
              for studying the general problem of climate evolution on terrestrial planets.
              These improvements include: 1) A detailed cloud microphysical model to more
              accurately simulate cloud responses to changes in atmospheric composition. 2) A
              simulation of the runaway or moist greenhouse effect, including cloud
              feedbacks, that will help us refine the inner edge of the habitable zone. 3) A
              modification of the model to simulate the climate evolution of Mars as a
              function of geological activity on that planet. 4) The incorporation of models
              of the thermal and volcanic evolution of terrestrial planets to
parameterize
              outgassing histories as a function of planetary size. This will allow the
              modeling of
climate evolution on a suite of hypothetical terrestrial planets
              as a function of size and
stellar-centric distance. This project is funded
              through the Division of Astronomical Sciences for the NSF's Life in Extreme
              Environments program.
***



