Title       : Chicago Urban Systemic Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2001   
File        : a0085115

Award Number: 0085115
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Bernice T. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11800000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Arne Duncan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Vallas  (Principal Investigator former)
              Richard M. Daley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Eason-Watkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cozette Buckney  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Chicago Public Schools
	      125 South Clark Street
	      Chicago, IL  606034013    773/553-1500

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Chicago Public Schools, formerly an Urban Systemic Initiative site funded by
              the National Science Foundation for five years (1994-1999), proposes to
              increase significantly K-12 student achievement in mathematics and science by
              noticeably improving the level of performance of the current science and
              mathematics teachers through a Citywide Professional Development University
              Partnership.  By means of the proposed partnerships, the Chicago Urban Systemic
              Program plans: (1) to increase the competency and diversity of the science and
              mathematics instructional workforce; (2) to advance the implementation of K-12
              standards-based mathematics and science curricula; (3) to increase student
              achievement as measured by standardized assessments; and (4) to promote and
              sustain collaborations with colleges, universities, and museums.

The
              proposed model encompasses four major initiatives to upgrade the standards of
              mathematics and science teaching via new university courses and the creation of
              a community of teacher professionals: (1) the K-4 Specialization in Mathematics
              and Science; (2) the Grades 5-8 Mathematics and Science Endorsement Program;
              (3) the Grades 9-12 High School Science and Mathematics Certification Courses;
              and (4) the Professional Development Networks.  The Northwestern University's
              Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools (LeTUS) will engage as a
              major partner to create innovative professional development course models that
              will typify the linkage of content to pedagogy and field-based experiences to
              practice.  By strengthening professional development as an essential component
              of systemic reform, and aligning it with other elements of the system, such as
              standards-based curricula, instruction, student assessment, and policies, the
              District will be able to sustain its systemic effort aimed at improved student
              achievement.  Furthermore, it is anticipated that all of Chicago's major
              collaborating universities continue to use the USP model and reform their
              teacher education programs.

The Chicago Education Alliance will coordinate
              the participation of ten universities that comprise this partnership.   The
              CUSP will gather formative feedback on the connection between professional
              development and student achievement by using the research capacity of LeTUS.

