Title       : Control of Moisture Content for Paper Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0085230

Award Number: 0085230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Perry Y. Li pli@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sridharan Ramaswamy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of a process control strategy
              for the control of moisture content in paper manufacturing.  The control
              strategy will utilize as feedback, estimates of the moisture content of the
              paper as it is being manufactured.  The vacuum dewatering process, in addition
              to the thermal drying process,  will be used as the control actuators.  The
              estimates of the moisture content will be based on surrogate measurements which
              are measurement of quantities that are more easily measurable than moisture
              content, but are related to moisture content.  To develop this control
              strategy, constitutive  models that govern the water removal process in vacuum
              dewatering will first be developed.  Suitable surrogate variables will be
              identified and models that describe how they relate to moisture content will be
              developed.  These models will be validated  in both static and dynamic
              dewatering environments. Based on the developed models for dewatering and for
              the surrogate measurements, algorithms for estimating moisture content will be
              developed.   Control algorithms will then be developed, analyzed, optimized,
              simulated, and finally, experimentally tested.

If successful, the results of
              this research will lead to improvement in the quality of moisture content
              control in paper manufacture.  Accurate and uniform moisture content is
              critical for paper to be curl free, cockle free and not cause printer and
              copiers to jam.  In addition, reduction in energy expenditure is also expected
              as the energy intensive thermal drying process will be more efficiently
              utilized.  The constitutive models developed in this research will improve the
              fundamental understanding of vacuum dewatering, which in turn will lead to
              improved designs for future paper machines.


