Title       : Integrative Freight Market Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a0085705

Award Number: 0085705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose Holguin-Veras   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kaan M. Ozbay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1607,1638,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The Integrative Freight Market Simulation (IFMS) attempts to depict a
              comprehensive picture of freight movements, in which both the user side, i.e.,
              commodity flows, and the logistic side, i.e., vehicle-trips, are considered.
              This framework has the potential to overcome the limitations of both commodity
              based models and vehicle-trip models. Commodity based models have great
              limitations in considering the flow of empty vehicles (which are the result of
              logistic decisions), while vehicle trip models are unable to take into account
              the economic characteristics of the cargoes.

The IFMS is based on a market
              equilibrium formulation that depict the competition among freight
              transportation providers, and a subset of routing problems to represent the
              actions of these companies when picking up and delivering the goods. The IFMS
              entails a bi-level approach in which the top level corresponds to the
              estimation of the provision of service consistent with Cournot-Nash
              equilibrium, while the bottom level focuses on the construction of tours that
              satisfy the Cournot-Nash solution and the remaining system constraints, in a
              context of a large scale simulation-optimization problem. The system
              constraints have been classified in: a) Primary; and b) Secondary. The primary
              constraints are: I) freight transportation companies maximize profits in a
              context of market equilibrium; and II) the user requirements are met, i.e., the
              commodities produced by and attracted to each zone are transported. Secondary
              constraints are: III) the resulting trip chains are consistent with known trip
              chain data; and IV) the resulting commercial vehicle traffic is consistent with
              secondary data sources, e.g., ITS traffic data. 
This project will focus on
              solving the most basic case of IFMS, taking into account the primary
              constraints (I and II), referred to as the Primary IFMS. This would entail
              developing solution algorithms that obtain the routing patterns that are
              consistent with both the Cournot-Nash solution for the provision of service
              (based on assumed economic parameters) and the user requirements. This will
              entail the definition of a set of synthetic, though meaningful, test cases that
              are meant to represent urban areas of different sizes and levels of complexity.
              These cases will be comprised of a number of data sets: 
1. zoning system;
              
2. set of relevant economic parameters;
3. a set of commercial vehicle
              operators;
4. a set of user requirements; and,
5. a set of commercial vehicle
              trips.
In other words, a set of synthetic cases for which all relevant
              information is known will be created. The collaboration of freight industry
              representatives will be requested to ensure a meaningful and realistic
              definition of the test cases. Their input is particularly important for the
              creation of data sets 3, 4, and 5. Algorithms will be developed to solve the
              Primary IFMS and applied to these test cases. The input data will be comprised
              of the data sets 1, 2, 3, and 4. The reasonableness and efficiency of the
              algorithms will be assessed by determining how well they are able to estimate
              the commercial vehicle trips (data set 5).

This award is made under the
              Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI) program
              solicitation.


