Title       : Road Transportation as complex adaptive systems: An exploratory conceptual
               framework to study road traffic patterns, accessibility, mobility, connectivity
               and congestion/emission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0085981

Award Number: 0085981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj Kulkarni rkulkarn@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger R. Stough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kingsley E. Haynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1607,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport
              Industries (ETI) program solicitation
	We propose to study transportation as
              complex adaptive systems (CAS).  It is our intent to carry out exploratory
              research and analysis of various aspects of highway and road transportation
              systems.  The topics for exploratory research and some of the methods used to
              analyze them are borrowed from many disciplines.  They are as mentioned
              below:
    (1) The hidden order in apparently random daily urban highway
              traffic patterns based on algorithmic entropy (Kolmogorov entroy).
  (2) 
              Connectivity of Transportation Network as a fractal dimension derived from
              river flow networks and fractal geometry models.
  (3) Accessibility and
              mobility based on site and bond percolation theory.
  (4) Emergence of
              long-term traffic patterns based on NK models of evolutionary biology.  
  (5)
              Congestion as a second order phase change based on spin glass theory and
              emission as a collective outcome of distributed agents modeled after neural
              networks.
  (6) Modifiable Areal Unit Problem (MAUP) and urban
              activities/transport systems based on models of self-organized criticality.
We
              believe that the interdisciplinary research and analysis of transportation
              systems will offer insights into Complexity and Transportation fields.  It is
              hoped that this would in turn spur interest in development of new traffic flow
              and transportation models that address the issue of how micro level
              interactions give rise to macro level behavior and the phenomenon of phase
              change.

