Title       : Developing a Core Integration System for a National Science, Mathematics,
               Engineering, and Technology Education Digital Library at WWW.SMETE.ORG
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0085878

Award Number: 0085878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $846616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice M. Agogino aagogino@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanne L. Narum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This demonstration project for the Core Integration System (CIS) of a national
              digital library for SMET Education is providing functioning horizontal and
              vertical integration of disciplinary collections and associated services.
              Www.smete.org represents an alliance of nearly twenty partner organizations -
              disciplinary collections, educational institutions, industry, and non-profit
              organizations - that is working to establish the basis for a national digital
              library for SMET education. Collaborators also include strong partners with
              experience in identifying and collecting digital resources for K-12 education.
              The project envisions this virtual facility as a place where members of the
              SMET community of learners interact with one another to develop, locate, use
              and discuss digital resources that enhance teaching and learning in classrooms,
              in coursework, in informal settings, and within and across disciplines. Towards
              this end the PI and team are developing a library portal to demonstrate
              interoperability of resources and federated search across multiple disciplinary
              collections. In addition, the project is coordinating the development of shared
              metadata across multiple disciplines in SMET education and developing subject
              thesauri and descriptors for describing pedagogy in SMETE. Other activities
              include participation with other pilot projects in developing a governing
              structure for the library, developing classifications for ranking materials,
              and identifying issues associated with curation of aging materials. Significant
              co-funding of this project is being provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities in the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences in
              recognition of the breadth of disciplinary coverage represented in this work.

