Title       : Comprehensive Understanding of Near-field Acceleration Recordings by a New HHT
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2001   
File        : a0085272

Award Number: 0085272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruichong Zhang rzhang@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS0085272
Title: "Comprehensive understanding of near-field acceleration
              recordings by a new HHT
analysis"
PI: R. Zhang
Institution: Colorado School
              of Mines

Abstract:
Near-field ground acceleration recordings have revealed
              many vibration/wave characteristics that are uniquely different from the
              medium- to far-field ones.  These include, among others, the low-frequency
              pulse-like wave signals and high-energy distribution in the beginning of the
              recordings.  They are very useful primarily in the following two
              aspects:
(1)	As the output in modeling earthquake wave motions and/or
              explaining earthquake phenomena in the earth, they can help solve such
              seismological issues as source mechanism, directivity influence, and soil
              dynamic non-linearity.    
(2) As the input to geotechnical and structural
              engineering systems, they can be used to compute dynamic nonlinear responses
              and thus to evaluate seismic performance of systems.  This analysis can
              quantify earthquake impact on various engineering systems designed on the basis
              of knowledge obtained form medium- to far-field ground motion records.
              

However, before the 1999 Kocaeli (Turkey) and Chi-Chi (Taiwan) earthquakes,
              there existed only 8 ground motion recordings worldwide for earthquakes greater
              than a magnitude 7 and at a distance of less than 20 kilometers from the fault.
               The lack of data has restricted studies on the quantitative nature of
              near-field motion and its impact on engineering systems.  In addition,
              conventional approaches (e.g., Fourier or Fourier-based wavelet analysis)
              supply either distorted or indirect information from the ground motion
              recordings.  This might mislead, to a certain extent, the consequent use of the
              ground motion data for solving the aforementioned seismological and engineering
              issues.  

This study seeks to use a newly developed Hilbert-Huang Transform
              (HHT) to comprehensively analyze the near-field acceleration recordings of the
              Kocaeli and Chi-Chi earthquakes.  In particular, the proposed study focuses on
              the following subjects:
(1) singling out the undistorted low-frequency
              pulse-like wave signals from the original data and presenting a simple measure
              of them in terms of their peak and duration;  
(2) providing an accurate
              representation of time-frequency seismic energy distribution of the motion;
              and
(3) revealing the commonality and difference in terms of vibration/wave
              characteristics of the motion among the near- and far-field recordings of each
              of the two earthquakes, among the near-field motions at observation sites with
              different orientations to the fault, and among the near-field motions of the
              two earthquakes compared with large-magnitude US earthquakes (e.g., 1992
              Landers earthquake).    

A multi-disciplinary research team has been formed
              to perform the proposed project, consisting of the PI, and a senior structural
              engineering researcher (Erdal Safak) and a seismologist (Stephen Hartzell) at
              USGS at Denver, CO.  The results from this study will be disseminated through
              the Internet at designated web pages related to these two earthquakes. 
              Seismologists and engineers will be able to use the results for their further
              studies and applications in pertinent research frontiers.  This study will not
              only help advance our knowledge of the earthquake source, but it will also
              improve the understanding of the damage potential of earthquake motion on
              various structures and thus enhance the contemporary seismic-resistance
              structural design.

