Title       : GOALI: Implementing Global Factory Schedules in Automated Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0085047

Award Number: 0085047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $569748             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reha M. Uzsoy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Lawley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Haldun Aytug  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shantha Mohan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project is
              to develop an integrated set of scheduling and structural controllers to
              implement a global schedule.  The investigators will not explore new methods of
              developing global schedules, but rather will seek to develop a systematic
              approach to implementing them, with implicit assumption that the global
              schedule accurately reflects management priorities.  The scheduling controller
              takes the job priorities developed by the global schedule as input, and
              reschedules jobs in the face of disruptions to minimize deviations from the
              global schedule as well as improve system performance.  The structural
              controller manages the distribution of work in the system to avoid states in
              which the system is vulnerable to disruptions.  Thus the function of the
              structural controller is to make the tasks of the scheduling controller easier
              by maintaining a "good" distribution of jobs relative to production and
              material handling capacity.  The researchers will formulate a novel approach
              for rescheduling problems, which exploit the information in a global schedule
              while maintaining its performance as closely as possible.  Structural control
              policies that avoid system states, i.e., distributions of lots throughout the
              factory that are unduly vulnerable to disruptions will be investigated. 
              

The research will be pursued in the context of semiconductor wafer
              fabrication, where the investigators have extensive experience and the
              industrial partner is the primary supplier of such software to the
              semiconductor industry.  Hence the team is uniquely qualified to address this
              inherently interdisciplinary problem and present novel, practical approaches
              for its solution.





