Title       : Real-Time Control of Transport Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0085694

Award Number: 0085694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan A. Desrochers aad@ecse.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joe H. Chow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George F. List  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Kokernak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1607,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport
              Industries (ETI) program solicitation. This exploratory research will focus on
              modeling and performance measures which will lead to a strategy for real-time
              control of transport networks.

Models will be developed that integrate
              information and product flow. Information-based quantities need to be a part of
              the entire model and need to be responsible for some portion of the control.
              Information flow is at least as important as physical product flow and the two
              must be integrated for effective real-time control of the network. At least 50%
              of the research effort will be spent on the modeling problem in the context of
              distributed load control for energy delivery systems, distribution of goods in
              the shipping industry, and distributed manufacturing.

Performance measures
              will be identified that are useful indicators of how well the transport network
              is operating. These measures along with the modeling effort will lead to the
              formulation of a real-time control strategy for these integrated
              systems.

The development of the real-time control strategy will be the
              second major effort. Transport networks are hybrid systems, systems with
              components operating in continuous-time while being driven by discrete events.
              The interface between the continuous components and the discrete events will
              require further advances in the modeling and control of hybrid systems with
              particular emphasis on the stability of such systems. The controller will use
              information and product flow knowledge to make decisions about the operation of
              the network subject to real-time constraints. Reconfiguration in real-time is
              one possible function of the controller.

The main goal of this proposed
              research is to build a science-based foundation across the major themes of
              modeling, performance analysis, and real-time control, all in the context of
              transport networks.

