Title       : LExEn: Role of Atmospheric Trace Gases in Microbial Colonization and Succession
               on Recent Lava Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0085495

Award Number: 0085495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. King GKing@Maine.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Klaus   Rudolf L. Nuesslein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1075,9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0085495
Gary M. King

Drs. Gary M. King of the University of Maine and
              Klaus Nusslein of the University of Massachusetts-Amherst have been awarded a
              grant from the NSF Life in Extreme Environment (LExEn) program to determine the
              role of atmospheric trace gases in microbial colonization and succession on
              recent lava flows.  Volcanic activity has played an important role in the
              development of terrestrial ecosystems for much of Earth's history, and
              continues to shape terrestrial environments at present.  Deposition of lava and
              tephra result in surfaces that over time support complex, highly productive
              biological communities.  However, young or recently extruded lavas represent
              extreme environments that contain few of the major nutrients necessary for
              sustaining life.  Neither organic matter nor a fixed form of nitrogen (e.g.,
              ammonium or nitrate) are readily available within or on the matrix of young
              lava.  Thus, early colonization of lava by microbes requires a source of
              exogenous nutrients.  Recent observations of young Hawaiian lava indicate that
              the atmosphere provides a significant source of carbon and energy for early
              microbial colonization.  In particular, trace gases such as hydrogen and carbon
              monoxide (and possibly methane) serve as substrates that fuel the metabolism of
              functionally diverse microbes.  Among these microbes are bacteria that use
              atmospheric nitrogen as a source of cellular nitrogen, and species that form
              important symbioses with plants.  The nature of trace gas utilization by
              microbes colonizing young lavas will be the primary focus of this LExEn
              research effort.  A variety of field and laboratory studies in the vicinity of
              the Kilauea volcano will document relationships among lava age (emphasizing
              chronosequences from 0-300 yr), microbial biomass, trace gas utilization
              (hydrogen, carbon monoxide and methane) and precipitation regimes (e.g., moist
              versus dry).  Extractions of genomic DNA from lava will be used to determine
              the diversity of microbial communities across age and climate gradients, and
              the diversity of specific functional groups within these communities. Finally,
              the research will include efforts to enrich, isolate and characterize novel
              trace-gas utilizing microbes from young lava and to determine the significance
              of such isolates in situ.  The research is expected to yield new insights about
              the survival and dynamics of microbes in extreme environments relevant for
              understanding both contemporary and ancient terrestrial systems as well as
              systems that might exist on other planets. 


