Title       : GROUND DEFORMATION DUE TO FAULT RUPTURE AND LIQUEFACTION DURING THE 1999 KOCAELI
               AND DUZCE, TURKEY, EARTHQUAKES:
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0085306

Award Number: 0085306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Pierre Bardet bardet@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS0085306
PI: Jean-Pierre Bardet
Institution: University of Southern
              California
Title: "GROUND DEFORMATION DUE TO SURFACE FAULTING AND LIQUEFACTION
              DURING THE 1999 KOCAELI AND DUZCE, TURKEY, EARTHQUAKES"

Abstract

During
              the 1999 Kocaeli and Duzce, Turkey, earthquakes, surface faulting
caused
              substantial damage to structures and lifelines. It is the first time
that
              surface faulting impacts urban and industrial areas to such an extent,
and
              raises major concerns about our current practices in earthquake
engineering.
              During the 1999 Kocaeli, Turkey, earthquake, there was also
major damage due
              to liquefaction-induced lateral spreads and coastal
subsidences along the
              coasts of the Bay of Izmit and Lake Sapanca. The
objective of this proposed
              exploratory research is to measure ground
deformations caused by surface
              faulting and liquefaction during the 1999
Kocaeli and Duzce, Turkey
              earthquakes. This information, which will be
disseminated to researchers and
              practitioners via the Internet, will
contribute to improving models for
              liquefaction-induced lateral spreads and
mitigation criteria for surface
              faulting effects. 

The proposed exploratory research completes the work
              performed immediately
after the earthquakes by the earthquake reconnaissance
              teams and
subsequently by our research collaborators in Turkey. The
              discontinuous
dislocations from surface faulting have already been mapped by
              geologists.
However, the continuous fields of ground strain surrounding
              surface
faulting have not yet been measured. The aerial photographs taken
              prior and
after the earthquakes are yet to be interpreted to yield a
              large-scale
understanding of ground deformation and failure mechanisms,
              especially in
stepovers between two strike-slip strands (e.g., Golcuk). The
              same image
processing techniques need also to be also applied for producing
              maps of
liquefaction-induced ground deformations (e.g., Sapanca Lake).
              The
processing and interpretation of aerial photographs will be instrumental
              in
understanding the large-scale ground deformation and failure
              mechanisms
observed during the 1999 Kocaeli and Duzce, Turkey, earthquakes.
              

The objectives of the proposed exploratory research are: (1)
              Compilation
and organization of existing data on surface-faulting
              and
liquefaction-induced ground deformation for the 1999 Kocaeli and
              Duzce,
Turkey, earthquakes; (2) Processing of aerial photographs taken prior
              to
and after the earthquakes for producing maps of permanent
              displacement
vectors and settlements induced by surface faulting and
              liquefaction; (3)
Collection of additional ground surveys, and data on geology
              and
geotechnical soil profiles (e.g., SPT and CPT soundings) in selected
              areas;
and (4) Dissemination of information collected thorough a new GIS
              platform
(Internet Map Server) on the Internet.


