Title       : STAR-Light - A 1.4 GHz Scanning Thinned Array Radiometer for use on light
               aircraft in arctic land-surface hydrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2000   
File        : a0085176

Award Number: 0085176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1380777            (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony W. England england@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1647      POLAR INSTRUMENT & DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-0085176
A.W. England

STAR-Light - A 1.4 GHz Scanning Thinned
              Array Radiometer for use on light aircraft in arctic land-surface
              hydrology

STAR-Light will enable hydrologists to extend plot models of
              land-atmosphere energy and moisture transport processes to the circumpolar
              Arctic. Arctic energy balance experiments at sites that are both representative
              and accessible are used to develop Land-Surface Process (LSP) models, but
              extrapolating from these sites to the varying and mixed terrains of the
              circumpolar Arctic will require model calibration and validation that can be
              achieved only with frequent observations over broad regions beginning with
              spring thawing and ending with fall freezing. Once calibrated, these regional
              models will then serve either as improved lower boundaries of atmospheric
              models or as more reliable elements of integrated regional hydrology models.
              

At the heart of the LSP model are estimates of moisture stored in soil,
              vegetation, and snow. The quality of these estimates and the skill of model
              predictions can be significantly improved by assimilating near-daily
              observations of the moisture in the upper few centimeters of soil. The remote
              sensing hydrology community has converged upon 1.4 GHz brightness as the most
              effective observation for this purpose. Recent breakthroughs in radiometer
              technology, in LSP/Radiobrightness models, and in efficient schemes for
              assimilating radiobrightness have placed us on a path toward reliable long-term
              monitoring of changes in the amount, state, and spatial distribution of
              moisture stored within tundra throughout the Arctic. Essential elements of this
              vision are data from satellite radiometers and calibrated LSP/R models for
              arctic terrains. 

Both the European Space Agency and NASA are developing 1.4
              GHz synthetic aperture radiometers for low Earth orbit. Hydrologists are
              preparing for the advent of data from these instruments with extensive field
              campaigns to develop and calibrate LSP/R models, and to validate schemes for
              assimilating satellite data. The focus of these efforts has been prairie
              terrains. There are no proven LSP/R models for arctic terrains even though one
              could reasonably argue that remote sensing technologies are more vital to Earth
              system science in the Arctic. Mature LSP/R models for arctic terrains require
              collaborative campaigns involving arctic soil and snow hydrologists and remote
              sensing hydrologists supported by near-daily regional data from an airborne 1.4
              GHz imaging radiometer. Only three such instruments are planned for the next
              decade -two in Europe and an enhanced version of NASA's Electronically Scanned
              Thinned Array Radiometer (ESTAR) which flies on the NASA P-3 -a large, 4-engine
              turboprop aircraft. The high operating costs of the P-3, the conflicting
              schedules of instruments on the P-3, and the demand for ESTAR data in NASA's
              many large field campaigns will greatly limit its use in seasonal and
              inter-annual investigations in the Arctic. 

The PI's research group has
              developed the first example of a compact, 1.4 GHz, Direct Sampling Digital
              Radiometer (DSDR). The proposed STAR-Light instrument will use seven 1.4 GHz
              DSDR receivers configured as a 2-dimensional synthetic aperture radiometer.
              STAR-Light will be sufficiently compact and robust to operate in the Arctic on
              a light aircraft or on an Uninhabited Aerial Vehicle (UAV). A design goal is
              that it fit within the performance and configuration limitations of a Super
              Cub. STAR-Light will be designed, fabricated, and tested over a 3-year period
              by the Space Physics Research Laboratory (SPRL) at the University of Michigan.
              

