Title       : Earth Systems Science: Developing an Effective Framework for Preparing
               Preservice K-8 Science Teachers and Strengthening Existing Links between UNO
               and the Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a0085392

Award Number: 0085392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Hall frhall@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cory Buxton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0085392
Hall

Historically, Louisiana has ranked at or near the bottom in
              educational support and the educational achievement of its students in
              comparisons with other states.  The New Orleans region, in particular, commonly
              ranks at the bottom within the State of Louisiana.  This result is particularly
              true for science and mathematics.  Fundamental weaknesses in science,
              mathematics, and technology literacy by teachers get transferred to the
              students.  These students grow into adults lacking critical-thinking skills and
              knowledge of using technology.  Therefore, they are ill prepared to face the
              challenges of the 21st century workplace.  Urban centers, such as New Orleans,
              can no longer expect to survive with a population of teachers who themselves do
              not understand the fundamental tenets of science.  As a member of the Great
              Cities Consortium and the major educator of K-12 teachers in the New Orleans
              environs, the University of New Orleans is striving to improve the pool of
              teachers to the community and improve links with the community-at-large.  At
              UNO, education is no longer viewed as K-12 then college.  Instead, we are
              looking at education as pre-K-16 and beyond.  Competently trained science
              educators that reflect this new paradigm are critically needed in our school
              system.  This proposal is written to request funds from the National Science
              Foundation to support the development of an Earth System Science based
              curriculum for preservice K-8 teachers.  The program we propose will: 1) Align
              the science methods and science content courses taught to preservice teachers,
              2) Develop a constructivist-based curriculum in earth-systems science that
              emphasizes the local environment, and 3) Prepare preservice teachers to use
              appropriate technology in their classrooms.  This curriculum will focus on the
              regional environment, including the Lake Pontchartrain Basin, Mississippi River
              drainage area, Mississippi River Delta, and Gulf of Mexico.  Furthermore, the
              students will learn the environmental interconnectivity of these areas as an
              interdisciplinary science aligned with the national and state science education
              standards.  Importantly, this curriculum will be taught in inquiry-based
              classes with emphasis on group-cooperative learning and authentic assessment
              practices.  Students will have access to, and be trained in, technology that
              they will be using when they become teachers, including computers and internet
              access, graphing calculators, and calculator-based laboratories.  Furthermore,
              we will adapt components of this curriculum and test it in a local middle
              school.  The population of this school is composed almost entirely of persons
              underrepresented in geoscience.  Success of this adaptation will be used as a
              model for adapting the entire curriculum to the K-8 level.  Drs. Hall and
              Buxton's complementary backgrounds make them ideally suited to develop and
              implement this curriculum.  Hall is a scientist with expertise in science
              education whereas Buxton is an educator with expertise in science.

