Title       : Algorithms and High Performance Computational Tools for Dynamic Flow Problems in
               Intelligent Transport Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0085830

Award Number: 0085830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ismail Chabini chabini@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1607,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research aims at designing efficient algorithms and computational tools for
              a set of dynamic flow problems that arise in intelligent transport networks,
              which are defined as networks equipped with information technologies aimed at
              dynamically collecting, processing, and communicating data on current and
              future network conditions.  Problems to be studied include those belonging to
              two classes:problems that are generic to multiple types of transport networks,
              and problems that emerge from the domain of intelligent road and highway
              networks.
Performance characteristics of transport networks are at best known
              with uncertainty, and are typically represented as random variables. In this
              project, uncertainty will be taken into account in developing efficient
              computational algorithms for the generic dynamic network flow problems, and in
              investigating the development of more realistic models, and their corresponding
              solution algorithms, for traffic flow problems in intelligent road and highway
              networks. This leads to modeling and algorithmic research questions involving
              stochastic and time-dependent networks.
Intelligent transport networks must
              operate in real-time. This project will develop algorithms that can run much
              faster than real-time for networks with real-life sizes. Fast sequential
              algorithms, that exploit properties of dynamic networks and data representation
              and manipulation techniques, will be developed and their implementation on high
              performance computing platforms will be considered. Fastest computer
              implementations for a given algorithmic problem will be integrated in a library
              of software tools.
The research has the following directions: study of some
              generic dynamic network flow problems; study of dynamic flow problems in
              intelligent road traffic networks; and software tools and high performance
              computational methods
This award is made under the Exploratory Research on
              Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI) program solicitation.

