Title       : LExEn: Integrated Biogeochemical and Microbiological Studies of Cold, Anoxic
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  2000   
File        : a0085607

Award Number: 0085607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $564496             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Reeburgh reeburgh@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Valentine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1075,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              LExEn: Integrated Biogeochemical and Microbiological Studies of Cold, Anoxic
              Environments
Although cold, anoxic marine sediments are a seemingly
              inhospitable location to support life, they are populated by microbes with
              unusual metabolic capabilities. They play a key role in the global cycling of
              organic matter today and in the past, and are also important for our
              understanding of life elsewhere in the Universe. Although previous studies have
              considered such environments, numerous questions still remain about the
              microbial communities and processes which occur there. The objectives of the
              current project are to further the understanding of the processes occurring in
              cold, anoxic systems, and to link the understanding of the processes with the
              microbial communities that participate. More specifically, this project will
              couple biogeochemical experiments performed at a permanently-cold, anoxic bay
              with sophisticated chemical analyses, culture-dependent and independent
              identification techniques, and laboratory-based studies of microbes isolated
              from the site, to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the
              microbiology and biogeochemistry of such globally-important
              environments.

Specific Goals Include:

1.	Determine the prokaryotic
              community structure of the study site (sediments of Skan Bay, AK). Several
              independent techniques will be utilized encompassing both culture-dependent
              (most-probable- number analysis, isolations) and culture-independent (complete
              depth-profile using 16SrRNA, DGGE, species-specific fluorescent probes, lipid
              biomarker analysis) identification techniques.
2.	Determine the pathways and
              thermodynamics of carbon and energy flow at the site. Several independent
              approaches will be utilized including following natural isotopic variations
              (lipid biomarker isotope analysis - 2 H and 13 C, methane isotope analysis - 2
              H and 13 C), utilizing isotope-labeled tracers (14 C-labeled methane, acetate,
              glucose), and determining depth profiles of important metabolites (CH4, SO4 2-
              , and H2).
3.	Isolate and characterize novel psychrophilic and psychrotolerant
              prokaryotes, including methanogens, sulfate reducing bacteria, amino-acid
              degrading syntrophs, and methane oxidizers.
4.	Integrate all laboratory and
              field studies with prior studies to develop a conceptual model of the
              microbial-biogeochemistry of cold, anoxic environments.

This project will
              also yield insight into the formation and consumption of methane hydrates by
              microbes. This work should also lead to the isolation and characterization of
              several novel prokaryotes capable of growth at low temperature, including
              sulfate-reducing bacteria, methanogenic Archaea, methane-oxidizing Archaea, and
              amino-acid consuming syntrophs. In addition, this work will help to identify
              the mechanism and organisms responsible for anaerobic methane oxidation.
              Results of this work are expected to be broadly applicable to other extreme
              environments.

