Title       : The Local Structure of Zeolites from X-Ray and Neutron Scattering Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0085036

Award Number: 0085036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul F. Lobo lobo@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0085036
Raul F. Lobo
University of Delaware
"The Local Structure of
              Zeolites from X-Ray and Neutron Scattering Data"


ABSTRACT

Like many
              useful materials, zeolites are often idealized as perfect crystals, solids
              in
which periodic long-range order is observed in all three directions in
              space.  Yet, very frequently the useful properties of a material stem from a
              small amount of minority elements (or defects) incorporated within the
              structure that shift the local environment away from the average.  In this
              project the Pair Distribution Function (PDF), as derived from X-ray and neutron
              diffraction patterns, is being measured to investigate the local atomic
              environment in an important group of industrially significant zeolites.  The
              gas-adsorption behavior and the catalytic activity of these porous materials
              are intrinsically associated with minor amounts of aluminum substituted for
              silicon in the structure. Since both catalysis and adsorption are fundamentally
              local phenomena, the understanding of zeolite properties thus depends on a
              detailed knowledge of the geometry of the sites.  The research objective is to
              determine in detail the atomic geometry of these sites using the PDF.

The
              results will help to explain the properties of various zeolites in their roles
              as catalysts and adsorbents.  More detailed structure-property information will
              guide the design and synthesis of new, more effective materials with enhanced
              properties.  The experimental structural data will also be valuable as a guide
              in the molecular modeling of zeolite properities.






