Title       : LExEn: Mercury Resistance in Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0085216

Award Number: 0085216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Blum pblum@biocomp.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1075,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is investigating the relationship between mercury and archaea. 
              Mercury is an extremely toxic heavy metal mined from cinnabar deposits but is
              otherwise rare.  Most bacterial prokaryotes employ the mer genes to achieve
              mercury resistance.  The mer genes are highly conserved, widely distributed,
              and frequently transmitted among bacteria.  Surprisingly, there are no reports
              of mercury resistance among archaeal prokaryotes.  To investigate this question
              studies have been undertaken on a naturally occurring mercury-rich geothermal
              environment distinguished by sulfhydryl deficiency and oxidative excess. 
              Mercury resistant archaea were cultured from Pool 3-4, a cinnabar hot springs
              (pH 1.7, 78 degrees C, 2 mg/liter mercury) located in the Mojave Desert.  Pool
              3-4 is strongly influenced by seasonal rainfall with concomitant changes in
              pool solute levels, particularly mercury.  Efforts in this project are focused
              on one isolate identified as Sulfolobus solfataricus.  Maintenance of archaeal
              mercury resistance in this isolate requires selective pressure.  Co-segregation
              of mercury resistance and a 13 kb endogenous plasmid indicates that resistance
              is plasmid encoded.  A mercury adaptive response was identified which is
              accompanied by transient induction of a 25 kDa protein.  The first part of this
              LExEn project focuses on archaeal mercury resistance and adaptation.   Enzyme
              assays for mercury reduction and volatilization will test for presence of a
              bacterial mer-type mechanism.  Characterization of the endogenous plasmid will
              enable identification of possible mer orthologous sequences.  Regions critical
              for mercury resistance will be identified using plasmid deletion derivatives
              for genetic transfer studies with mercury sensitive recipients.  Identification
              of the mercury induced 25 kDa protein will help clarify the mechanism of
              toxicity.  The relationship between mercury resistance and adaptation will
              focus on expression patterns of the 25 kDa protein.  The second part of the
              project focuses on the origin and potential transfer of mercury resistance
              genes.  Phylogenetic analysis of cultured and uncultured microbes from Pool 3-4
              will be completed and used to create specific fluor-labled probes for community
              structure analysis.  Measurements of community composition will establish the
              consequences of seasonal variation in mercury levels.  Archaeal mercury
              resistance gene probes will be used to track distribution and transfer of
              mercury resistance among members of the Pool 3-4 community coinciding with peak
              mercury concentrations.  The anticipated results should distinguish possible
              origins of archaeal mercury resistance and establish an understanding of the
              mechanism of mercury toxicity in archaea.  This information will extend
              knowledge about life in extremely oxidizing environments and contribute to the
              genetic manipulation of archaeal hyperthermophiles.
