Title       : Swarm Intelligence Applications in Transportation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0085430

Award Number: 0085430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dusan Teodorovic duteodor@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1607,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              In the last few of years, the mathematicians and engineers started studying the
              behavior of social insects (ants, termites, bees, wasps) in an attempt to use
              the Swarm Intelligence concept in order to develop various Artificial Systems.
              The development of Artificial Systems does not entail the complete imitation of
              natural systems, but explores into them in search of ideas and models. 

It
              should be noted that a large number of traditional engineering models and
              algorithms is based on control and centralization. On the other hand, bee or
              ant swarm behavior in nature is primarily characterized by autonomy and
              distributed functioning and self-organizing. Natural systems teach us that very
              simple individual organisms can form systems capable of performing highly
              complex tasks by dynamically interacting with each other. It is of course of
              great importance to investigate both advantages and disadvantages of autonomy,
              distributed functioning and self-organizing in relation to traditional
              engineering methods relying on control and centralization. The basic question
              about the above-mentioned characteristics of social insects that should be
              answered is: 

Can we use some principles of natural Swarm Intelligence in
              development of Artificial Systems aimed at solving complex problems in traffic
              and transportation? 

In this research project, models inspired by the Swarm
              Intelligence principles will be developed for some of the following potential
              applications: (a) Designing transportation networks for highways and public
              transportation routes through complex geographic spaces (b) Locating emergency
              and non-emergency facilities on the transportation networks, and (c) Vehicle
              fleet planning and static and dynamic routing and scheduling of vehicles and
              crews, with emphasis on truck operations and public transportation services.
              

This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the
              Transport Industries (ETI) program solicitation.

