Title       : ETI: Design and Evaluation of a Hierachical Highway Network Structure and a
               Decision Support System with Surveillance Information to Enhance Business
               Partnerships in the E-Market
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2000  
File        : a0085667

Award Number: 0085667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Simin Pulat pulat@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Sluss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Moses  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Havlicek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sridhar Radhakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1607,1669,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI) award is
              to investigate the effectiveness of grid-based multi-tier network architecture
              for the highway system, which will be expandable to include other transport
              modes.  Two subnetworks, backbone and access networks, represent the highway
              system.  Interstate highways forming grid boundaries define the backbone
              network.  Each grid has its own access network connected by border gateways
              (interface nodes).  A framework for a decision support system (DSS) is
              developed to provide support for B2B and B2C transportation as well as support
              for highway monitoring.  Advanced sensors are used to collect traffic and
              vehicular data.  On the backbone network, locations where sensors are currently
              available are identified.  New locations are selected for sensor deployment and
              sensor types are defined for these locations.  The data collected from various
              sensors will be converted into knowledge to be used by decision models and
              route planning algorithms.  Efficient optimization methods for hub location
              selection, synchronized load routing and consolidation, and for congestion and
              flow control will be investigated. 

The multi-tier highway representation
              allows for scalability in design.  If research results are found promising, the
              model can be expanded to represent inter-modal transport by adding levels to
              the architecture.  Tactical decisions on the backbone network are critical to
              operations of any transport company and can be shared by all.  Seamless
              integration of surveillance data with the decision support system to provide
              efficient load consolidation and routing schedules over the multi-tier highway
              network architecture is novel and will lead to enhanced B2B relations in the
              e-marketplace.  Deployment of sensor technology on the backbone network can
              also be used for other decisions such as highway safety and maintenance. 

