Title       : Optimimizing Noise-based Enhancement of Speech Recognition by Cochlear Implant
               Patients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0085370

Award Number: 0085370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie M. Collins lcollins@ee.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0085370
Collins
It is well established that cochlear implants restore some
              level of functional hearing to most deaf individuals. However, speech
              recognition abilities vary widely across subjects and the mechanisms
              responsible for this variability are poorly understood.  One factor that may
              impede speech recognition by cochlear implant subjects is that electrically
              stimulated nerves respond with a much higher level of synchrony than what is
              normally observed in acoustically stimulated nerves.  Recently, some
              researchers have suggested that adding noise to a speech signal may decrease
              the synchronicity of the neural response observed under electrical stimulation,
              and thus, might restore a more normal response pattern.  By generating more
              natural patterns, it may be possible to improve speech recognition for cochlear
              implant patients. Preliminary theoretical results from our lab indicate that
              more normal neural response patterns can be induced when small amounts of
              additive noise are added to periodic electrical signals.  In addition,
              preliminary experimental results, again from our lab, indicate that speech
              recognition may also be improved using this approach.  In the literature, the
              phenomenon whereby additive noise, when presented at an optimal level, improves
              signal transmission in nonlinear systems is known as stochastic resonance (SR).
              

The goal of this research is to investigate and optimize a novel speech
              processing approach for cochlear implant patients based on the theory of
              stochastic resonance. To date, SR research has focused on the addition of noise
              to a weak signal within the context of a nonlinear systems.  This research will
              instead consider the theoretical basis for driving a complex system to respond
              in a more chaotic fashion, and thus better mimic the responses observed in the
              normal auditory system.  A series of theoretical and laboratory experiments has
              been designed to address the fundamental role of additive noise under
              electrical stimulation.  A computational model of the neural response to
              electrical stimulation will be employed to develop the theoretical results, and
              results will be verified in psychophysical as well as neurophysiological
              experiments.  Although optimizing the additive noise process for weak signals
              under "normal" acoustic neural stimulation has been considered in traditional
              SR research, this issue has not been addressed for neural systems subject to
              electrical stimulation.  The specific questions that are proposed involve both
              generating a SR phenomenon and optimizing the phenomenon under electrical
              stimulation of the auditory system. 

This work will form an important
              theoretical basis for driving the auditory system to respond in a more natural,
              albeit chaotic fashion.  Construction of the computer models will improve
              understanding of the neural response driven by electrical stimulation and
              assist in the design of new electrical stimulation paradigms that improve the
              representation of speech within the profoundly impaired auditory system.  A
              collaboration with a neurophysiologist will ensure that the theoretical
              predictions are validated in a human model via psychophysical experiments and
              in neurophysiological data.  In addition, the interdisciplinary scope of this
              work will provide a unique venue for the training of biomedical engineers. 

