Title       : LExEn: Diversity of Electron Donors and Electron Acceptors Supporting the Growth
               of Hyperthermophilic Microorganisms.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0085365

Award Number: 0085365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Derek R. Lovley dlovley@microbio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1075,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0085365
Lovely
Microorganisms are thought to have an important impact on the
              geochemistry of hot (80-110 degrees C), oxygen-depleted environments such as
              those found deep below the Earth's surface, at the bottom of the ocean, and
              around terrestrial hot springs.  The goal of this research is to evaluate the
              metabolic diversity of anaerobic hyperthermophilic microorganisms in order to
              learn more about the biogeochemical processes that are possible in hot
              microbial ecosystems.  It is hypothesized that there is wide diversity of
              microorganisms that are capable of living in hot environments by oxidizing
              organic compounds such as: acetate and other short-chain fatty acids,
              long-chain fatty acids, amino acids, aromatic compounds, and a variety of
              hydrocarbons.  Electron acceptors for the oxidation of these organic compounds
              are predicted to include Fe(III), sulfate, S (zero), or nitrate.  It is
              proposed that in the absence of these electron acceptors that these organic
              compounds can be microbially converted to methane.  Novel strategies will be
              employed in an attempt to recover autotrophic, hydrogen-oxidizing,
              Fe(III)-reducing hyperthermophiles because it is hypothesized that some
              organisms with this form of respiration will phylogenetically be among the most
              deeply branching microorganisms still existing on Earth.  In order to evaluate
              the possibility that Fe(III) reducers may be active in hot, acidic
              environments, an attempt will be made to recover acidophilic hyperthermophiles
              that can reduce the soluble Fe(III) found at low pH.  The possibility that
              Fe(III)-reducing hyperthermophiles produce isotopically unique Fe(II) minerals
              will be evaluated by examining the oxygen and iron isotopes in these minerals. 
              It is expected that these studies will provide further insight into the biology
              and geology of hot microbial ecosystems on Earth as well as the microbial
              ecosystems that may exist in the hot subsurface of other planets.  These
              studies are also expected to have economic benefits by: 1) better explaining
              the generation of economically important ore deposits; 2) providing new
              strategies for the remediation of toxic organic and metal contaminants; and 3)
              suggesting a new approach for increased recovery of hydrocarbons from petroleum
              reservoirs.


