Title       : Next-Generation Re-Configurable Wiresaw for Wafer Slicing and On-Line Real-Time
               Metrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0085021

Award Number: 0085021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215858             (Estimated)
Investigator: Imin Kao kao@mal.eng.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fu-Pen Chiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to develop the theoretical modeling as well as
              experimental research of the wiresaw technology.  Research issues and the
              implementation of the next-generation re-configurable wiresaw integrated with
              on-line and real-time metrology, such as the real-time monitoring of wire wear
              and wire web management, will be investigated.  Innovative modeling integrating
              the "rolling-indenting" mechanism, elasto-hydrodynamics, fracture mechanics,
              plasticity, vibration, and stiffness control will facilitate the integrated
              modeling of the wiresaw manufacturing process.  Such sound theoretical
              methodology is particularly important for the production of large wafers to
              avoid typical trial-and-error approaches at the expense of quality and
              consistency.  The research objectives include: (1) investigation of both
              theoretical and practical issues of the novel agile wiresaw, with integrated
              monitoring and metrology that can be adapted to slice different materials,
              sizes, configuration, and other characteristics; (2) development of in-situ,
              real-time sensors for monitoring of wire wear and on-line wire web management;
              (3) research of the next-generation shadow moire measurement of the whole wafer
              surface using the phase shifting technique to render high precision and
              resolution; and (4) design and application of smart MEMS transducers for the
              wiresaw machine.  The research also features collaboration between academic
              institution with industrial partners to strengthen the relevance of this
              research and application in industry. This collaborative research will make it
              possible to establish a superior technology for the next-generation
              wiresaw.

If successful, the results of this research will enable us to
              further the technology of wiresaw and to facilitate the advancement of
              semiconductor technology by providing high-quality and low-cost substrates in
              the fabrication of microelectronics, MEMS, and microsystems.  The wiresaw
              research results and applications of smart MEMS transducers can be utilized for
              the development of the next-generation, re-configurable, and smart wiresaw for
              wafer production; as well as optical metrology, such as shadow moire technique
              with phase shifting, to enhance the capability of both in-situ and post-process
              measurements and controls of wiresaw manufacturing process parameters and
              topology of wafer surfaces.  In addition, the breakthrough in fundamental
              research and technology advancement will feature a very promising enabling
              technology in the manufacturing of not only large diameter silicon wafers but
              also silicon carbide, lithium niobate, III-V and II-VI semiconductors, ceramic,
              and composite materials.

