Title       : Ground Failure and Building Performance in Adapazari, Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0085130

Award Number: 0085130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Bray bray@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond B. Seed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS0085130
Title: "Ground Failure and Building Performance in Adapazari,
              Turkey"
PI: J. Bray
Institution: University of California at
              Berkeley

Abstract:

The "field laboratory" of Adapazari, where hundreds of
              buildings settled, tilted and collapsed due in part to liquefaction and ground
              softening, provides an exceptional opportunity to document the effects of
              ground failure on building performance.  Moreover, there are a number of
              observations of damaging ground response that have not been documented
              previously.  The seismic interaction between buildings and softened foundation
              soils is an especially important feature, as ground failure appeared to be more
              prevalent and severe adjacent to and under buildings than away from structures.
               Current guidelines, such as the California Hazard Mapping Program, are poorly
              defined regarding the effects of liquefaction on building performance and
              necessary mitigation measures.  Considerably more building performance
              documentation and subsurface characterization are required to learn the lessons
              from this exceptional field laboratory on the effects of ground softening and
              failure on structures and the effects of soil-structural interaction and
              response on ground performance.

The primary goal of the proposed study is to
              develop well-documented case histories of building performance at sites
              undergoing moderate to severe ground failure, so that the profession can use
              these case histories to advance our understanding of these phenomena and
              enhance our ability to numerically simulate them.  A parallel goal is to
              provide a comprehensive record of ground performance data in Adapazari and
              adjacent communities so that additional lessons can be learned.  

This
              research project combines the talents of several professors and students who
              led and participated in reconnaissance efforts of the Kocaeli earthquake.  It
              has been effectively coordinated through key Turkish professors who are sharing
              their expertise, data, and equipment.   Existing aerial photographs offer the
              opportunity to coordinate the study and generalize findings.  The team has
              access to detailed damage statistics collected by the Turkish government. 
              Building systems for key case histories will be better documented, because
              ground failure appeared to be caused in part due to the dynamic response of the
              overlying structures.  For example, ground failure was not pervasive in
              undeveloped areas, and taller buildings settled more than shorter buildings. 
              Additionally, areas with significant ground failure contained significant
              structural damage.    Due to the significant variations in subsurface
              conditions across Adapazari, efficient Cone Penetration Testing will be
              invaluable.  But it is important to tie this type of testing with Standard
              Penetration Testing, where soil samples are retrieved, due to the presence of
              significant nonplastic, and sometimes plastic, fines in many of the deposits
              that softened as a result of shaking. 

