Title       : Phytopia: Showcasing Tiny Ocean Life in a Multimedia Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0085447

Award Number: 0085447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88834              (Estimated)
Investigator: Annette V. deCharon ADecharon@Bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephan I. Zeeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Sieracki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              00-85447
This award provides funding for scientists at Bigelow Laboratory for
              Ocean Sciences and the University of New England to collaborate with the Data
              Distribution Laboratory, a facility based at California Tech/JPL, to create a
              multimedia educational experience that will bring the lower end of the marine
              food web "to life". Interaction with multimedia tools and data simulations will
              enable students to discover why the marine ecosystem is critical to human
              existence. These multimedia products will provide a window to the fascinating
              world of the oceans' microscopic plant life which, at present, only scientists
              see. In order to develop the project, the PI's will also develop the first
              searchable database of important phytoplankton from the world's temperate
              oceans using three-dimensional phytoplankton models.  The program will be used
              and tested in the University of New England's Biology classes, which are
              required for all incoming freshmen, as well as the upper level courses.
              Although this pilot is aimed at undergraduates, the PI's propose to expand the
              program to include pre-college students and informal education audiences.
              Initially, the program will be disseminated via CD ROMS and a website, but the
              program is aligned with efforts to create a Digital Library for Earth Science
              Education.

