Title       : SGER: Simulation-Based Design and Prototype Testing of a Programmable Chemical
               Vapor Deposition Reactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a0085633

Award Number: 0085633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84634              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond A. Adomaitis adomaiti@umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary W. Rubloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Adomaitis - 0085633 

An exploratory research program is planned to
              design a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) reactor that will enable across-wafer
              spatial control of deposition characteristics.  An existing CVD reactor will be
              modified and used to generate data for developing a detailed simulator for
              reactor design and operation.  The goals are to evaluate the actuation
              capabilities of this programmable reactor and establish its process simulation,
              optimization, sensing, and control requirements.  The research is expected to
              demonstrate proof of concept for an entirely new mode of CVD
              processing.

Specific tasks will include:
(1) Proving a new concept for CVD
              reactor design that will demonstrate spatially controllable reactant delivery
              to the wafer:  This will enable across-wafer uniformity to be achieved at
              virtually any process design point desired for material performance or
              manufacturing throughput.  It will also allow intentional, programmed
              non-uniformity to reduce cost and time in process development.
(2) Developing
              object-oriented simulation-based design, analysis, optimization, and process
              control tools for the programmable CVD reactor system.
(3) Establishing a
              prototype for the next generation of CVD reactors for use in a materials
              development environment for conducting combinatorial CVD studies to rapidly
              evaluate new processes and materials.
(4) Demonstrating a concept in
              semiconductor processing equipment design that can be extended to other
              important manufacturing processes, including plasma-enhanced CVD, reactive ion
              etching, and possibly liquid-phase processes such as wafer cleaning and
              plating.

