Title       : The Instructional Architect: A System for Discovering, Recommending, and
               Combining Learning Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0085855

Award Number: 0085855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mimi M. Recker mimi.recker@usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Dorward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project creates a system comprised of a set of online services collectively
              called the Instructional Architect. The Instructional Architect is a suite of
              services for digital libraries consisting of four tools that provide for
              discovery, presentation, inspection, and recommendation of learning objects.
              

A primary goal of digital libraries is to provide users, including teachers
              and students, a way to search for and display digital learning resources or
              learning objects. Often, the digital libraries do not provide methods or
              support for recombining and embedding discovered learning objects within new
              instruction and curriculum. This project provides this functionality by
              including an additional tier of services that will overlay and be compatible
              with existing digital library services. These services include the enhancement
              of search capabilities provided by existing digital libraries, automated
              recommendation of learning objects based on feedback from members of
              communities of users, instructional support for the combination of learning
              objects into lessons, an integrated Web-based development environment in which
              learning objects can be assembled into instruction, and a method for enabling
              the spontaneous formation of new communities of users based on shared
              interests.

While many advances have been made in the creation of digital
              libraries, there is considerable room for improving how learning objects are
              accessed and re-used by the large population of teachers and learners who have
              Internet access but need technological and instructional support. This project
              will result in a system that will enable more focused and relevant access to
              learning objects for the purpose of creating instruction and thus enhance the
              role of digital libraries in promoting effective SMET education.

