Title       : Development of a Satellite-Linked Remote Data Collection and Photogrammetic
               Imaging System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2001  
File        : a0085211

Award Number: 0085211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Simon Stephenson                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $806393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Markus Horning horningm@tamug.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1647      POLAR INSTRUMENT & DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The goal of this project is the development of a local area imaging network
              for polar regions that is remotely accessible via satellite high-speed data
              link. The primary purpose of this imaging network will be the performance of
              close-range three-dimensional photogrammetry for the remote determination of
              accurate spatial dimensions. By incorporating 3D-photogrammetry into the
              imaging system, the PIwill transform remote, close-range imaging from a simple
              observational tool to into a sophisticated quantitative tool for the accurate
              assessment of biological and physical systems in extreme environments.

The
              rationale for this system is a critical knowledge deficit of vital
              life-history
data on polar pinnipeds and seabirds. In northern regions,
              significant marine life management decisions are being made in the absence of
              adequate data. In the Bering Sea ecosystem in particular, apex predators such
              as Steller sea lions have declined to about ten percent of peak population
              levels. Despite years of intense research, hypothesized competition between
              marine apex predators and fisheries industry remains untested, predominantly
              for lack of viable research approaches for obtaining crucial life history data.
              Such data include frequent accurate census and age structure information in
              rookeries, as well as body mass and condition estimates of individual animals
              prior to, during and after fishing seasons. In a novel approach, we propose to
              use remote 3D-photogrammetry to significantly increase temporal resolution and
              numerical accuracy of remote census operations, to determine the age structure
              of rookeries through measurements of animals lengths, and to use
              photogrammetric volume determinations as estimators of body mass, in a
              technique recently validated by our laboratories.  The proposed
              Satellite-Linked Data collection and Photogrammetric imaging system (SLiDaP
              system) will consist of initially four independent sub-stations, linked via
              wireless LAN to a fifth core-station. All stations will contain
              ultra-high-resolution digital still cameras and PCs, and will be independently
              powered by solar panels and batteries. The core station will be remotely
              accessible via an INMARSAT high speed data link. Key system design criteria
              will center around extreme ruggedness, highest reliability with minimal service
              requirements, low temperature capability, complete independence from any local
              power and communications infrastructure, rapid system deployment capability, as
              well as very low environmental impact. 

Two prototype SLiDaP systems. The
              first system will be tested in Astoria, or for greater accessibility and early
              developmental refinement. The second prototype system will be tested under
              realistic field conditions on Ugamak Island, in the Aleutian Island
              chain.

This cooperative proposal between Texas A&M University Laboratory for
              Applied
Biotelemetry & Biotechnolgy and the National Marine Mammal Laboratory
              (NMFS), brings together leading academic research and marine resource
              management laboratories, as well as the industry leaders in photogrammetry and
              mobile archival tag design. Our efforts aredesigned to enhance basic biological
              research as well as marine ecosystem management. The proposed system will have
              applications far beyond our projected use: geologists, glaciologist and
              vulcanologist should profit from the availability of accurate remote
              close-range measurements for monitoring of shore degradation, land movement
              hazards, or volcano hazards to arctic air traffic routes along the Aleutians.

