Title       : Integrating Research & Education in Paleontology & Marine Ecology:An
               Inquiry-based Grade 6-8 Curriculum that Investigates Spatial & Temporal
               Patterns in Naticid Gastropod Predation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0085439

Award Number: 0085439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108173             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thor A. Hansen thorenet@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia H. Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award was made via the Awards to Facilitate Geoscience Education (AFGE)
              program to Drs. Thor Hansen, Western Washington University and Patricia Kelley,
              UNC Wilmington. The award provides funds to organize grade 6-8 students from
              schools around the coastal U.S. to learn about ecology and paleoecology of
              marine ecosystems and gain an understanding of the workings of science by
              participating in an authentic scientific investigation. The students will help
              the PI's collect data on the modern predation habits of the moon snail, a
              carnivorous gastropod. Moon snails leave a diagnostic trace of their feeding by
              drilling distinctive beveled holes in the shells of their prey. The students
              will collect shells with drill holes in them to help the scientists identify
              the characteristics of the preferred victims, such as size, morphology and age.
              Drillholes also provide information on; 1) identity and size of the predator
              (based on the size of the hole that is drilled); 2) the efficiency of the
              predator (by analyzing the siting of the borehole on the prey's shell); and 3)
              the success of the attack (based on whether the hole completely penetrates the
              victim's shell).

Fossil records left by the moon snails and their prey
              create an excellent system for testing hypotheses concerning the evolution of
              predator-prey relationships. Current work by Kelley and Hansen on the naticid
              system tests the hypothesis of escalation using a database of 146,000 mollusc
              samples collected from Gulf and Atlantic coastal plain sediments. In order to
              complete the study of fossil records, the PI's need data from modern samples.
              They propose to work with students from across the U.S. to collect this data.
              The PI's have recruited teachers to work with them. They will train the
              teachers in a two-week workshop and will develop a curriculum based on the
              collection of shells. Data from each class will be posted on a common web site.
              The students will be an integral part of a real scientific investigation. The
              PI's will work with a variety of schools, including many schools with
              substantial Native American populations (see letters of support). 


