Title       : Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI): Air-Traffic
               Management and Control Issues in the Terminal Area and in the Enroute National
               Airspace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0085640

Award Number: 0085640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanif D. Sherali hanifs@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio A. Trani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1607,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport
              Industry (ETI) program solicitation. The research effort will address tactical
              and strategic planning decision support systems to aid Air Traffic Control
              (ATC) personnel manage the air traffic in the terminal area and in the enroute
              National Airspace (NAS), as well as to aid policy makers in planning future
              directions and in formulating various operational guidelines.  Related to the
              enroute airspace, a comprehensive Airspace Planning Model (APM) will be
              explored to select among alternative flight-plans for a set of flights in a
              collaborative decision making framework between FAA and airline carriers.  The
              model will consider various issues concerned with safety and collision
              avoidance, sector workload, fuel and delay costs, and equity among the involved
              airlines. Related to the terminal area at hub airports, a comprehensive
              decision support system called the Airport Ground Control Advisory System
              (AGCAS) will be explored to aid in ground control issues pertaining to aircraft
              sequencing and runway operations, and pertaining to taxiway and airport ground
              network operations. 

The intent of this research is to develop a vision for
              an overall framework for ground and enroute air-traffic control, describing
              existing capabilities, and identifying needs and opportunities for improvements
              and coordination. To achieve this, new models will be proposed to aid in
              tactical decision making as well as in policy formulations regarding the
              airport terminal area and the enroute airspace. A framework for integrating
              these models with existing advanced ATC automation tools will be explored in
              collaboration with FAA and NASA in order to enhance air traffic management
              capabilities. The long-term impact expected from this research effort will be
              to improve airspace and airport handling capacities and to reduce delays and
              congestion effects through a more efficient and effective control and
              management of resources and operations.

