Title       : Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI): Solving
               Large-Scale Logistics Problems in Real-Time: Models, Algorithms, and
               Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0085682

Award Number: 0085682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilbrand E. Romeijn romeijn@ise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ravindra K. Ahuja  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1607,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the
              Transportation Industries (ETI) program solicitation.  This award provides
              funding for the development of new optimization models, algorithms, and
              software for solving large-scale logistics problems, in which cost effective
              solutions are sought by integrating transportation and inventory decisions. 
              The network and assignment structure inherent in many logistics problems will
              be utilized to develop efficient algorithms to solve these problems.  Due to
              the scale of these problems, the investigator will concentrate on efficient
              heuristic methods. In particular, the development of greedy heuristics and
              neighborhood search techniques for solving the assignment component, integrated
              with heuristics for solving the nonlinear network flow component.  The  focus
              on heuristics seems particularly promising for taking advantage of the larger
              availability of operational data, which calls for a frequent reoptimization of
              the flow of goods through a logistics network, based on data as it becomes
              available.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to
              improvements in the design of logistics systems and the development of new
              heuristics for solving complex non-linear and integer network flow problems. 
              The primary goal of this work is to produce logistics systems in which
              operational decisions can be made more efficiently, by providing a much better
              starting point for making these decisions.  The factors that will be taken into
              account for the evaluation of the costs of a logistics network design are the,
              generally conflicting, costs of transportation and holding inventory, as well
              as customers' demands for service, such as just-in-time deliveries and
              single-sourcing.  This will help to achieve an overall cost reduction in
              comparison to the traditional two-stage approach where the transportation and
              inventory decisions are decoupled.  The proposed work will also contribute to
              the theory of assignment and network flow problems by providing new and
              efficient heuristic for such problems. 

