Title       : Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI): An
               Internet-Based Distributed Architecture for Real-Time Control of Freight
               Transportation Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0085368

Award Number: 0085368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren B. Powell powell@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erhan Cinlar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Bernstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1607,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI) project
              is  to develop multi-agent architecture for coordinating decision-making among
              groups or organizations arising within supply chains and supporting freight
              transportation networks.  Decision-making units can be managers at different
              terminals in a large rail or trucking network, or managers at different
              suppliers within a supply chain.  Better decision making occurs with better
              information, and a more formalized decision-making process.  The research will
              first define the four major classes of information that are used in decision
              making.  A general class of mathematically based decision functions will be
              designed, which will formalize how each class of information is used.  These
              functions will allow us to study how decisions by one unit impact the decisions
              of another unit.  The presence of uncertainty, and missing or incomplete
              information, will be explicitly modeled.  The expectation is to implement these
              decision agents in a loosely coupled environment, using the Internet as the
              primary means of communication.  All testing will be done using data already
              available from major railroads and trucking companies.

If successful, the
              architecture will improve overall coordination between decision-makers in large
              transportation and logistics networks, accelerating network response, with
              lower cost and better service.  The technology will capture the inherently
              decentralized process of decision making in complex operations, but will
              develop a process, which offers global optimizing behavior.  The process should
              produce plans that can be followed in real-time, using forecasts of decisions
              in the future (and on other elements of the system) to make better decisions
              now.  The expectation is to develop insights into the value of improved
              information, which will allow quantifying the cost of better information
              against the benefits.  It is this tradeoff that is the primary deterrent
              against the use of more advanced information technologies in many elements of
              the transportation and logistics information infrastructure, and the research
              should speed adoption of information technologies by helping us understand the
              economic barriers to adoption.  


