Title       : LExEn: Molecular Diversity and Structure of Photoendolithic Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0085490

Award Number: 0085490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman R. Pace Norman.Pace@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1075,9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0085490
Norman R. Pace

Dr. Norman R. Pace of the University of Colorado
              at Boulder has been awarded a grant to study microbial diversity of a highly
              unusual, but perhaps fundamentally important environment, the endolithosphere. 
              The "endolithic" habitat, comprised of the pore-space within rocks, is a
              ubiquitous extreme environment on Earth, and may contribute significantly to
              global biomass. Although of large significance to our understanding of
              microbial diversity and bio-geochemical processes, such as nutrient cycling and
              mineral weathering, relatively little is known about microbial constituents of
              endolithic ecosystems.  This research project will survey, identify and study
              the microbial organisms that occur in selected photosynthesis-driven endolithic
              communities. Molecular DNA-sequence-based methods will be used that do not
              require pure-cultivation in order to identify organisms and to gain information
              about them. This consideration is crucial for such environmental analyses
              because most (>99%) microorganisms in environmental samples are not cultured
              using standard techniques. 
The specific goals of the proposed program are the
              following:
             i.  To identify and quantify the constituents of
              selected temperate-zone (Colorado) endolithic communities, DNA sequences will
              be obtained from microorganisms in the environment, and analyzed using
              phylogenetic methods to explore their evolutionary relationship. The results
              will provide insight into the physiological workings of photoendolithic
              ecosystems, and expand our view of microbial diversity.
	ii.  To validate
              organisms indicated by environmental sequences, community samples will be
              visualized by microscopy using fluorescent tags (probes) to these specific
              environmental DNA sequences.  The results will disclose the morphological
              properties of organisms that correspond to the selected sequences and reveal
              their physical distribution in the community.
	iii.  This survey will likely
              encounter novel organisms and raise questions about their properties.  To
              explore such physiological hypotheses, DNA-based probes will be used to monitor
              the growth of selected organisms in culture. The results are expected to
              identify many new cultivatable microbes for subsequent culture-study, and will
              provide information regarding their metabolic capabilities.
Overall, the
              proposed program is expected to advance substantially our understanding of the
              kinds and activities of organisms that comprise photosynthesis-based endolithic
              communities.

