Title       : Lateral Resistance of Deep Foundations in Liquefied Sand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0085353

Award Number: 0085353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97425              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyle M. Rollins rollinsk@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The lateral load capacity of deep foundations is critically important in the
              design of bridges, buildings, and other structures in seismically active
              regions.  Although fairly reliable methods have been developed for predicting
              the lateral resistance of piles in non-liquefied soils, there is very little
              information to guide engineers in the design of piles that are surrounded by
              liquefiable soils.  An accurate assessment of the resistance-displacement
              relationship for piles in liquefied soil is needed to determine whether
              additional piles are required for a foundation in liquefied sand, or whether
              soil improvement must be undertaken to prevent liquefaction altogether.  These
              issues become even more important as the engineering profession attempts to
              move to performance-based design codes where estimates of displacements are
              required.

A series of full-scale lateral pile load tests were performed at
              Treasure Island in San Francisco Bay after a surface layer was liquefied using
              controlled blasting techniques.  These tests demonstrated that controlled
              blasting can induce liquefaction in a well-defined volume of soil for
              full-scale experimentation.  Because of the success of that test program,
              another series of full-scale liquefaction load tests were undertaken in
              connection with the design of a new bridge in Charleston, South Carolina. 
              Funding for the testing program was provided by the South Carolina Dept. of
              Transportation; this action is to support a detailed analysis required to
              develop lateral load-deflection (p-y) curves for the liquefied sand and to
              generalize the load test results.

These analyses take full advantage of over
              $250,000 invested in the construction of the foundations, instrumenting the
              structure, and conducting the testing.  The experimental results provide time
              histories of bending moment at regular intervals along the length of the
              shafts; the excess pore pressures at corresponding depths; and load, deflection
              and rotation measured at the pile head.  Using these results, p-y curves are
              being computed as a function of excess water pressure.  Several techniques for
              developing these curves are being used and compared.  The influence of fines
              content and sand density on the p-y curves is also being evaluated.  For the
              dynamic testing, accelerometers were placed at regular intervals along the
              length of the shaft.  The results from the dynamic and static load tests are
              being used to evaluate the effect of loading rate on the measured resistance,
              and to evaluate the influence of damping on resistance.

As a supplement to
              the load-testing program, shear wave velocity measurements were made during the
              blasting to define the change in velocity as a function of the water pressure
              change.  In addition, CPT (cone penetration test) soundings were made at
              several intervals after blasting to determine the rate of change in penetration
              resistance with time.  Information of this type often becomes very important in
              assessing the quality of soil improvement techniques where it is not possible
              to wait for long-term test results.

