Title       : LExEn: Environments in Europa's Crust: Characterization of the Physical Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a0085563

Award Number: 0085563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Greenberg greenberg@lpl.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1075,1206,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0085563
Greenberg

Jupiter's satellite Europa has been identified as one of
              the most likely sites for life in the
solar system.  In order to assess the
              habitability of Europa, Dr. Richard Greenberg and colleagues at the University
              of Arizona will investigate the character of its surface, with particular
              attention to testing whether and how a liquid water ocean interacts with the
              surface through the ice crust.  He will test models of crustal processes by
              continuing quantitative assessments of spacecraft data and theoretical studies
              of the mechanics of the underlying processes involved. From those results, the
              research team will describe the character, locations and time changes of
              Europan environments most benevolent to life. The goal is to characterize the
              physical conditions, diversity, and variability of potentially habitable
              settings on Europa. 

This project addresses issues raised by a model of
              Europa's crustal processes in which much of the geology of the surface is
              governed by interaction with an ocean under only a very thin crust, thus
              providing a variety of evolving environmental niches. Dr. Greenberg and his
              team have constructed that model based on quantitative analysis of
              observations, combined with calculations of the effects of tidal processes,
              which control heat, stress, and rotation. They have confirmed that surface
              lineaments are correlated with global stress patterns, demonstrating that they
              form by lithospheric cracking, but only if a substantial ocean is present to
              give adequate tidal amplitude.  While the evidence for this broad picture is
              compelling, the model is not proven and important issues remain unresolved.
              This project is aimed at testing the thin-ice model by an interdisciplinary
              range of investigations and comparing it with alternative possibilities, such
              as a model of a thicker ice crust in which surface processes are governed by
              solid-state viscous flow. This work will define and constrain the range of
              possible habitable environments, because of the implications regarding linkage
              of the crust to the ocean.  This project is funded through the Division of
              Astronomical Sciences for the NSF's Life in Extreme Environments
              program.
***



