Title       : Nanoscale Simulation by Quantum Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0085557

Award Number: 0085557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tapan Mukherjee                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth Lloyd slloyd@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Cory  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal addresses devices that have become sufficiently small that they
              approach the scale at which their dynamics must be described by quantum
              mechanics. The quantum-mechanical nature of nanoscale systems brings both
              problems in the form of quantum noise and fluctuations, and opportunities in
              the form of novel methods for control and information processing. This proposal
              focuses on one of the most promising of opportunities for nanoscale modeling
              and simulation: quantum simulation by quantum computers. Quantum computers are
              devices that process information in a way that preserves quantum coherence.
              Prototype quantum computers have been realized experimentally and larger
              `second-generation' quantum computers are currently being constructed. Quantum
              computers are uniquely suited for performing nanoscale
              simulations.

Nanoscale systems, though small, consist of many parts. The
              interaction between those parts is governed by quantum mechanics. The
              difficulty of simulating such systems on a classical computer increases
              exponentially with the number of parts. In 1982, however, Feynman noted that a
              quantum computer might be able to perform quantum simulations much more
              efficiently, so that the difficulty of simulation increases only linearly with
              the number of parts. In 1996, the PI of this proposal showed how Feynman's
              proposal could be put into practice. In 1998, the co-PI demonstrated the power
              of quantum simulation experimentally by using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
              to construct a special-purpose quantum simulator capable of performing
              simulations far too difficult for any classical computer.

The proposed NSF
              research program will construct, program, and operate quantum simulators.
              Quantum simulators are essentially `analog' quantum computers that are
              programmed to mimic the behavior of another quantum system. In the first stage
              of the research program, quantum simulations will be performed on existing
              liquid-state NMR quantum computers and on special purpose solid-state devices.
              In the second stage, general-purpose, large-scale simulations will be performed
              on the large-scale, solid-state,
NMR quantum computers being constructed at
              MIT with separate (non-NSF) funding. These simulations will investigate the
              properties of chemical and physical systems, ranging from molecules to bulk
              spin systems, concentrating on issues of information propagation and
              processing, including examining quantum mechanisms for entropy production,
              decoherence, and chaos. In addition to generating algorithms for simulating
              such phenomena, the program will develop methods for using dynamic quantum
              models
to manipulate and control nanoscale quantum systems.

