Title       : LExEn: Sulfuric Acid Speleogenesis by Chemolithotrophic Bacteria: Community
               Structure and Habitat Modification by Acid Extremophiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0085576

Award Number: 0085576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip C. Bennett pbennett@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Libby A. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AWARD ABSTRACT
Sulfuric Acid Speleogenesis by Chemolithotrophic Bacteria:
              
Community structure and habitat modification by acid extremophiles
P. C.
              Bennett and L. Stern, 
Dept. of Geological Sciences, University of
              Texas

The Earth's subsurface contains innumerable extreme habitats that are
              occupied solely by microorganisms that survive by manipulating chemical forms
              of energy and altering their geologic surroundings to scavenge nutrients.  This
              project will investigate the geology, geochemistry, and microbiology of a
              sulfidic cave system in Wyoming, and characterize the interaction between an
              acid-generating microbial population and the surrounding rocks.  The Kane
              Caves, WY have a diverse microbial community that consumes hydrogen sulfide as
              a source of energy, while producing sulfuric acid as the waste product.  The
              produced acid chemically dissolves the surrounding carbonate rock to produce a
              cave, a potential modern analog for the formation of Carlsbad Caverns.  The
              goals of this project are to characterize the importance of these unusual
              microbial populations in the production of acid, and the carbon and sulfur
              cycles in this chemically based subsurface ecosystem.  PIs will also identify
              the source of fundamental inorganic nutrients, measure the rate of carbonate
              dissolution and cave expansion, and characterize the influence of changing
              hydrologic conditions on the microbial community.  These results will be used
              to develop methods for identifying the geologic fingerprints of chemical
              autotrophy, extremely acid environments, and microbial acid speleogenesis. 
              


