Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Scalable Services for the Global Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0085842

Award Number: 0085842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1225074            (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Knightly knightly@ece.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1661,4095,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 The emergence of new applications has fostered a number of attempts to add
              functionalities to the minimalist Internet core. However, the adoption of
              enhancements to the Internet has either been slow, failed entirely, or limited
              to special-purpose private networks. The key reasons for this failure are
              extensibility and scalability:  First, IP networks were not designed to be
              extensible at the internetworking level. Second, proposals for new network
              layer services often require that vast amounts of state information be managed
              in the core network infrastructure, thus, introducing scalability bottlenecks
              which exacerbate the existing scalability problem of the growing Internet.
   
               Today, the development and deployment of advanced services on the Internet has
              reached a crossroads: efforts to add new services have quickly encountered
              scalability problems, yet new services are in critical demand and must be
              rapidly and widely deployed.
     The research goal is to develop truly
              scalable services for each of the three fundamental components of the
              Internet's infrastructure: information communication, replication, and storage.
              Taking a new and unified approach to the seemingly conflicting requirements for
              scalability and sophisticated network services, the researchers propose to
              develop:
     1. Scalable Performance-Predictable Communication: a new
              foundation for quality-of-service communication via a scalable edge-based
              architecture.
     2. Scalable Multicast for Efficient Data Dissemination: a
              self-organizing multicast infrastructure scalable to many spontaneously-formed
              groups.
     3. Scalable Storage for Next Generation Information Services: an
              infrastructure which brings information
closer to users and enables scalable
              third-party information storage services.
     4. Design Principles of
              Scalable Services: a multi-faceted approach for the development and
              deployment
of scalable services in the global Internet, under consideration of
              economic models, industrial structure,
theories and algorithms, engineering,
              and deployment.
     Thus, this project proposes to develop architectures and
              methodologies for deploying scalable services in the global Internet. The
              impact of this project will be to provide the theoretical underpinnings, basic
              architecture, and a prototype implementation for the information communication
              of the global Internet of the 21st century. An integral part of this project is
              the dissemination of results and the infiltration of standard organizations
              with the concepts developed within this project, and innovative approaches to
              educate the next generation of engineers for the future Internet.
