Title       : A Real-Time Device for Constructing Virtual Ion Channels in Living Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0085177

Award Number: 0085177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321290             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. White jwhite@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0085177
White
Introduction.  Electrical activity in nerve and muscle cells is
              generated by populations of ion channels that "gate" (open or close) in
              response to changes in transmembrane voltage and/or the concentrations of
              crucial chemicals.  In studies of the biophysical processes underlying
              electrical activity, scientists and engineers rely upon two basic recording
              configurations.  In the first recording configuration, commonly referred to as
              current clamping, the researcher controls the amount of net transmembrane
              current (i.e., current across the cell membrane) and measures transmembrane
              voltage.  In the second recording configuration, called voltage clamping, the
              researcher uses an electrical feedback circuit to control transmembrane voltage
              and measures transmembrane current.  Current clamping is useful for
              characterizing the patterns of electrical activity generated by a given nerve
              or muscle cell; voltage clamping is useful for studying the biophysical
              mechanisms underlying a particular pattern of electrical activity.

More
              recently, a third very useful recording configuration has been developed, in
              which neither transmembrane current nor transmembrane voltage is the controlled
              variable.  Instead, the researcher uses a sophisticated recording system to
              mimic in real time the electrical conductance associated with a given
              population of virtual ion channels.  This recording mode, called dynamic
              clamping, allows the researcher to block native ion channels, and replace them
              with virtual analogs, the properties of which can be controlled precisely. 
              Dynamic clamping and other real-time-computing-based protocols enable entirely
              new classes of experiments, in which (for example) the applied stimulus can
              mimic the behavior of a (blocked) dynamic component of the system, and thus be
              used to determine unequivocally the effects of the mimicked component of
              overall behavior.

Dynamic clamping and other real-time experimental
              techniques show enormous promise as important research tools.  Dynamic clamping
              could be used, for example, to study the electrical effects of
              computer-designed pharmaceutical agents even before the agents are developed in
              the laboratory.  So far, however, the impact of this technique has been educed
              by three interrelated difficulties.  First, the technical complexities of its
              design are beyond the skills of most end-users, and no one has yet provided a
              flexible, powerful, turn-key system.  Second, existing dynamic clamp systems do
              not account for the seemingly stochastic (i.e., probabilistic) nature of
              voltage-gated ion channels.  Adding this capability would allow researchers to
              attack entirely new sets of exciting problems that are as yet unapproachable. 
              Third, existing dynamic clamp systems cannot account for measured or assumed
              spatial distributions of ion channels.

Specific Aims.  The specific aims of
              this proposal are (1) to complete construction of a stochastic dynamic clamp
              (SDC) system that can be used to study the actions of noisy virtual voltage-
              and ligand-gated ion channels in living cells; (2) to create a web-based system
              of support to help end-users adopt and use the SDC system for dynamic clamping
              and other real-time experimental applications; (3) to develop methods for
              representing virtual ion channels that are remote from the recording site in
              the cell body, and (4) to use the new SDC system to test specific hypotheses
              regarding the relative importance of noise from synaptic sources and noise from
              voltage-gated ion channels in limiting neuronal reliability.

The project
              will have educational impact at both the graduate and undergraduate levels, in
              the context of the classroom and research projects.  Innovations from Specific
              Aims 1 and 3 will extend the dynamic clamp method to account for stochastic and
              spatially distributed channels.  The investigators' support (Aim 2) will be a
              crucial step in developing a turn-key system.  The system will be easily
              adaptable to apply techniques of real-time computation in many biomedical
              engineering applications.  Field tests of the device (aim 4) will push the
              field of neurobiology in a more quantitative, information-oriented direction. 
              In particular, they will advance the study of the biophysical underpinnings of
              neuronal reliability, which play a fundamental role in the understanding of
              coding strategies used by the nervous system.  Such advances are not
              practically achievable without real-time computing technology.


