Title       : Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI): Robust
               Planning for Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0085723

Award Number: 0085723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Nemhauser   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellis L. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anton J. Kleywegt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1607,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI) grant
              provides funding for the development of a numerical tool for determining
              optimal process parameters in bulk forming processes, such as rolling,
              extrusion, and forging.  The developed numerical tool will determine the
              optimal process geometry; temperature and speed that satisfy specified design
              criteria for a given two-dimensional forming process.  An optimization
              algorithm based on an adaptive arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian finite element
              formulation for modeling large deformation thermo-elasto-viscoplastic contact
              problems will be used.  The algorithm will be implemented in the context of an
              existing advanced computational framework that has tools for mesh generation,
              adaptively, and parallel computing.  Experiments involving the extrusion
              process will also be performed to validate the algorithms developed.
              Experimental dies will be manufactured according to the optimal die shapes
              predicted in this work and tested at the predicted optimal die speeds.  A model
              press, which can extrude plasticine material marked with a grid, will be used
              in these experiments to observe the material flow behavior.

If successful,
              the results of this research will lead to improvements in the design of bulk
              forming processes and new developments in optimization methods for handling
              complex non-linear problems.  The primary goal of this work is to determine
              optimal process geometry, thermal conditions, and process speed in bulk forming
              processes that will satisfy typically prescribed design criteria.  These design
              criteria may include generating a uniform flow of the material, generating a
              specified material property distribution in the formed product, minimizing the
              production time, or minimizing the energy required for the process. 
              Determining the process parameters to achieve these objectives will help to
              reduce the cost and improve the quality of the final product in processes such
              as extrusion and forging.  The proposed work will also contribute to the
              computational tools and methodologies available for nonlinear optimization
              problems.

