Title       : Preliminary Investigation and Implications of Improved Ground Performance during
               the 1999 Turkey Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0085281

Award Number: 0085281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Martin jrm@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James K. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS0085281
Title: "Preliminary Investigation and Implications of Improved
              Ground Performance during the 1999 Turkey Earthquakes"
PI: J.
              Martin
Institution: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
              University

Abstract:
Across the world, many large cities have developed
              over low-lying, relatively flat waterfront areas underlain by weak, soft
              sediments deposited by rivers, lakes, or bays. In terms of make-up, these
              deposits typically contain soft clays and/or loose sands saturated by a high
              water table. Of particular concern is the safety and integrity of constructed
              facilities and lifelines in these areas against large earthquakes expected in
              the future. As illustrated by recent large earthquakes (San Francisco, CA;
              Kobe, Japan; and Istanbul, Turkey), these settings are frequently the site of
              heavy infrastructure damage from soil failures such as excessive settlement and
              large lateral movements. Recent experience indicates that damage potential in
              these environments can be reduced using ground improvement techniques. As a
              result, a variety of ground modification methods are being developed to
              strengthen and stiffen weak soils. These techniques involve compaction,
              densification, drainage, replacement, adding of chemical mixtures, and other
              measures that increase the resistance to ground failure during shaking.
              Although these techniques are seeing increased acceptance, there remains a lack
              of performance data to confirm the effectiveness of the methods under actual
              earthquake loadings (current soil improvement methods for earthquake damage
              mitigation are based primarily on laboratory and computer studies).  Field data
              are crucial for improving current design procedures and refining improvement
              techniques. The presence of a number of improved soil sites in the affected
              region of the recent earthquakes in Turkey provides the unique opportunity to
              study such sites under field conditions. 
Following the August 1999 Kocaeli
              Earthquake (M=7.4) and significant aftershocks, the PIs performed
              investigations in the affected area to document geotechnical field performance.
              These studies focused on investigating improved soil sites. Six sites were
              identified, and field reconnaissance and preliminary analyses were conducted.
              The sites represented a range of soil conditions and ground improvement
              techniques.  Five sites were located in industrial/commercial settings and
              contained mixtures of loose sands and soft clays that were treated using
              vibro-densification, stone columns, and/or jet grouting.  The remaining site
              was a reinforced earth wall constructed of steel strips and compacted granular
              backfill. The sites were subjected to ground motions ranging from about 0.10g
              to 0.35g. The site locations ranged from 0 to 35 km from the zone of energy
              release.
Preliminary observations showed that ground treatment was generally
              effective in mitigating earthquake-related damages, especially relative to
              damages observed at nearby sites of untreated ground.  The reinforced earth
              wall also performed well despite being subjected to large ground displacements.
               Each site was carefully studied and documented during the reconnaissance.
              Although some subsoil data and construction details were obtained for most of
              the sites investigated, there were inadequate data to characterize soil
              conditions at the scale needed for careful, detailed study.  Of particular
              concern is the complete lack of geotechnical data for untreated sites located
              adjacent to the main study sites. The untreated sites provide an important
              basis for performance comparisons. This proposal is submitted to obtain the
              data needed to make possible case history analysis of the ten sites.  The
              proposed work involves collection of existing soil data where available,
              Standard Penetration Testing (SPT), Cone Penetration Testing (CPT), insitu
              shear wave velocity measurements, and laboratory index and strength testing (in
              Turkey). The balance of the effort during this phase will be directed toward
              preliminary case analysis of the Turkish sites. A subsequent proposal will be
              submitted to perform a more general study of improved ground that will include
              cases from Turkey, Taiwan, Japan, and the U.S., along with numerical modeling
              and centrifuge data.
This project will rely on close collaboration between
              Virginia Tech and Turkish researchers.  The PIs have a long-standing close
              relationship with engineers and researchers at Zetas Engineering Company and
              Bogazici University. Also, Virginia Tech and the Swiss Federal Institute of
              Technology recently established the World Institute for Disaster Risk
              Management (DRM).  The Swiss government, Swiss Re, and the World Bank support
              DRM.  The Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich (ETH), Virginia Tech,
              Bogazici University, and Yokohama National University through DRM recently
              developed a collaborative proposal, "Microzonation for Earthquake Risk
              Mitigation." The Swiss component of the project has been funded by the Swiss
              Agency for Development and Cooperation. Work with Sakarya University in
              Adapazari, Turkey is underway. The current proposal would play an integral role
              in Virginia Tech's involvement in this project.

