Title       : Orographic Precipitation Processes over the Wasatch Mountains during the
               Intermountain Precipitation Experiment (IPEX)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  2002    
File        : a0085318

Award Number: 0085318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231504             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. James Steenburgh jimsteen@met.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Improvement in quantitative-precipitation forecasts over the western United
              States requires advances in several areas including the understanding of
              dynamical and microphysical processes during orographic precipitation events
              and the numerical simulation and parameterization of orographically-induced
              circulations and precipitation microphysics.  The interaction between
              terrain-induced flow fields and orographic precipitation processes remains
              poorly understood, and the measurement and prediction of orographic
              precipitation is a major scientific challenge.  This is particularly true over
              narrow and steeply sloped mountain ranges, such as those of the Intermountain
              West, where the quantitative precipitation forecast skill of operational
              numerical weather prediction models is substantially lower than in other
              regions of the United States.

The primary objectives of the research are (1)
              to advance fundamental knowledge of orographic precipitation processes over the
              Intermountain West, with an emphasis on the Wasatch Mountains of northern Utah;
              (2) to validate and improve mesoscale model performance and quantitative
              precipitation forecasts over regions of complex terrain.  The project will
              utilize data collected during the Intermountain Precipitation Experiment
              (IPEX), a major field program held in northern Utah during February 2000. 
              Specialized data sets collected during IPEX include airborne Doppler-radar and
              microphysical observations, ground-based radar observations collected by two
              mobile Doppler radars, and high resolution surface and upper-air observations.
              These data sets will be used to examine factors controlling the distribution of
              precipitation across the Wasatch Mountains, including windward enhancement by
              upstream blocking effects and the influence of mountain-wave structure on
              lee-side spillover.

These objectives are directly related to the
              quantitative-precipitation forecasting focus of the U.S. Weather Research
              Program (USWRP).  Results from the project will also have positive scientific
              and socio-economic benefits for the West, including Salt Lake City, host of the
              2002 Winter Olympics.  Educational benefits include the participation of
              graduate students from the University of Utah and the use of project data sets
              and findings for classroom instruction.

