Title       : Red River Geoscience Education Pilot Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0085583

Award Number: 0085583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph H. Hartman joseph_hartman@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0085583
Hartman

The Red River Geoscience Education (RRGE) Pilot Project will
              give secondary school students in eastern North Dakota a learning opportunity
              that will prepare them to understand the issues that affect watershed water
              quality in general and, specifically, the water quality of the Red River of the
              North (in North and South Dakota, Minnesota, and Manitoba).  Incorporating a
              complementary expansion of the tributary monitoring activities initiated in the
              Minnesota portion of the watershed, this geoscience education program provides
              a collaborative approach to science teacher development and student education
              using the major geological feature of the region.  One objective of the project
              is to provide area educators with effective geoscience activities and methods,
              focused on water issues, to be used in the field and in the classroom. 
              Objectives for the students include developing critical-thinking and
              problem-solving skills, participating in scientific research, and promoting
              interest in geoscience in particular and science in general.  These objectives
              compliment the priorities and recommendations of the NSF directorate for
              Geosciences, Working Group Report, and national and state science education
              standards.  Tailored to the individual needs of the participating urban and
              rural schools, the pilot project will improve the quality of science education
              by integrating experiential geoscience content into the coursework.  The
              students will receive field, laboratory, and technology training in themes
              relating to riparian habitats, hydrology, and human impacts on water quality. 
              Under the guidance of their teachers and geoscientists, students will monitor
              water quality parameters and examine riparian status at sites along the Red
              River and two of its tributaries, gathering data and analyzing water samples
              during monthly field trips.  The students will perform wet-chemistry and
              instrumental techniques using EPA-approved methods to evaluate water samples in
              their school laboratories.  As the students gain experience in observation,
              sampling, analysis, and data reduction techniques, the emphasis will shift to
              the correlation of the results from schools in the Minnesota portion of the
              watershed and incorporation of information on fluvial systems, precipitation,
              soil and near-surface geology, ground cover, landscape, and aquatic species. 
              The program will draw from established curricula such as Project WET (Water
              Education for Teachers) to supplement research activities and provide the
              background to interpret the analytical results and draw conclusions on the
              factors affecting the quality of the ecosystem.  They will develop an
              understanding of the interactions between nature and humans that determine the
              health of the river.  The preparation and presentation of research papers for
              regional scientific and water quality conferences will summarize the students'
              research experience and relate the significance of their findings to other
              geoscientists.  These activities will help raise the scientific literacy of
              adults as well as students through the presentation of results at venues such
              as science and county fairs and community open houses.  The participation of
              partners from several educational and professional fields will build closer
              relationships between K-12 education, universities, and government agencies in
              North Dakota and Minnesota.  This program will connect local scientists and
              practitioners with classroom teachers and provide student opportunities to work
              with scientists in research discovery.  The hands-on learning aspect will
              enhance science and math education through the practical application and
              connections of skills developed in the classroom.  Placing research in the
              context of their local environment will empower students with responsibility
              toward the Earth and ignite their curiosity.  The impact of this project's
              activities will be greater science literacy in the communities participating in
              the program and a successful model for bringing the "hands-on-minds-on"
              approach to geoscience education to the high schools of the Red River
              watershed.  Because the pilot includes both rural and urban school districts,
              the unique problems associated with both groups can be explored and addressed,
              yielding a program exportable throughout the Red River watershed and beyond.

