Title       : Economical High Strain Rate Superplastic Forming via Friction Stir Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0085044

Award Number: 0085044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajiv S. Mishra rsmishra@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9163,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Superplastic forming has emerged as an attractive near net shape forming
              technique for production of complex shaped components and unitized structures
              for aerospace applications. In spite of many attractive features, the
              widespread commercial use of superplastic forming outside aerospace sector is
              hampered by two major drawbacks: (a) slow superplastic forming rates, and (b)
              high cost of starting material for superplasticity. Fine grain size is a key
              requirement for materials to exhibit superplastic behavior, i.e., tensile
              ductility of >200%.  The conventional rolling-based thermo-mechanical
              processing methods for producing aluminum alloys having superplastic properties
              typically require six steps.

The goal of this research is to develop an
              innovative one-step thermo-mechanical processing technique for grain
              refinement, Friction Stir Processing (FSP). The basic concept of FSP (an
              adaptation of friction stir welding) for enhanced superplasticity is based on
              the very fine microstructure that develops during solid-state friction
              stirring. Successful development of FSP would provide opportunities to develop
              new concepts, that include: (a) selective superplastic forming; (b)
              superplastic forming of thick sheets; and (c) one-step processing for
              superplasticity from cast sheet or hot-pressed powder metallurgy sheet.  This
              project will focus on developing an understanding of critical microstructural
              issues, such as: (1) influence of FSP parameters on the microstructural
              development; (2) the effect on microstructure of overlapping passes during FSP;
              (3) the response of refined microstructure to elevated temperature exposure;
              and (4) microstructure-superplastic property correlations in friction stir
              processed materials. The research involves active collaboration of university
              (UMR) and industries (the Rockwell Science Center and the Boeing Phantom
              Works). The direct industrial participation will result in faster technology
              transition and the overall impact is likely to be very significant.
