Title       : Structure, Properties and Modeling of Transported Residual Soil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0085397

Award Number: 0085397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Whittle ajwhittl@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Germaine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Studies of soil behavior have historically focused on properties of sedimented
              clays and clean sands in which the material micro-structure and engineering
              properties are defined by the deposition process and subsequent stress history.
               In contrast, the structure and properties of residual soils are controlled by
              in situ weathering processes that involve chemical dissolution and
              reprecipitation.  Existing methods of classifying residual soils and predicting
              their behavior are far from adequate and can be linked directly to problems in
              construction.  The PI's have recently been involved in a project in San Juan de
              Puerto Rico, where unexpectedly large ground settlements have occurred during
              tunneling through deposits of old alluvium.  Further research has established
              that this material can be classified as a transported residual soil (i.e.,
              weathered after deposition), a class of soil barely documented in the
              literature, but of apparently quite widespread occurrence.  Extensive block
              samples of the soil already obtained by the PI's provide an excellent
              opportunity to investigate the structure, engineering properties and spatial
              variability of the material.  To date, these preliminary investigations have
              identified iron oxides as the cementing agent, and have found an extraordinary
              reduction in bulk hydraulic conductivity due to breakdown in the structure in
              1-D compression tests.  This project will undertake a comprehensive
              experimental study of the material micro-structure and investigate how the
              breakdown in this structure can be linked to changes in the shear strength,
              deformation and flow properties.  The work will benefit from the prior studies
              and availability of high quality block samples.  Data from the experimental
              program will be used to formulate a constitutive model, based on a conceptual
              interpretation of the micro-structure.  Model validation will then focus on
              predictions of material response associated with destructuring.  

This
              project will provide a valuable and unique database of properties for a
              transported, residual soil comparing the behavior of intact (in situ),
              destructured and intrinsic properties.  By understanding the material
              structure, the project will also contribute towards standardizing the
              classification of residual soils.  Future application of a well validated
              constitutive model will lead to more reliable predictions in geotechnical
              analyses of projects in the old alluvium and other similar deposits.

