Title       : Channel Flow of Homogeneous Electrorheological Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0085026

Award Number: 0085026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Annette D. Shine shine@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Annette D. Shine, University of Delaware
Proposal #0085026
Channel Flow of
              Homogeneous Electrorheological Fluids

	In this research, homogeneous
              electro-rheological (ER) fluids based on liquid crystalline polymers (LCPs) are
              characterized experimentally in pressure-driven flow between narrowly separated
              electrodes.  The objective of this work is to develop a quantitative
              understanding of homogeneous ER fluids in complex flow geometries, in order to
              assess the technical feasibility of using the fluids in conventional and
              microfluidic applications. The project scope consists of three parts:  (1)
              synthesis of the LCP, (2) experimental characterization and quantitative
              mechanistic modeling of the ER behavior of LCP solutions, and (3) testing of
              the LCP solutions in simple and complex fabricated channels.
Poly(n-hexyl
              isocyanate) (PHIC) is synthesized by living, reversible polymerization to
              produce monodisperse samples various molecular weights. The viscosity of
              concentrated solutions of PHIC is experimentally characterized over a range of
              shear rates and electric field strengths, and modeled with a previously
              developed two-dimensional version of Doi's molecular theory of LCP rheology. 
              Steady state and transient pressure drop measurements at constant flow rate are
              conducted in rounded-entry channels. Special micro-electrodes are fabricated by
              electron beam lithography in an overlay pattern in order to direct
              two-dimensional planar ER fluid flow in a prescribed fashion by selective
              electrification of electrodes. 
	This work will allow, for the first time in
              50 years of ER fluid research, the complete a priori prediction of ER behavior
              from the properties of the fluid components.  This predictive capability links
              ER fluid formulation with ER device design, so that rigorous engineering
              analysis can identify which fraction of the estimated potential billion dollar
              market for ER devices can be realized using homogeneous ER fluids.



