Title       : Nanoscale Modeling of Flow of Macromolecules Through Microfluidic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0085560

Award Number: 0085560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tapan Mukherjee                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $916397             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan J. De Pablo depablo@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Klingenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Microfluidic devices are rapidly finding an increasing number of applications in
              biology, chemistry, and medicine, to name a few. These devices rely on the
              ability to control the flow and transport of fluids and macromolecules through
              micron and nanometer scale geometries. As the ability to manipulate and process
              materials at the sub-micron level advances, so will the demand to make a priori
              predictions of molecular behavior in flow processes on this scale. In the
              proposed work, a large-scale computational approach is adopted to model the
              transport of fluids containing long-chain molecules through microdevices of
              arbitrary geometry. One overall goal is to develop efficient Brownian dynamics
              methods for the molecular study of: (1) long-chain flexible molecules in flow,
              fully accounting for hydrodynamic, excluded volume and electrostatic
              interactions; (2) assemblages of semiflexible polymers, accounting for
              interparticle interactions that often dominate flow behavior; (3) hydrodynamic
              interaction effects on dynamics of chain molecules near solid surfaces; (4)
              coupling of nanoscale Brownian dynamics simulations and continuum fluid
              mechanics simulations (for self-consistent solution of complex problems).
	A
              general approach to multi-scale computational fluid dynamics will be developed,
              in which microstructural, nanoscale simulations are seamlessly and efficiently
              integrated into full scale flow simulations for design of microfluidic
              processes. Our goal is to develop the fundamentals for development of a general
              nanoscale process simulator, akin to those currently used in design of
              large-scale industrial processes. In this project, these advances will be
              applied to improve the understanding of polyelectrolytes in flow; to study the
              flow of DNA solutions through microchannels and near surfaces; to study the
              interaction between flow and nanostructure in geometries characteristic of
              microfluidic devices.

