Title       : Capacity and Flexibility Assessment of Transportation Infrastructure Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0085658

Award Number: 0085658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward K. Morlok morlok@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhi-Long Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1607,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research seeks to answer the question of how to measure the capacity
and
              flexibility of a transportation system, considering uncertainty in
system
              performance and traffic. The emphasis is on the term system, for
methods
              already exist to measure the capacity of individual links and nodes
of a
              network in terms of volume-delay functions. But as we have learned
with the
              recent capacity problems of U.S. freight railroads, capacity is
dependent on
              many other system elements, including the fleet, labor, and
energy, among
              others. And information technology -- vehicle and cargo
tracking systems,
              mobile communications, real-time movement control, etc.--
can increase fleet
              productivity and shift link volume-delay curves. 

This research will develop
              overall metrics for system capacity. These are
intended to address questions
              of the maximum amount of traffic a system can
accommodate, and the flexibility
              of the system in accommodating different
mixes of traffic. Such mixes include
              changes in: spatial patterns resulting
from shifts in national or
              international trade patterns, the mix of
commodities carried, and speed or
              other level of service features required
by industry. We term these different
              quantities and mixes of commodities
and related features "traffic
              scenarios."

The methods developed are intended to address fundamental
              questions that
face those responsible for providing transportation
              infrastructure,
including: Is the system capable of accommodating an expected
              future
traffic scenario? If not, what are the bottlenecks? How flexible is
              the
current system in accommodating various traffic scenarios that might
              arise?
How adequate and flexible will the system be given planned investments
              and
other changes? Traditional transportation models have focused on
              estimating
the performance-- cost and level of service--of a given system with
              given
traffic scenario, and generally do not consider uncertainty. This
              research
addresses different but related questions, namely, the ability of a
              system
to accommodate various possible traffic scenarios. Our results
              should
provide improved methods by which private and public sector
              infrastructure
mangers can assess the state of their systems and also
              evaluate
improvements resulting from investments and operational
              changes.

In undertaking this research, we will build upon existing models of
              the
system, but structure these into an optimization formulation that
              enables
us to posit different measures of capacity and flexibility. One
              version
will be deterministic. But our goal is to develop a stochastic model
              that
will take into account stochastic variations in such features as
              link
performance and the quantity and mix of different commodities over
              time.
Thus we also intend to develop a Monte Carlo simulation version of
              the
model, which will provide a basis for developing a combined
              optimization
and stochastic approach to the problem. We expect to use current
              capacity
problems in the freight transportation system as examples and tests
              of the
methodology that we develop.

This award is made under the
              Exploratory Research on Engineering the
Transport Industries (ETI) program
              solicitation.

