Title       : Origins of RNA Catalysis in Extreme Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0085627

Award Number: 0085627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Johnston bjohnston@somagenics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergei A. Kazakov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Somagenics Incorporated
	      MMRI, 325 E. Middlefield Road
	      Mountain View, CA  94043    650/237-0282

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1075,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0085627  Brian Johnston
This project explores the idea that extreme
              environmental conditions such as freezing and dehydration could be vital forces
              in the emergence of life from a prebiotic world containing RNA. The idea is
              based on the discovery that such conditions can stimulate a key synthetic
              reaction (self-ligation) in a small, virus-associated, modern, catalytic RNA. 
              The discovery of RNA catalysis inspired the concept dubbed the RNA-world
              hypothesis, which maintains that early in the evolution of life, both
              information-carrying and catalytic functions of self-replicating entities were
              provided by RNA.  However, the susceptibility of the RNA backbone to chemical
              cleavage, particularly in the presence of the divalent metal ions that are the
              normal cofactors for RNA catalysis, challenges whether RNA could ever have
              developed enough complexity to become functionally useful in the absence of the
              protective environment of the cell.  The P.I.'s laboratory recently discovered
              that the hairpin ribozyme (HPR) catalyzes efficient ligation in the absence of
              metal ion cofactors when solutions of the HPR are subjected to freezing and/or
              dehydration. This discovery led to speculating whether dehydration-induced
              ligation could have played a role in building up RNA complexity in prebiotic
              evolution.  Several facts support this conjecture:  (1) Since their chemistries
              are the same, ligation provides a means of reversing random cleavage; (2)
              Freezing and dehydration can provide important mechanisms for concentrating and
              stabilizing macromolecules; and (3) Freezing and dehydrating environmental
              conditions are very likely to have existed on the early Earth. Moreover, such
              conditions are likely to exist or to have existed on Mars and Europa, two
              possible candidates for bearing extraterrestrial life. (Europa is believed to
              contain large amounts of freezing water, and Mars appears to have had flowing
              water in the past, possibly quite recently.)  This conjecture would be
              strengthened if RNA structures in addition to HPR were found to have similar
              freezing- or dehydration-induced catalytic activity. Therefore the authors will
              investigate the likelihood that enzymatic capabilities conducive to the
              emergence of life can arise from those extreme conditions, by searching a
              random library of RNA sequences for new motifs that catalyze ligation of RNA
              under those conditions.  An established selection protocol will be used, but
              only those sequences whose catalytic activity is induced by either freezing or
              chemical dehydration will be chosen.  Successfully isolating and characterizing
              new families of such sequences will enhance our understanding of the mechanisms
              of RNA catalysis, provide important support for the origin of life in extreme
              environments, and invite searches for extremophiles that use such activities. 
              This project will be a collaboration between Somagenics, Inc. and Princeton
              University, and will include a training component involving a graduate student
              and a post-doctoral fellow.  As a company applying RNA technology to functional
              genomics, therapeutics, and diagnostics, Somagenics wishes to exploit special
              properties of RNA that emerge under unusual and extreme conditions.
