Title       : Multicomponent Space-Charge Ion Uptake and Ion/Solvent Transport Models for
               Ion-Exchange Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2000  
File        : a0085679

Award Number: 0085679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239087             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Pintauro peter.pintauro@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT



CTS-0085679

Multicomponent Space-Charge Ion Uptake and
              Ion/Solvent Transport Models for Ion-Exchange Membranes

Peter N.
              Pintauro
Department of Chemical Engineering
Tulane University
New Orleans,
              LA 70118	


Ion-exchange membranes are used in a variety of industrial
              processes and electrochemical devices, including electrodialysis separations,
              electrochemical reactors, sensors, and proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells.  In
              order to understand better the mechanism of selective ion transport by these
              membranes, new space-charge equilibrium ion uptake and ion/solvent transport
              models are being developed and tested. The models consider: (i) multivalent
              counterion/fixed-charge-site ion-pair formation, (ii) concentration-dependent
              ion diffusivities and solvent viscosity within the pores of a membrane, (iii)
              variable Gibbs energy of ion solvation within the pore-fluid double layer, (iv)
              electrostatic interactions between ions and the membrane's fixed charges, and
              (iv) the orientation of solvent dipoles inside a membrane pore due to the
              strong electric field generated by the membrane's fixed-charge groups.  The
              models are applied to a variety of systems: (i) commercially available
              cation-exchange and anion-exchange membranes, (2) solutions composed of
              monovalent/monovalent cation and anion salts, monovalent/divalent cation salts,
              alkali metal/quaternary ammonium salt mixtures, and NaCl/amino acid (glycine)
              mixtures, and (3) water, methanol, methanol/water, and acetonitrile/water
              solvents.  Experimental measurements include ion and solvent fluxes and bulk
              solution concentration changes during multicomponent Donnan dialysis and
              electrodialysis as well as membrane-phase counterion concentration levels
              during multicomponent ion uptake. The data are used to test the space-charge
              membrane models.

The development of sufficiently detailed structure/function
              models that describe accurately absorption and transport of multiple ionic
              species in ion-exchange membranes would be of great value to polymer engineers
              and membrane scientists who are developing new membrane applications and
              formulating new polymeric membrane materials. Such models could be used (i) to
              simulate the performance of a given ion-exchange membrane in a particular
              electrochemical device or separation application, and (ii) to indicate new
              membrane structures with desired ion-transport rates and selectivities. This
              research project seeks such models by expanding the fundamental knowledge-base
              regarding the molecular-level processes and interactions that control the
              separation of multicomponent salt solutions from aqueous and non-aqueous
              solvents in anion and cation-exchange membranes.

