Title       : Integrated Environmental and Economic Performance Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0085253

Award Number: 0085253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330261             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bert Bras bert.bras@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chen Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leon F. McGinnis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for research  to integrate environmental and
              economic performance information for manufacturers.  This research will attempt
              to help industry see, in real time, opportunities for improving both economic
              and environmental performance.  The objective is to develop new
              business/process instrumentation and corresponding methods of analysis that
              will quantify and qualify the joint environmental and economic performance of
              manufacturing plants.  This project will extend familiar cost management
              principles (in particular Activity-Based Costing) into environmental management
              in order to create a combined economic and environmental performance
              measurement framework.  A model of a manufacturing plant's processes using an
              Activity-Based Cost, Mass, and Energy approach will be developed. 
              Manufacturing process sensors will be used to enhance response time of
              performance measurements.  The data streams will be integrated into a
              web-browser based display that provides read-outs of the plant's performance at
              various levels of detail.  The tools will be implemented and tested in an
              actual manufacturing plant.  This test-bed will be used to assess the findings
              and lessons learned with respect to developing integrated economic and
              environmental assessments.

If successful, this research will provide new
              business and process instrumentation and corresponding methods of analysis that
              will quantify and qualify the joint environmental and economic performance of
              
manufacturing plants.  These tools will advance the cause of environmentally
              conscious manufacturing (and ultimately, sustainable development) by providing
              a basis for benchmarking a manufacturing plant 
with other plants and other
              industries.  Companies will use these methods to accelerate their contributions
              to a more sustainable society.

