Title       : Development of a Database from the Duzce-Bolu Region in Turkey to Enable Testing
               Hypotheses Relating Urban Building Damage to Structural, Geotechnical and
               Geological Parameters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0085270

Award Number: 0085270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Frosch   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mete A. Sozen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio Bobet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julio A. Ramirez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Ridgway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS0085270
Title: "Development of a Database from the Duzce-Bolu Region in
              Turkey to Enable Testing Hypotheses Relating Urban Building Damage to
              Structural, Geotechnical, and Geological Parameters"
PI: R.
              Frosch
Institution: Purdue University

Abstract:

The specific and sole
              objective of the proposed work is to gather, collate, and archive for
              distribution data related to the assessment of urban building seismic
              vulnerability in the Duzce-Bolu region in Turkey.  The work will focus on the
              damage caused by the 12 November event and will be carried out by faculty and
              students of Purdue University cooperatively with the University of Notre Dame,
              the University of Illinois, and The Middle East Technical University, Ankara. 
              The Turkish State Waterworks and the Turkish Directorate for Resettlement and
              Natural Disasters have committed to allow free access to their databases on
              geological, geotechnical, and seismological information.

The distinctive
              feature of the project is that the final product will include a database
              (initiated already at www.AnatolianQuake.org) containing information selected
              by a cohesive group of structural engineers, geotechnical engineers, and
              geologists and presented in a manner to be understood by researchers in all
              three disciplines so that cross-cutting hypotheses about urban earthquake-risk
              can be tested.

The plan is to include basic building data (damage level,
              number of stories, framing type, footprint, critical member sizes, location
              coordinates) for approximately 750 buildings in Duzce, Bolu, and Kaynasli.  The
              geotechnical data will include geological and geotechnical surface maps as well
              as hydrogeological maps of the Duzce-Bolu region.  In GIS format, it will also
              include borehole logs with soil characterization and available field and
              laboratory data such as SPT, CPT, permeability, and shear vane.  In addition to
              the currently available line maps of the fault, geological data will include
              detailed information on ground fracturing and deformation to be obtained by the
              project staff.

Availability of these data, focused on specific locations of
              heavy and light damage to the built environment, will provide a rich and useful
              database to geologists, geotechnical engineers, and structural engineers
              working jointly or independently to test and develop methods for assessment of
              earthquake vulnerability.


