Title       : Issues in Acquisition, Processing and Use of Information to Enhance the
               Performance of Transportation Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0085754

Award Number: 0085754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65368              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darbha Swaroop dswaroop@mengr.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K. R. Rajagopal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1607,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is being made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the
              Transport Industries (ETI) program solicitation.

Information acquisition and
              processing is central to all Intelligent Transportation System technologies. 
              Technological advances continue to facilitate the acquisition  of a wide
              variety of data.  However, in order to realize the potential benefits of
              equpping the transportation systems with sensing, actuation, data acquisition
              and communication systems, methodologies that provide guidelines, on the
              information to be acquired and how the acquired information must be processed
              and utilised to empower the transportation system with real-time decision
              making capability, are required and are currently lacking.

The focus of this
              proposal is on engineering traffic flow behavior from the synthesis of control
              actions for constituent vehicles; we view vehicles as information sensing,
              purveying and actuating devices.

In this study, we seek answers to the
              following questions.  At the fundamental level, we would enquire into:

    
              1.  What characterizes the performance of a transportation system?  What
              information is relevant and useful to improve the performance of a
              transportation system?  Of these, what is feasible with the current state of
              technology?  What kind of technologies can be developed?

     2.  What tools
              must be developed for the analysis of performance of the transportation
              system?

At the applied level, we are interested in determining answers to
              the following questions:

     1.  How does one determine the effect of
              information acquisition, processing and utilization in the transportation
              system on its performance?

     2.  Given macroscopic performance
              specifications of the transportation system, how does one engineer a
              transportation system that achieves the given performance specification?

We
              will develop tools to model traffic flow behavior, examine their stability and
              develop robust adaptive traffic flow control strategies to compensate for any
              changes in traffic flow behavior arising from road and weather conditions and
              from the effects of informed microscopic actions of the vehicles.  It is
              expected that this research will provide guidelines on required infrastructure,
              communication and information processing capabilities for the next generation
              of vehicular and traffic control sytems.
