Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research:Scalable Quality-of-Service Control for the Next
               Generation Internet: Fundamental Challenges and Effective Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0085848

Award Number: 0085848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1882115            (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Towsley towsley@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lixin Gao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Kurose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1661,4095,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Today's Internet owes its great success to the simple, "hour-glass" IP
              network protocol architecture laid
out twenty-five years ago. With rapid
              advances in networking technologies and explosive growth of rich
multimedia
              content in recent years, the networking community finds itself at an important
              crossroads: what
should be the next generation Internet architecture for
              controlling network resources and provide the quality
of service (QoS) needed
              by emerging multimedia applications? There is a multidimensional spectrum
              of
possible approaches to providing QoS guarantees. The choice of a QoS
              solution for the next generation
Internet will have a substantial impact on
              both the evolution of the Internet itself, and on what it enables.
Making the
              "right" choices requires the development of a fundamental understanding of the
              scalability of
QoS controls and the impact of these controls on the efficacy
              of QoS provisioning.

The goal of the proposed research is to develop a
              comprehensive, quantitative understanding of the
fundamental trade-offs
              involved in various approaches toward providing scalable QoS guarantees. To
              this
end, the researchers  will develop coherent theories to systematically
              address the issue of scalability in QoS controls.  The research program divides
              broadly into four areas:

Aggregate network calculus for guaranteed flows: To
              gain a thorough understanding of the fine time-scale
(e.g., packet-level)
              behavior of a network system in providing QoS performance guarantees, the
              researchers
will develop an aggregate network calculus to study the impact of
              aggregate QoS control mechanisms
on the performance and complexity of data
              plane operations. This theory is developed for guaranteed
flows - flows which
              require the network to commit, either at a per-flow or an aggregate level,
              a
certain amount of resources (e.g., bandwidth and buffer) throughout their
              life time, regardless of the
network congestion status. The aggregate network
              calculus will provide a mathematical framework
to quantify the impact of
              aggregate QoS controls on the fundamental trade-offs in QoS provisioning.
It
              will also yield insights into the design of scalable data plane QoS control
              mechanisms.

End-to-end QoS controls for responsive flows: The researchers 
              will develop fluid models to study the impact of aggregate QoS control
              mechanisms on the end-to-end performance of responsive flows. A
              responsive
flow responds to signs of network congestion, such as loss, by
              adapting its transmission rate. These
models will enable us to develop a
              better understanding of the behavior of responsive flows such as
TCP coupled
              with different aggregate QoS mechanisms and to design end-to-end QoS services
              for
responsive flows.

QoS control laws and control plane aggregation rules.
               The researchers  will develop QoS control laws for capturing the slow
              time-scale, system-wide behavior of a network and aggregation rules that
              address the performance and complexity of control plane operations under
              aggregate QoS controls. These QoS control
laws and aggregation rules will lead
              us to the design of distributed and centralized algorithms for
scalable
              control plane operations.

Scalable QoS mechanisms and service architectures
              as an integral part in developing these theories, the researchers will also
              design effective and scalable QoS mechanisms, and tools and techniques for
              quantifying and evaluating the trade-offs of various QoS solutions. Based on
              the results from these efforts, the researchers  will study how various QoS
              solutions can be combined to construct meaningful end-to-end services.

The
              research will blend formal modeling/analysis, experimentation/implementation,
              and evaluation. The
understanding and insights gained as a result of the
              research will lead to the establishment of the theory,
design principles, and
              guidelines for building scalable QoS controls for the future Internet. This, in
              turn,
will allow reasoned and informed choices to be made as the next
              generation Internet takes shape.

