Title       : Optimization and Control of Freight Movement and Roadway Transport Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0085726

Award Number: 0085726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice R. Daniel daniel@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Washington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1607,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              As international trade increases in our nation, there is a need for the marine
              transportation system infrastructure, which handles a large part of
              international trade, to be integrated into an efficient and effectively
              operated system to remain competitive. Despite the extensive marine
              infrastructure system, growth of intermodal freight traffic has spawned
              concerns about the capacity of the existing infrastructure to handle expected
              growth. Physical expansion of many of the components of the marine
              transportation system cannot be accomplished easily due to physical,
              environmental, political and economic constraints. 

The effective operation
              of the intermodal freight transportation system relies on the development of an
              approach to plan, build, and operate the intermodal system in a way that
              emphasizes optimal utilization of existing resources and ensures that
              connections between modes provide a smooth flow of goods through an integrated
              system. Before this objective can be achieved, there is a need for tools, which
              can be used to represent intermodal transportation as an integrated
              system.

This research investigates an approach for integrating freight
              management systems and roadway control systems using simulation so as to: (1)
              optimize flow of intermodal freight from the terminal to a distribution center;
              (2) minimize costs and delays to users of the system; (3) maximize capacity;
              and (4) have flow rates tend to the maximum capacity of the system.The research
              uses high performance computing as a tool to provide the means of modeling the
              integrated system. High performance computing will provide the computational
              power needed for integrating the components of the system in a seamless fashion
              and will allow for a large scale network to be evaluated. Hence, the numerical
              simulation of the proposed model will effectively identify parameters or modes
              that are critical to the optimization of this system. The initial algorithm
              will be developed for a single processor high end computer which can later be
              scalable to a parallel computing paradigm.

As an investigation, the proposed
              work will focus on the movement of containers from port terminals via truck
              transportation. In many metropolitan areas where major port facilities are
              located, trucks represent a primary mode for freight movement. Using the
              simulation model developed in this research, a preliminary control system for
              intermodal freight transportation will be identified. The data requirements for
              the control system and models needed for describing the state of the freight
              management system and the roadway system will be identified. Finally, the
              control system will be evaluated for an intermodal freight movement from the
              Port of New York and New Jersey to a destination in northern New Jersey and New
              York.


This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the
              Transport Industries (ETI) program solicitation.

