Title       : Collaborative Research: Damage Assessment, Control, and Restoration of the
               Electric Power Grid Following Catastrophic Disturbances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0085676

Award Number: 0085676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun G. Phadke aphadke@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Virgilio A. Centeno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1038,1607,9196,9197,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract


This proposal explores new concepts for the damage
              assessment, control, and restoration of the electric power grid following
              catastrophic disturbances.  These disturbances would include:

1. Natural
              disasters like earthquakes, tornadoes, ice storms, wind storms, and large
              electrical impacts like short circuits, and failure of major components. 
2.
              Man-made disasters, such as terrorist attacks, and human errors.

The damage
              assessment consists of determining the severity based on the following
              criteria:
a) Degree of damage, b) Degree of danger, and c) Extent of hazard. 
              This type of analysis will require input from a well established information
              and sensing system.  The complexity of the problem is further increased because
              of the large geographical expanse of the Electric Power Transportation system. 
              The use of a wide array of communication technologies including GPS, Microwave
              Networks, Internet, low earth orbit satellites, and other communication
              networks will be examined as a part of the information infrastructure. 
              

Issues related to the scheduling and processing of real time information
              will also be carefully examined.  Key requirements for the computing and
              communication infrastructure to support real time supervisory control and data
              acquisition of large electric power grids are identified.  Information and
              computing architectures to meet these requirements will be proposed.

Various
              control strategies to prevent and minimize the extent of the dislocation of the
              electric network will be compared.  Concepts of graceful degradation as applied
              to the electric power grid will be proposed.  This aspect of the work would
              also involve corrective strategies to facilitate fast restoration. Newer
              configurations for the electric power distribution networks and their control
              and protection equipment so that the network responds to emergencies in a more
              controlled manner will also be explored.

The final step in the investigation
              will deal with approaches for the restoration of the system following
              catastrophic disturbances.  This is one of the least analyzed aspects of large
              power grids.  It is a highly complex undertaking and involves several issues
              that relate to automatic restoration as well as manual switching that involves
              a variety of manpower issues. 

It is important to note that the power
              delivery network is overlayed with several hierarchical information and control
              networks that provide various functions dealing with supervisory control, data
              acquisition, and transactions information in the new deregulated electric
              utility environment.  The roles of each network layer will also be carefully
              identified.

