Title       : ITR: New Approaches to Human Capital Development through Information Technology
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a0085952

Award Number: 0085952
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harry G. Hedges                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3176944            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryant W. York   (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan E. Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roscoe C. Giles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clarence A. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valerie E. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1653,1661,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0085952
York, Bryant
Northeastern University

ITR:  New Approaches to
              Human Capital Development through Information Technology Research

The
              objective of this project is to discover effective mechanisms for reducing the
              disparity
between the technological haves and have-nots, in terms of
              employability, income and societal
participation (aka The Digital Divide).
              Since a disproportionately large number of African-Americans fall in the
              category of have-nots, we have taken on the "so-called" African
              American
Problem as our research challenge. Recent data suggest that Hispanic
              Americans have begun to
close the gap in the Digital Divide. However, this is
              not the case for African Americans.
Despite years of affirmative action and
              targeted programs, African Americans as a group have not
benefited in
              proportion to the resources expended. The Internet, the World Wide Web, and
              new
information technologies are powerful engines for change and rapid
              technological change tends to
exacerbate pre-existing social and economic
              conditions. Thus, the "Digital Divide" continues to
grow because it is firmly
              supported by existing racial, economic and social divides, despite what
appear
              to be grand efforts to the contrary. Our project will implement a
              multidisciplinary
approach to the solution of the Digital Divide problem for
              African Americans through basic
research in information technology,
              distributed systems, human computer interfaces, and
collaboration technologies
              with a central emphasis on how culture expresses itself in and
influences
              information technologies. We will utilize our results to develop technologies
              that
diminish the Digital Divide.

In this project we will conduct basic
              research in distributed systems, information retrieval, human
computer
              interfaces, collaboration technologies, social/cultural preferences of African
              Americans,
public policy analysis and culture-specific pedagogies and
              assessments. A unifying framework
for our project is the development of a
              culture-specific, distributed, distance learning system for
African Americans
              based on the single-learner multiple-teacher model. Our basic research
              is
complemented by a number of educational technology development projects and
              community
deployment assessments.

