Title       : Developing a Model to Map Global Positioning System (GPS) Data onto
               Transportation Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a0085650

Award Number: 0085650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Aultman-Hall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1607,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The United States' global positioning system (GPS), NAVSTAR, consists of
              a
constellation of 24 satellites orbiting in high altitude. GPS
              receivers
that can be placed in any type of vehicle, including automobiles,
              trucks,
buses, airplanes, trains and ships, calculate their position on the
              earth
based on their distance from four or more of these satellites. This
              ability
to determine the location of vehicles in time has many useful
              applications
in transportation including tracking vehicles on networks for
              navigation or
travel surveys, as well as collecting and storing data about the
              networks
of roads, waterways or even pipelines for facility inventories.
              Although
development of a technique such as that proposed here to map GPS
              point data
to linear network configurations has many applications, it is
              routing
behavior and route choice as an improvement to traffic assignment
              models in
urban planning that are specifically of interest to this
              researcher.

The objective of this research is to develop a mathematical
              model to
determine routes on networks from GPS point data in order to automate
              the
route data collection process such that the recording of routes can
              become
routine and widespread.  The data points collected by GPS receivers for
              the
route of a vehicle travelling in a transportation system are recorded
              as
single points in space.  Network segments such as roads, even though
              they
have two dimensions including width, are represented as one
              dimensional
lines in a GIS or other network database.  Even if there were not
              errors in
both the GPS points and the network data it would be necessary for
              the GPS
points to be translated to links in order to consider the route
              behavior or
optimize it in the network system. Currently, errors that can not
              be
completely eliminated in both the GPS collected points as well as the
              base
linear networks make the process of matching the GPS data onto the
              network
complicated.  In many cases, humans are needed to directly transform
              the
GPS point data into a representation consisting of network line
              segments
for analysis.  This is not practical on a large scale for
              full
transportation networks where a large number of vehicles are being
              tracked.

In this project GPS point data for automobiles traveling on an
              urban road
network will be collected (urban roads will be used because their
              close
spacing as well as the interference from buildings challenges
              the
methodology). Data will be collected during various weather conditions
              as
well as at different times of the day when satellite configuration
              varies
and affects measurement quality.   The known actual routes will be
              manually
entered into the road network database and a mathematical model will
              be
developed to transform the GPS points into complete routes in link by
              link
network (line) nomenclature.  The model will make use of a minimum
              path
algorithm and link impedances defined based on GPS point density,
              velocity
and bearings. Goodness of fit measures that determine the extent of
              match
between the actual and modeled routes will be used to evaluate
              alternative
model specifications.

This award is made under the Exploratory
              Research on Engineering the
Transport Industries (ETI) program solicitation.

