Title       : LExEn: Hyperthermophiles of the Hydrothermal Vent Subsurface and Their
               Environmental Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2000   
File        : a0085534

Award Number: 0085534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360448             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas P. Teske ateske@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl O. Wirsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1075,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              LExEn: Hyperthermophiles of the Hydrothermal Vent Subsurface and Their
              Environmental Tolerance
Hyperthermophilic archaea, isolated from deep-sea
              hydrothermal vents, survive and grow under extreme heat, pressure, and most
              likely chemical toxicity. Their isolation and detection in hydrothermal vent
              effluents and in solids from undersea volcanic eruptions strongly suggest that
              they also occur in hot and anoxic subsurface environments. Their ability to
              survive or grow under extreme subsurface hydrothermal vent conditions (pH,
              sulfide, metals, temperature, and pressure) will show whether these organisms
              have potential as widespread and environmentally tolerant deep-subsurface
              inhabitants. With the exception of temperature, and to some degree pressure,
              many critical factors which determine growth and survival of vent
              hyperthermophiles under subsurface conditions have not been tested, preventing
              a realistic assessment of the occurrence range and environmental tolerance of
              these organisms.

This project will test the hypothesis that hydrothermal
              vent archaea actually grow in
the hot, anaerobic and toxic hydrothermal vent
              subsurface, most likely along the flow paths of vent fluids through the porous
              or cavernous rock. Four hydrothermal vent hyperthermophilic archaea will be
              used for these experiments, the methanogen Methanococcus jannaschii, the
              heterotrophic sulfur reducers Thermococcus fumicolans, Pyrococcus sp. strain
              GB-D, and the sulfate reducer Archaeoglobus profundus. These archaea were
              selected as a cross-section of anaerobic, thermophilic metabolisms which are
              representative for hydrothermal vent archaeal populations, and have the
              physiological potential to withstand subsurface conditions. Most importantly,
              these genera have been isolated directly from ongoing undersea eruptions and
              vent megaplumes. We will systematically test the growth and the survival of
              these vent archaea under approximated in situ conditions: high hydrostatic
              pressure of mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal vents and their subsurface extensions;
              acidic pH; and high sulfide and metal concentrations. These factors will be
              tested individually, and together in ways that approximate the natural
              situation. The hypothesis that the synergistic effects of these stress factors
              on growth and survival of hydrothermal vent archaea in the subsurface
              environment will differ considerably from the effect of each factor alone will
              be tested by comparing single-factor and multi-factor experiments. An important
              feature which influences growth and survival is biofilm formation, only
              recently studied for archaea model systems. Since biofilm formation enhances
              the environmental tolerance of many bacteria, archaeal biofilms in hydrothermal
              vent and subsurface environments are likely to show increased tolerance to
              environmental stress factors. In other words, the most resistant organism of
              hydrothermal vents and the earth's subsurface biosphere may not be an archaeon,
              but an archaeal biofilm. These experiments aim at integrating several physical
              and chemical factors which together determine the tolerance limits of some of
              the most extreme life forms on earth.

