Title       : The NSDL Central System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0085753

Award Number: 0085753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799085             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Y. Arms wya@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl J. Lagoze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dean Krafft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Saylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah E. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the National Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology
              Education Digital Library (NSDL) Program is to transform science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology education and knowledge sharing. The resulting
              national digital library should not only provide traditional library services,
              but also encourage new methods of learning, collaboration, and dissemination of
              resources. This project is building a one-year prototype of the core
              integrating component of the digital library, that provides a technical
              infrastructure, standards and guidelines, integration of diverse collections
              and services, and an organizational framework for the management of the
              facility. Collaborations on which the PI and team are involved are contributing
              several technologies and expertise to the project. The Dienst architecture,
              which has proven effective in a number of distributed digital library
              applications including the Networked Computer Science Technical Reference
              Library (NCSTRL), forms the technical foundation for the project, and provides
              a framework for multiple levels of participation including those defined by the
              agreements of the Open Archives initiative (which are based on the Dienst
              protocol). The ongoing leadership role of project staff in metadata initiatives
              and research, such as the Dublin Core and Warwick Framework, is facilitating
              the development and incorporation of NSDL metadata standards. The experience of
              the University Library in developing, refining, and managing the Cornell
              University Library Gateway provides expertise in licensing, organizing, and
              managing digital resources. Finally, the project team's high-level of
              participation in the digital library research community is accelerating crucial
              technology transfer.
