Title       : Establishing Functional Relations Between Fluid Flow Parameters for Single Rock
               Joints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0085059

Award Number: 0085059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208596             (Estimated)
Investigator: P.H.S.W. Kulatilake kulatila@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Modeling of fluid flow through jointed rock is important in petroleum,
              environmental, civil and mining engineering disciplines.  Fluid flow through
              jointed hard rock is very much dependent on the fracture network pattern in the
              rock mass and on the flow behavior through these fractures.  Discrete fracture
              flow models (flow models that incorporates a network of fractures with each
              fracture considered as a discrete element) are suggested in the literature to
              simulate fluid flow through jointed hard rock masses.  However, a proper model
              to represent fluid flow through single fractures is not available in the
              literature.  This research will overcome this shortcoming.  Flow behavior
              through a single fracture depends on the spatial distribution of the aperture
              (void space between the two contact surfaces of the fracture) including its
              connectivity, the contact area distribution of the fracture, and fluid
              properties.  The aperture and the contact area distributions of a fracture
              depend on the stress system acting on the joint.  

This research deals with
              fluid flow behavior through single joints subjected to normal compressive
              stresses.  Experimental, theoretical, analytical and numerical procedures will
              be used to reach the following goals: (a) To find a minimum set of parameters,
              which have the capability of representing the spatial distribution of aperture
              in fractures; (b) To find a suitable parameter, which has the capability of
              quantifying the percentage contact area of a fracture and capturing the
              influence of contact area on fluid flow behavior; (c) To develop functional
              relations between (i) the apparent overall fracture closure and normal
              effective stress, (ii) the contact area and normal effective stress, (iii) the
              spatial distribution of aperture and normal effective stress, (iv) the apparent
              overall fracture closure and spatial distribution of aperture, and (v) the
              apparent overall fracture closure and contact area for different types of
              fractures; (d) To develop a numerical model for fluid flow through single
              fractures, which has the capability of predicting results obtained through
              laboratory experiments; (e) To develop a fluid flow law applicable for
              different types of fractures; (f) To study the effect of directional change of
              fracture roughness on the fluid flow behavior; and (g) To study the effect of
              size of fracture on the fluid flow behavior of single fractures at an
              introductory level.  

A comprehensive experimental program will measure
              fracture deformations, contact and void areas, spatial distributions of
              aperture and flow rates resulting from applied hydraulic pressures under
              different normal stresses for three types of fractures coming from three
              different rock types. All these tests will be performed on 15 cm square
              fracture surfaces. Experiments will be conducted to study the effect of
              directional change of fracture roughness on the fluid flow behavior through
              single joints.  For the roughest fracture surface, the experiments will be
              repeated on a 7.5 cm square fracture surface sample obtained from the 15 cm
              square sample.  Liquid injection techniques coupled with laser profiling, and
              video imaging will be used to determine the aperture, contact area and void
              area distributions of the fractures.  Advanced numerical and statistical
              techniques will be used to develop functional relations between parameters
              which are connected with fluid flow through single rock joints.  The influence
              of the roughness and rock type of the fractures on the coefficients of the
              developed functional relations will be investigated.  The developed relations
              obtained for the two sizes of the roughest fracture will be compared to
              evaluate the effect of size of the fracture on the fluid behavior of single
              fractures at an introductory level.  The preliminary conclusions obtained here
              will be used to suggest a more comprehensive experimental program to evaluate
              the size effect in a complete manner in a future research.

Upon successful
              completion of the proposed research, improved tools and techniques will be
              available to perform better simulations of fluid flow through single fractures
              to use in discrete fracture network models in modeling fluid flow through
              jointed hard rock masses. Such modeling will be useful in the following field
              problems associated with jointed rock masses: (a) characterization and
              development of fractured rock oil reservoirs, (b) geothermal energy
              development, (c) petroleum well design, (d) nuclear waste repository
              performance assessment studies, (e) interpretation of hydrologic tests, (f)
              design of in-situ hydrologic tests, (g) groundwater contamination studies, (h)
              in-situ mine leaching studies, and (i) stability studies of rock masses in the
              presence of groundwater flow.  It is expected that this research will lead to a
              completion of a Ph.D. dissertation. Research findings will be published in
              journals and/or in conference proceedings.  Presentations based on research
              findings will be given at national and international conferences in rock
              mechanics and petroleum engineering.

