Title       : Columbia Pubscape: A Core Integration System for a National Science Digital
               Library Publishing Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a0085870

Award Number: 0085870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497212             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kate Wittenberg kw49@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Millman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Ginsburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis E. Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the auspices of the Electronic Publishing Initiative at Columbia (EPIC),
              a
university-based organization involving the university press, the libraries,
              and the
Academic Information Systems computing center, we are creating
              mechanisms for the
development, implementation, and sustainability of
              innovative, cost-efficient, and high
quality digital library resources
              designed for the enhancement of teaching and learning in
science. Utilizing
              our experience in creating "Columbia International Affairs Online"
              and
"Columbia Earthscape," the Electronic Publishing Initiative at Columbia is
              developing
models for rights management, sustainability, content development,
              interoperability,
business partnerships, and archiving systems necessary to
              create an effective Core
Integration System for the National Science Digital
              Library (NSDL). Expected outcomes
of the project include the development of a
              set of scalable organizational and operational models for the successful
              implementation and long-term sustainability of the NSDL.
Specifically, we are
              creating in this project (or * plan to create in the future in follow-on
              work):
1. an intellectual property and rights management system that can be
              employed for digital rights management for the NSDL.
2. business models,
              license agreements, pricing, sales, and sustainability mechanisms for use by
              the NSDL.
3. * system and staffing models for developmental editing of
              educational materials contributed to the NSDL with the goal of transforming
              them into professional-quality teaching tools for use on a large scale by
              educators and students.
4. system and staffing models for site design,
              production, interoperability, and security systems necessary for the effective
              operation of the NSDL.
5. * models for partnerships with outside content
              providers such as scholarly societies, not-for-profit organizations, and
              commercial publishers for licensing of content, joint development of
              intellectual property, and collaborative ventures that will result in the
              availability of valuable content for inclusion in the NSDL.
6. * models for
              the archiving and preservation of content in the NSDL with the goal of insuring
              reliable and perpetual access to the collection.


