Title       : International workshop on control and power systems, Washington, DC, between
               November and December 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0085661

Award Number: 0085661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gwendolyn C. Owens                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mustafa H. Khammash khammash@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vijay Vittal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The effective operation of power systems in the present and the future depends
              to a large extent on how well several emerging challenges are met today.  Power
              systems continue to be stressed as they are operated in many instances at or
              near their full capacities.  Addition of new transmission lines to relieve this
              stress is often very difficult and is mired in regulatory procedure.  The new
              deregulated environment has the potential of exacerbating this stress as more
              power is shipped from longer distances.  At the same time, new flexible ac
              transmission system (FACTS) devices are being commissioned in various
              locations.  While these devices can offer significant performance improvements
              and may help alleviate some of the problems alluded to; they do have unique
              dynamic properties that are less familiar than those of existing devices.  In
              addition proper design and analysis of control systems for FACTS is crucial for
              efficient operation.  The resulting dynamic behavior of the overall system that
              incorporates these FACTS devices is not well understood.  Consequently, the
              potential benefits of these devices may not be fully realized.  The market
              mechanisms in the future will have a bearing on the operating conditions and
              the transaction contracts that are established.  Since the market would be
              geared to fully utilizing efficient generation, additional stress would be
              imposed on the transmission grid in certain locations.  New technology
              involving distributed generation is being rapidly introduced in the system to
              meet growing demand.  As a result several important technical issues related to
              system interconnection, reliability, and location need to be addressed.  These
              important issues call for work in the areas of real time control, sensing,
              communication, economics, modeling, and analysis of large scale systems.

We
              propose to conduct a workshop that will bring together researchers, scientist,
              and federal agency participants in the areas described above.  Selected
              participants will present position papers and discussions that address key
              research issues will be conducted.  The workshop will focus on identifying
              emerging problem in power systems that can benefit from the system and control
              theoretic developments as well as presenting new research ideas in the control,
              operation, and economics of large networks and their application to power
              systems.  The outcomes of the presentations and discussions will be used as the
              basis to identify future research needs in the area of large-scale power
              systems and the means by which such needs can be met.  The presentations,
              discussions, and recommendations for future research will be published in the
              workshop proceedings.

