Title       : LEXEN: Effects of Microbial Activity on Rates of Basalt Alteration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2000  
File        : a0085436

Award Number: 0085436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Giovannoni steve.giovannoni@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin R. Fisk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1075      LIFE IN EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1075,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              LEXEN: Effects of Microbial Activity on Rates of Basalt Alteration
About three
              quarters of the ocean floor is basalt, providing chemical and physical
              environments that are suitable for many known microbial species. This ocean
              crust is a vast source and sink for chemical exchange with the ocean, and
              basalt/seawater chemical reactions release energy that is a resource for
              microorganisms. From a global geochemical perspective, the role of microbes in
              this chemical exchange is an important issue. From an astrobiological
              perspective, the deep ocean crust is an extremely stable environment and
              microbes in deep sea basalts may be some of the most primitive organisms on
              Earth. Study of microbially precipitated minerals and microbial marks in
              minerals is also relevant to the search for evidence of life on other planetary
              bodies composed of water and rock. This project explores a new strategy for
              culturing microorganisms that directly interact with deep sea basalts. A
              submersible will be used to collect exposed basalts from the sea floor, and to
              isolate the rocks in sealed containers and introduce tracers into the
              containers to evaluate contamination. Molecular biology and microscopy
              techniques will be used to identify organisms and study their interactions with
              the basalt, and dilution culture methods will be used to search for pure
              cultures.
Mineralogical products of the microbially alterated basalts will be
              identified by microbeam chemical analysis. ICP-mass spectroscopy will be used
              to monitor the release of elements from the basalts into solution. This project
              is relevant to the LExEn objectives (1) of understanding life supporting
              environments where chemical fluxes are extremely small, (2) of fostering
              interdisciplinary research - in this case the disciplines of microbiology and
              geology are closely linked, and (3) of exploring environments on Earth that are
              likely to exist on planets or moons in the solar system.

