Title       : Multi-Species Slurry Pipeline Transportation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2000 
File        : a0085645

Award Number: 0085645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. A. Ebadian EBADIAN@HCET.FIU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1607,1638,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Pipeline systems are widely used in transportation industries. Examples are
              transportation of coal, iron ore, mineral concentrates, ore tailings, sewage
              sludge, and nuclear waste. In many of these applications, transported slurries
              are complex multi-species mixtures. In the past, most of the theoretical and
              experimental studies dealt with only single-component slurries such as sand- or
              coal-water mixtures; little is known about multi-species slurries. The design
              of pipeline systems based on the studies of single-component slurries causes
              substantial limitation of safety and efficiency. Thus, there is a significant
              need to study multi-species slurry transportation in order to build a
              scientific basis for better pipeline system design in the future. 

It is
              proposed to study multi-species slurry transportation both experimentally in
              the lab-scale flow loop and numerically, using commercially available solvers
              as well as developing new computer codes. Both two- and three-component
              slurries will be used in the study to focus research on the effects of slurry
              component density on transport characteristics. Materials such as glass
              particles, sand, aluminum oxide, and nickel oxide will comprise slurry
              components in studying density ratios of heavier to lighter material in the
              range of 1.2 to 5.0. Different particle sizes of slurry components in the range
              of 50m to 500m and different relative component concentrations in the slurry
              will be tested. In addition, we will study solids concentrations in the range
              of 5% to 40% by volume for each slurry recipe. 

A flow loop for slurry
              transport experiments will be constructed. The flow loop and its
              instrumentation will be calibrated by performing experiments with clear water.
              Next, slurry transport experiments in the flow loop will be performed.
              Important engineering parameters such as critical deposition velocity and
              pressure drop versus flow velocity will be of interest. Flow patterns
              associated with different flow regimes will be examined by using flow
              visualization techniques such as Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV). A wide range
              of Reynolds numbers from 500 to 100000 will be considered to cover laminar,
              transitional, and turbulent flow regimes. Critical deposition velocity will be
              determined by visual observations of particle settling and from the turn point
              on the pressure drop versus mean flow velocity curve. Rheology studies of
              slurries under investigation will be performed. 

A reasonable numerical
              model of multi-species slurry flow will be developed. Experimental data will be
              used to improve numerical model. Improved model will then be used for
              parametric study to obtain detailed information about the effects of solids
              densities, particle sizes, and solids concentrations on slurry transport
              characteristics. In addition, we will study re-suspension phenomenon to
              investigate pipeline restart feasibility and characteristics. Slurry will be
              allowed to fully settle in the loop and then mean slurry velocity will be
              increased gradually until the settled bed is completely
              removed.

Correlations and numerical models obtained from this research will
              be useful in designing next-generation pipeline systems for multi-species
              slurry transportation. The study will also contribute to the improved
              fundamental understanding of physical phenomena associated with multi-phase
              flows.

This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the
              Transport Industries (ETI) program solicitation.


