Title       : Computational Nano-Engineering for Patterned Magnetic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0085569

Award Number: 0085569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tapan Mukherjee                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1680000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Huajian Gao gao@am-sun2.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Nix  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Clemens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kyeongjae Cho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0085569
Gao

Computational nano-engineering is an emerging field of research
              aimed at developing nanoscale modeling and simulation methods to enable and
              accelerate the design and development of functional nanometer-scale devices and
              systems.  Just as microfabrication has led to microelectronics revolution in
              the 20th century, nano-precision engineering will be a key to the
              nanotechnology revolution in the 21st century.  A major challenge in this
              technology is to fabricate patterned nanostructures.  The objective of the
              proposed research is to develop multiscale modeling and simulation methods for
              nanopatterning.  As a prototype example with comprehensive industrial impact,
              we will focus our efforts on nanopatterning of magnetic nanostructures for
              high-density information storage device applications where the control of grain
              size distribution is becoming increasingly important, and the drive for
              decreased media noise and increased storage density is pushing the grain size
              below the 10 nm regime.

We propose a systematic study of the mechanisms that
              control the grain size and grain size distribution in magnetic thin films.  We
              will use continuum theories to model the length scales determined by competing
              mechanisms of epitaxy, surface stress, surface energy, strain energy,
              compositional free energy and quantum energy.  We will develop kinetic Monte
              Carlo and quantum simulations to simulate nanoscale self-organization for
              creating magnetic thin film media with ultra-fine grain sizes and ultra-narrow
              grain size distributions.  The simulation tools will allow us to quantitatively
              investigate nanofabrication processes, and in particular, to predict the grain
              size and grain size distribution in magnetic nanostructures.

The proposed
              project will have immediate impact on the magnetic information storage
              nanotechnology by providing industry with the first theoretical tool to analyze
              nanofabrication processes based on the state-of-the-art knowledge of nanoscale
              modeling and simulation.  This project will allow engineers to reduce or
              eliminate costly and slow processes of developing new nanostructured materials.
               Through the proposed research, we will develop the framework of computational
              nanopatterning technology which will benefit the whole spectrum of current
              nanotechnology challenges.  This project will lead to better understanding of
              the basic mechanisms that control the structuring of materials at the nanometer
              scale.  The Kinetic Monte-Carlo simulation and quantum simulation methods
              developed under this project will have far-reaching significance for the design
              and manufacturing of nanodevices.

