Title       : Characterizing Rock Fractures from Borehole and Tunnel Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0085093

Award Number: 0085093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241604             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Mauldon   (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Dunne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research will develop and test new methods for using readily available data
              from cylindrical samples to quantify rock fracture measures.  Cylindrical data
              from boreholes, rock core, tunnels and shafts are widely available but
              currently under-utilized for rock fracture characterization. Boreholes and core
              are standard components of geotechnical/geoenvironmental site investigations
              and petroleum exploration worldwide and borehole-imaging techniques (such as
              BIPS) are highly developed and rapidly progressing. On a larger scale, tunnels,
              shafts and wells provide excellent windows into the subsurface rock mass
              structure. Borehole images, rock core and full-periphery tunnel maps will be
              used to quantify fracture size, density (number of fracture centers per unit
              volume of rock mass) and intensity (area of fractures per unit volume of rock
              mass) - all major components of a unified system of fracture abundance
              measures. The research results could be used by engineers or geologists to help
              quantify fracture characteristics from small-diameter cylinders such as
              boreholes, bolt holes or oil wells, as well to obtain
direct, real-time
              quantitative fracture data from tunnels and shafts.

Methods to be explored
              include: (1) estimating mean fracture size from the ratio of transections to
              partial transections of the cylinder by fractures; (2) using the frequencies of
              intersections, transections and partial transections to quantify fracture
              density and intensity; (3) combining circular scanlines normal to the cylinder
              axis with straight scanlines parallel to the axis to create an orthogonal
              sampling geometry that minimizes orientation bias; and (4) modification of the
              Terzaghi correction for zero-diameter boreholes to take into account fracture
              size and cylinder size. These approaches are outgrowths of previous work by the
              principal investigators on the sampling and interpretation of linear fracture
              traces exposed on planar surfaces.

A key aspect of the proposed work is
              continued cross-disciplinary research and teaching involving civil engineering
              and structural geology. This collaboration brings together investigators from
              two fields that have strong but different interests in understanding rock
              fractures. A major goal of the proposed research is to meld the two viewpoints
              together. A key output of the research will the two co-supervised Ph.D.
              students, who will be cross-trained in rock engineering and  structural
              geology.

