Title       : Electronic Encyclopedia of Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a0085511

Award Number: 0085511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86867              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Henyey henyey@earth.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Simpson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert K. Reitherman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Bernard Minster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0085511
Henyey

The objective of this project is the creation of an
              Electronic Encyclopedia of Earthquakes (E3), which will function as an integral
              part of the NSF Digital Library Initiative.  The lead organization in this
              project is the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC), in collaboration
              with California Universities for Research in Earthquake engineering (CUREE) and
              the Incorporated Research Institutes in Seismology (IRIS).  The one-year pilot
              phase of this project will result in an operational framework with an initial
              set of entries; the enlargement of this collection is planned to then
              efficiently follow in a subsequent phase.  The project name, Electronic
              Encyclopedia of Earthquakes, accurately describes the product of this project:
              The information will be electronic in form, communicated via the World Wide
              Web.  Rather than only reading text, the user will be able to access data sets
              and to manipulate, visualize, and analyze the data in individualized ways.  For
              example, the student or instructor will be able to select from a library of
              earthquake ground motion records and play a given record in combination with a
              structural model to experiment with the concept of dynamic response.  The
              Electronic Encyclopedia of Earthquakes is related to a traditional printed
              encyclopedia in that it is entry-based, consisting of a series of topics, each
              dealt with as independent explanations and sets of information and yet also
              cross-referenced.  The root meaning of "encyclopedia," the circle of knowledge,
              also applies, because the expanse of the topics will cover the earthquake
              subject in cross-disciplinary fashion.  Earth sciences, engineering, physics,
              and mathematics are the four basic fields of knowledge to be included, with
              some treatment of impacts on human systems of earthquakes.  Entries and data
              sets are provided that will allow the instructor or student to tie different
              topics together in an individualized, inquiry-based way, or to complete the
              circle, without encountering artificial divisions along traditional
              disciplinary lines.  Thus, "encyclopedia" is an accurate description of this
              product, rather than "primer," because the goal here is to provide clearly
              organized, dynamic information that allows the learner to discover many
              different paths through the subject matter, or to create new knowledge, and not
              to meter out one idea or piece of information at a time in a pre-determined
              sequence.  The third term, "earthquakes," is largely self-explanatory, except
              to note that E3 will not be limited to individual earthquakes, though specific
              major earthquakes will be included as entries and will be used to illustrate
              broader concepts.  To balance the broad range and open-ended nature of the
              entries with the need for an instructor or student to quickly co-locate
              information found under different headings that is appropriate to their
              inquiry, threads of related content will be tagged and linked to provide
              continuity for a given likely level of user.  For example, the content that
              will be mapped out to show high school teachers what may be useful for their
              physics courses is different than in the case of a college-level engineering or
              geophysics class where the same topic is treated in greater depth.  The
              information will be layered in terms of its complexity or implied prerequisite
              knowledge: A primary (glossary), secondary (precis), and tertiary (in-depth
              information) framework will be used.  A large amount of information exists in
              this field that can be adapted for this collection, but a common problem is
              that the Web user often encounters a large volume of low quality or irrelevant
              data in the process of eventually finding the content they desire.  The layered
              framework and the encyclopedic idea of cross-references, along with a
              commitment to quality control to ensure high academic standards, have been
              designed to overcome this problem.

