Title       : Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport Industries (ETI): Capacity
               Planning and Design for Transportation and Handling of Bulk Coal over
               Distribution Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0085659

Award Number: 0085659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tayfur Altiok altiok@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yorai Wardi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Melamed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1607,1669,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport
              Industries (ETI) program solicitation.  It provides funding for the development
              of effective modeling, fast simulation and sensitivity analysis for day-to-day
              transport and handling of coal based on a fluid-flow modeling approach (the
              approach taken can be easily extended to other bulk materials).  Worldwide
              usage of coal is increasing, the United States being the second largest coal
              producer in the world and a major coal exporter.  The recent trend towards
              deregulating the power industry has been exerting economic pressures to lower
              energy prices via improved coal-related operations, due to emerging
              competition.  Our proposal adopts a Continuous-Flow Model (CFM) worldview for
              modeling, analysis and optimization of the movement of bulk material over
              distribution networks.  We propose a three-prong research project to support
              coal transport and handling operations as follows:  (1) CFM-based analytical
              modeling and performance analysis of coal-related operations; (2) design and
              development of a Monte Carlo simulation templates for capacity planning,
              performance analysis and design of coal enterprise operations from extraction
              of coal to consumption in coal fired power plants, as well as coal export via
              marine terminals; and (3) sensitivity analysis via Infinitesimal Perturbation
              Analysis (IPA) algorithms for efficient computation of derivatives of
              performance measures with respect to design parameters to support design
              trade-off decisions.

If successful, this research will improve the
              efficiency and effectiveness of coal handling and transport operations in the
              U.S.  The tool will be made available to the coal and power industries, and its
              functionality will include capacity planning and performance analysis/design. 
              Another impact will be in the educational arena.  The models and scenarios to
              be developed will be incorporated into various courses (e.g., Performance
              Analysis, Simulation Modeling, and Operations Management), thereby acquainting
              students with important issues arising in the coal and power generation
              industries.


