Title       : Seismic Schools: Real-Time Data, Real World Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0085582

Award Number: 0085582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85007              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nazli M. Nomanbhoy nazli@cnr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darell Speer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward E. Geary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith L. Hannah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0085582
Nomanbhoy

Seismic data recorded at PEPP (Princeton Earth Physics
              Project) seismograph stations in Colorado and existing seismology resources on
              the World Wide Web will be used to meet the Colorado Model Content Standards in
              earth sciences for grades 9 to 12.  Teachers will be trained in both content
              and use of curricular materials so that they can use real-time seismic data to
              engage students in real world research.  The training will enable teachers and
              students to access seismic data from the Internet and to use those data to
              solve real problems in seismology.  This will provide teachers with the
              opportunity to experience a hands-on, project-based approach to learning
              science before implementing this approach in their classroom.  The training
              will be done in collaboration with the Center for Science, Math and Technology
              (CSMATE) at Colorado State University.  During the first phase the PIs will:
              (a) visit each PEPP seismograph station in Colorado to ensure that the
              seismometers are running and data are being archived; (b) prepare the seismic
              data collected at local PEPP seismograph stations for dissemination by the
              Internet; (c) research the Internet for appropriate seismology resources and
              activities for classroom use; (d) design a website that will act as a gateway
              for teachers to access the seismic data, activities, and support from team
              members; (e) train a small group of teachers in summer 2000 to use the seismic
              data so that they can in turn act as trainers during a weeklong
              teacher-training workshop during the following summer; and (f) design and begin
              implementation of an evaluation plan and initiate organization and recruiting
              for the teacher-training workshop.  During the second phase they will: (a)
              train 45 more teachers to use these resources during a weeklong workshop at
              Colorado State University; (b) provide follow-up through on-site visits by a
              project team member; (c) complete assessments and finalize evaluation of the
              project; (d) disseminate project outcomes through the Internet, presentations
              at conferences, publications in journals and newsletters, and contributions to
              the Digital Library for Earth Science Education (DLESE).  The on-site visits
              will serve two purposes: (1) to assist teachers in the transition from the
              workshop laboratory to their own working environment, and (2) to ensure that
              all hardware, software and resources are readily available and functioning in
              the participant's schools.  There will be two lasting outcomes of this project.
               First, the PIs will establish and maintain a web site at the Colorado
              Geological Survey for archiving PEPP data, posting instructional materials, and
              providing on-line support for teachers.  Second, they will have provided up to
              48 teachers (who teach at least 5000 students) with the content knowledge,
              confidence, and instructional materials they need to teach earth science
              content through active research, using real quantitative data and interacting
              with scientists through the Internet.  With the focus on web-based activities
              and dissemination through DLESE, the project has the potential to serve a far
              larger, essentially global audience.

