Title       : Marine Advanced Technology Education (MATE) Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0085345

Award Number: 0085345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Gilmartin mgilmartin@mpc.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deidre Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicole L. Crane  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Monterey Peninsula College
	      980 Fremont
	      Monterey, CA  939404704    408/646-4010

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The MATE Center is building upon its past achievements in order to increase its
              impact on marine technology education and enhance student preparation for
              marine technology careers. In light of the national need for a well-prepared
              technical workforce and the changing ways in which society views technician
              work, MATE is building partnerships and collaborations that improve marine
              technical education and increase public awareness of technical education and
              career opportunities. They are also developing or enhancing model marine
              technology associate degree programs at Monterey Peninsula College and MATE
              partner community colleges.

The Center has five major goals. These are to:
              (1) build active partnerships; (2) identify industry needs and develop industry
              guidelines for curricula development; (3) increase the quality and availability
              of curricula; (4) provide professional development for faculty and teachers;
              and (5) increase outreach and dissemination. The Center is building active
              partnerships with business, industry, research and academic institutions, and
              professional societies by strengthening existing partnerships and developing
              new ones. These partnerships are an important part of the Center's efforts to
              assess industry's needs. These needs in turn are being used to create
              industry-driven guidelines for curriculum development. These guidelines then
              form the basis for the development of skill competency clusters that reach
              across numerous occupations. The Center is also working with government
              agencies to define specific marine technical occupations. The guidelines and
              skill clusters form the basis of the Center's efforts to improve the
              availability and quality of curriculum and instructional materials at the high
              school and college level. Monterey Peninsula College is piloting this effort.
              The Center is offering an annual faculty summer institute and faculty
              internships to foster the process. Dissemination of Center products and
              information is being carried out using the Web site, extensive information
              services, conference attendance, and site visits to other programs and
              industry.
