Title       : Magnetic Behavior and Phase Transitions of Selected Pure, Dilute and Mixed
               Magnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0085662

Award Number: 0085662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200448             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary C. DeFotis gxdefo@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The detailed magnetic behavior, especially that associated with magnetic phase
              transitions, of various pure, dilute and mixed magnetic systems with
              short-range exchange interactions will be examined.  The pure materials are
              interesting because: some are members of a new transition metal series certain
              members of which exhibit nonequilibrium behavior, one is ferromagnetic and a
              potential member of a rare universality class; and others show signs of very
              large zero-field splittings.  The study of spin glass behavior in insulators is
              of particular importance, and several of the proposed mixed magnets could
              exhibit such behavior in insulators is of particular importance, and several of
              the proposed mixed magnets could exhibit such behavior.  One of these is a
              potential new type of spin glass which may occur on diluting a previously
              studied ferromagnet of novel type.  Even apart from spin glass formation, the
              behavior of a ferromagnet of this kind with dilution is an important problem. 
              Two of the mixed systems are ternary in character, that is they contain more
              than two components.  Such systems are virtually unstudied among insulating
              materials.  The mixed magnets will contain either competing exchange
              interactions, competing anisotropies, different spin values, or some
              combination of these.  Determination of magnetic phase diagrams, showing the
              dependence of ordering temperature on composition and regions of phase
              stability, is a major objective of this work.  Some theoretically predicted
              phase diagram types are yet to be observed.  Very high field magnetization data
              will also be obtained for several systems, both pure and mixed; this will yield
              new information on critical fields in the materials and on zero-field
              splittings.
%%%
The chemical compounds to be examined included novel
              monohydrates of simple transition metal salts that exhibit certain novel
              structural or magnetic features.  Studies of these systems will further such
              materials science goals as elucidation structure-property relationships and
              developing materials with new properties.  A major impact will be the
              opportunities afforded undergraduate science students to gain experience with
              frontier research topics in a field of high priority to industry.

