Title       : ITR: Algorithms: From Theory to Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a0085982

Award Number: 0085982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy E. Blelloch blelloch@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Avrim L. Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Lafferty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel D. Sleator  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,1661,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the explosion in connectivity of computers and in the size of data sets
              available for analysis, mathematically sophisticated algorithms are becoming
              increasingly crucial for a wide range of real-world applications. 
              Unfortunately, it often takes many years for an algorithm to make it from
              theory into applications.  In fact, the trend has been for different areas to
              develop their own algorithms independently, with the result that similar
              techniques reinvented many times in different contexts, and radically new
              approaches that require an algorithmic level of abstraction take a long time to
              make it into applications.  
The intellectual core of this proposal is to
              create a coordinated effort in "Algorithms from Theory to Practice" that
              connects the basic development of fundamental algorithms and data structures to
              their many disparate uses.  This work will address critical needs by connecting
              relevant algorithms to application areas, by exposing and tackling important
              issues that are common to multiple applications, and by developing
              fundamentally new approaches to solving key problems via the connections made. 
              
	This proposal aims to provide impact at a number of different levels.  At
              the lowest level are specific research projects that target key application
              domains.  These include algorithms for mesh generation with applications to
              scientific simulations and graphics, algorithms for indexing and searching
              needed for a number of data analysis tasks, and protocols that connect machine
              learning with cryptography to produce a fundamentally new way for people to
              securely authenticate to their computers.  At a higher level, this proposal
              will create a center to which researchers in application areas can come to
              build connections and integrate algorithmic techniques and principles into
              their own projects.  At the highest level, this proposal will create tools to
              improve the process of moving algorithms from theory to applications more
              broadly.  As one example, the course "Algorithms in the Real World" run by PI
              Blelloch has already developed a set of web pages detailing how algorithms are
              used in various applications and what turn out to be the crucial issues
              involved.  A new, extensible version of this database would provide support for
              theoreticians, practitioners, and educators.  We hope the end result to be both
              a faster pipeline from algorithm design to application, and improved sharing of
              algorithm techniques across application areas.  In addition, we expect the
              students supported by this effort to fulfill the highest-level goals of this
              project becoming the next generation vertically-integrated algorithm
              researchers.
	The PIs each have a strong track-record in algorithms, both
              theoretical and applied.  Guy Blelloch is developer of the NESL parallel
              programming language, as well as fast parallel algorithms for a number of core
              problems.  Arvin Blum is known for his work in machine learning and
              approximation algorithms, and is developer of the Graphphan planning algorithm,
              used as the basis of many AI planning systems.  Manuel Blum is winner of the
              ACM Turning Award for his work in the foundation of computational complexity
              theory and its applications to cryptography and program checking. John lafferty
              is known for his work in language modeling and information retrieval, and is
              co-developer (along with PI Sleator)of the Link Grammar natural-language
              parser.  Daniel Sleator is winner of this year's ACM Kanellakis "Theory  and
              Practice" award for the development of the Splay Tree data structure, and more
              recently been developing algorithms for natural language applications.

