Title       : GOALI: Novel Surface Engineering Methodology to Anneal the Surface Defects
               Generated During Grinding Operation for Silicon Nitride Ceramic Components for
               Heavy Duty Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a0085233

Award Number: 0085233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ajay P. Malshe apm2@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharad N. Yedave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Batzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip H. McCluskey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
              provides funding for the development of a numerical tool for determining
              optimal process parameters in bulk forming processes, such as rolling,
              extrusion, and forging. The developed numerical tool will determine the optimal
              process geometry, temperature and speed that satisfy specified design criteria
              for a given two- dimensional forming process. An optimization algorithm based
              on an adaptive arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian finite element formulation for
              modeling large deformation thermo-elasto-viscoplastic contact problems used.  
              The algorithm will be implemented in the context of an existing advanced
              computational framework that has tools for mesh generation, adaptivity, and
              parallel computing.  Experiments involving the extrusion process will also be
              performed to validate the algorithms developed.  Experimental dies will be
              manufactured according  to the optimal die shapes predicted in this work and
              tested at the predicted optimal die speeds.  A model press, which can extrude
              plasticine material marked with grid, will be used in these experiments to
              observe the material flow behavior.

If successful, the results of  this
              research will lead to improvements in the design of bulk forming processes and
              new developments in optimization methods for handling complex nonlinear
              problems. The primary goal of this work is to determine optimal process
              geometry, thermal conditions, and process speed in bulk forming processes that
              will satisfy typically prescribed design criteria. These design criteria may
              include generating a uniform flow of the material, generating a specified
              material property distribution in the formatted product, minimizing the
              production time, or minimizing the energy required for the process. Determining
               the process parameters to achieve these objectives will help to reduce the
              cost and improve the quality of the final product in processes such as
              extrusion and forging.  The proposed work will also contribute to the
              computational tools and methodologies available for nonlinear
optimization
              problems.

