Title       : LExEn: Molecular Microbial Ecology and Biogeochemistry of Methane Hydrates and
               Brine Pools: Distribution and Activity of Microorganisms in Two Extreme Deep
               Sea Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a0085549

Award Number: 0085549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $726510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Sobecky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Montoya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1075      LIFE IN EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1075,1389,4444,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Gulf of Mexico seafloor contains vast reservoirs of liquid and gaseous
              hydrocarbons that overlay thick accumulations of Jurassic salt. Conduits, or
              focused flow regions, permit rapid vertical migration of thermogenic
              hydrocarbons from deep reservoirs to the sediment-water interface and,
              ultimately, into the water column. The close association of salt and
              hydrocarbon systems results in frequent co-migration of brine and hydrocarbons
              (oil and gas). Upon reaching the surface, the co-migration of these fluids
              creates distinct extreme environments capable of supporting prolific microbial
              communities and complex chemosynthetically-based food webs. The Gulf of Mexico
              setting is complicated by the mode of hydrocarbon occurrence. At one extreme,
              free gas and/or liquid oil is a component of a complex fluid contained in
              seafloor brine pools or diatremes. The fluid in these pools is hypersaline, can
              reach temperatures of 40 degrees C or greater, and may entrain quantities of
              silt or clay as ejecta or debris flows. At the opposite extreme, hydrocarbons
              and H2S form ice-like clathrates with water, called gas hydrates. Relatively
              little is known about the types of microorganisms dwelling in these
              environments, their genetic diversity, or their ecology and ecophysiology. This
              project will test the hypotheses that brines and hydrates form distinct
              microbial niches containing specialized communities and functions and that the
              dynamic interaction between the microbial activity and geochemistry of these
              systems results in distinctive geochemical signals that can be detected in the
              environment. Key functional and phylogenetic groups in the community will be
              identified by analysis of microbial and genetic diversity. The organisms can
              then be linked to their characteristic activities through measurement of
              biogeochemical rates (e.g. sulfide and methane oxidation, methanogenesis,
              sulfate reduction). Evidence of these processes is recorded in both the
              microbiota and the surrounding environment and can be revealed through stable
              isotopic analysis of cellular and environmental molecules. This information
              will contribute to the field of deep-sea microbiology and will lead to a better
              understanding of the microorganisms' adaptations to unique environments that
              may be present on other planetary bodies (e.g., hydrates on Europa).
