Title       : Field Science Approach to Earth System Science: Back to Basics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a0085487

Award Number: 0085487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart J. Birnbaum sbirnbaum@utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sabine Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oscar W. Van Auken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0085487
Birnbaum

An integrated Earth system field research component will be
              developed to incorporate into the science curriculum.  Objectives are to (1)
              work with a high school and two of its feeder middle schools to develop
              teacher-teams capable of incorporating an integrated Earth system field
              component into their curriculum; (2) establish a challenging and exciting
              environment where teachers and students conduct inquiry-based science by
              addressing questions they formulate themselves; (3) develop an appropriate
              curriculum built around integrated Earth system field research; (4) involve
              students and teachers in research that they may present at a UTSA sponsored
              research conference; and (5) provide opportunities for faculty in the sciences
              and education to conduct research: students using the field site will
              contribute to faculty research through data collection (in the case of the
              sciences) and as participants in education research.  Nine teachers
              representing science and mathematics will be selected for the project: six from
              middle schools and three from a high school.  Teachers will be trained over a
              five-month period in field and laboratory methods in disciplines that include
              archeology, ecology, environmental science, geoscience, and microbiology;
              emphasis will be placed upon critical thinking and developing hypotheses based
              upon observations.  With this background, teachers will take their classes into
              the field a minimum of three times for data and sample collection.  Data will
              be recorded on maps developed by students using global positioning satellite
              receivers and Arcview Explorer GIS software.  Students will publish their data
              on a Web site and present their research results at a conference developed for
              the project.  This project will have significant impact on the students and
              teachers involved.  There will be improvement in critical thinking skills,
              proposing hypotheses based upon observations, communication skills, and
              understanding the linkages between Earth systems.  In addition, this will
              develop a greater enthusiasm for, and understanding of, the sciences.

