Title       : Strong Atom-Photon Interaction for Microphotonic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0085680

Award Number: 0085680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lionel C. Kimerling lckim@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michal Lipson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposed research is to develop a new class of devices based on
              Er-doped microcavities that function as efficient light emitters, as photonic
              switches and as terahertz signal oscillators. The devices will exploit the
              basic physics of the strong photon-atom interaction to determine the
              feasibility of the using of Er-doped media in a high Q microcavity as a basic
              unit of photonic device design. The fabrication of these devices will involve
              the design of the structures and the process metrics, such as stress relief,
              planarity and uniformity of the layers and the phase stability of the materials
              systems. If successful, this research creates a new class of devices for the
              generation, detection and manipulation of photons that could be critical to the
              evolution of all optical networking for the movement and management of
              information.  Our preliminary results obtained with an Er 2 O 3 microcavity
              medium clad by Si/SiO 2 dielectric stack mirrors showed direct evidence of
              photon-atom coupling, an enhancement of the light emitted from the microcavity
              by orders of magnitude at room temperature, and the capability of optical
              switching. The Si/SiO 2 microcavity structure of this potential new class of 
              devices provides a very important route to CMOS compatible processing and
              integration. In addition, the high dielectric contrast of the Si/SiO 2
              materials system (D nr=2) means that only four layer pairs are required for
              cavity Qs of 1000. Rare earth elements as quantum dot analogs offer the
              ultimate in size monodispersity and electronic localization. Erbium is an ideal
              rare earth optical dopant because of its emission spectrum in the
              telecommunications standard, l=1.55 micron wavelength region.  The main
              obstacle to the development of a Si:Er platform is the small optical cross
              section, long radiative lifetime and difficulty of tuning of the atomic
              resonances of the rare earth elements. We propose to use monolithic planar
              microcavities to enhance the Er-photon coupling, and hence,  add a mechanism
              for tuning of the oscillator strength. An Er2 O3 cavity medium provides a high
              density of atoms that can experience coherent interactions with light. These
              interacting Er atoms are weakly coupled to their host matrix with sharp
              emission lines. This property yields a device that responds to light as a set
              of Er-photon coupled oscillators. By tuning the microcavity resonance the
              emission, transmission and reflection properties of the structure may be
              controlled at speeds equivalent to the frequency difference between the Er and
              cavity resonances. We propose a three-year effort to design, fabricate and
              characterize room temperature operating devices for emission and switching of
              light in the l=1.55 micron wavelength region. The proposed study explores a new
              device platform of photon coupling to optically active ions and its application
              to the generation and control of light. If the promised performance can be
              achieved, then this Er:Si/SiO2 system will provide a highly manufacturable,
              silicon compatible photonic device platform. 


