Title       : Diversity, Vertical Distribution, and Metabolic Activities of Inorganic
               Sulfur-Cycling Prokaryotes in Lake Fryxell, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2000  
File        : a0085481

Award Number: 0085481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Madigan madigan@micro.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie A. Achenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1075      LIFE IN EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Cold environments comprise more than ninety percent of the earth's biosphere yet
              relatively little is known about the diversity, physiology, phylogeny, and
              metabolic activities of cold-loving (psychrophilic) microorganisms.  This
              research focuses on bacteria involved in the sulfur. The study is Lake Fryxell,
              a meromictic lake that contains significant levels of sulfide in the water
              column. The research will take a polyphasic approach that includes in situ
              biodiversity studies, isolation and laboratory culture, and molecular analysis
              of metabolic activity.  Each of these objectives will be pursued using a
              combination of traditional research strategies coupled with novel experimental
              techniques, the prime objective being to dissect the microbiology and microbial
              ecology of sulfur-cycling that occurs at 0 degree C in Lake Fryxell.  Work will
              focus on Proteobacteria with the biodiversity studies using metabolic genes
              rather than ribosomal RNA genes as molecular targets. Targeted genes include
              pufM, csoS1, and dsr. Isolation and culture of key representatives of each
              major group of sulfur-cycling prokaryotes will be pursued using a combination
              of methods, including extincting dilution, high-throughput microtiter plate,
              and archaeal-targeted enrichments.  Molecular measurements of metabolic
              activity in situ will be combined with these biodiversity and laboratory
              culture results.  Collectively, the results of the proposed research will: (1)
              reveal for the first time the biodiversity of sulfur-cycling prokaryotes active
              in an important nutrient cycle at permanently cold temperatures; (2) make
              available new genetic resources of psychrophilic phototrophs, sulfur
              chemolithotrophs, and sulfate-reducing bacteria for basic research and for
              biotechnological exploitation; and (3) reveal the most ecologically significant
              sulfur-cycling prokaryotes in Lake Fryxell and identify metabolically important
              organisms that remain to be cultured.  In addition to advancing an
              understanding of the microbial sulfur cycle, the results of the proposed
              research will positively impact efforts to recognize and culture microbial life
              outside planet Earth, and should reveal the limits, in terms of low
              temperature, to which microbial sulfur-cycling can occur on Earth.             
                                                           
