Title       : Documentation and Evaluation of Factors Controlling Seismic Slope Stability
               Using GIS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0085298

Award Number: 0085298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Sitar nsitar@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS0085298
Title: "Documentation and Evaluation of Factors Controlling Seismic
              Slope Stability Using GIS"
PI:  N. Sitar
Institution: University of
              California at Berkeley

Abstract:
Seismically triggered landslides are a
              common phenomena associated with earthquakes in mountainous regions. The
              September 21, 1999, Chi Chi, Taiwan earthquake and subsequent large aftershocks
              generated more than 1,800 landslides throughout the central mountain region of
              Taiwan.  What makes these landslides particularly interesting for follow up
              studies is the fact that the earthquake activated instruments at more than 700
              free-field acceleration sites.  Consequently, with this large database of
              recorded ground motions we now have a unique opportunity to directly relate the
              extent and type of slope failure to the magnitude of shaking and to evaluate
              our capability of GIS based models to assess seismic slope stability on a
              regional and local scale.

One of the principal problems in being able to
              develop an accurate predictive GIS based slope stability model is the
              resolution of the baseline information, which consists of many layers of data
              collected from various sources.  In Taiwan, such data resides in CEDAMS (Chi
              Chi Earthquake Database Analysis & Management Systems), which provides on-line
              analysis and management functions for about 15-20 Giga Bytes of data available
              in the form of aerial photos, SPOT images, basic datasets of disaster areas,
              Digital Terrain Maps and digital maps in the Chi Chi Earthquake database.  The
              main problem is making sure that the database contains the right type of
              information with sufficient accuracy for future analyses.  Thus, the immediate
              objective of this one-year effort is to take advantage of this large amount of
              data and to concentrate on the task of collecting detailed field data on a
              small subset of the landslides.  Digital field mapping techniques based on GPS
              positioning will be used in order to augment the existing database with more
              accurate topographic information.  This information will be used to define
              sharp breaks in the terrain, such as the top and toe of the slopes, stream
              banks, road cuts, ridges or other locations of abrupt surface change. 
              Furthermore, accurate mapping of landslide scarps, local geology, and an
              assessment of strength characteristics will be needed.  These data will then be
              coupled with best interpretation of the local ground motions in order to
              calibrate the model.


