Title       : GOALI: A Highly Efficient Electrolytic In-process Dressing Method for High-speed
               Ultra-precision Grinding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0085022

Award Number: 0085022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhenqi Zhu zzhu2@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhongxue Gan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sivagnanam Thangam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
              provides funding for the development of a highly efficient electrolytic
              in-process dressing method that is inherently consistent, efficient, and
              cost-effective in controlling the level of super-abrasive grit protrusion
              during high-speed grinding.  High-speed electrolytic in-process dressing
              systems (HELID), an innovative high-speed in-process dressing system, will be
              developed to overcome the technical barrier existing in today's
              state-of-the-art electrolytic in-process dressing (ELID) method developed in
              Japan.  The HELID method will be designed to work with a wheel surface speed of
              up to 350 m/s, while existing ELID does not function well at wheel speeds over
              30 m/s.  HELID with a moving-foil electrode and HELID with a hydrodynamic
              electrode will be studied.    This study will include (1) modeling of the fluid
              dynamics of the HELID based on the moving-foil electrode and hydrodynamic
              electrode, (2) modeling of electrolytic process at high speeds, (3) HELID
              grinding and process control, and (4) simulation and experimental study.
              

Sharpening or dressing high-speed precision grinding wheels today means
              that machines have to be slowed down or stopped.  This interruption of
              high-speed grinding process, reduces productivity and results in inconsistent
              grinding performance.  Skilled machinists have to be used today as dressing is
              more an art than a science, making the costly, time-consuming grinding the
              least automated among machining processes.  Despite considerable research
              effort over the years, inconsistent and inefficient dressing of high-speed
              grinding wheels remains a serious problem for industry.   If successful, the
              results of this research are expected to significantly improve grinding
              productivity over the existing approaches without sacrificing accuracy and
              surface integrity.  The method will contribute to the development of scientific
              tools which can significantly enhance automation in grinding.  

