Title       : LEXEN: Microbial Life in Freshwater Hydrothermal Vent Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a0085515

Award Number: 0085515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $518485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen Aguilar aguilar@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell L. Cuhel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Wimpee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Paddock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Microbial Life in Freshwater Hydrothermal Vent Systems.

Carmen
              Aguilar  EAR-085515

Understanding physical, chemical and biochemical
              characteristics of organisms that thrive at high temperatures has been a hot
              topic in exobiology and evolutionary biology.  The organisms can be a link to
              ancient organisms and can be a key to the early evolution and development of
              life.  One of the theories is that life arose under reducing conditions with
              high temperatures, similar to the hydrothermal vent systems that are currently
              found on Earth.  These high temperature systems are relevant to understanding
              extreme environments on Earth as well as other planets and moons in our Solar
              System.

Yellowstone Lake, WY is located in the caldera of the largest
              volcanic eruptions , the area  is well known for its steaming geysers,
              shimmering thermal pools and bubbling mudpots.  Equally relevant, though not
              visible, are the hydrothermal vents submerged under the northern area of
              Yellowstone Lake.  These vents exist within spatial microbiogeochemical
              domains, which may mimic conditions of early Earth and perhaps other planets. 
              The bacteria inhabiting vent systems have access to the reduced minerals and
              oxidizing agents necessary to support lithotrophic life.  Mineral inputs to
              Yellowstone Lake come from a variety of sources, namely hydrothermal vents,
              ground water, rain water, flux from sediments and direct runoff (including
              tributaries). Approximately one third of Yellowstone Lake is directly
              influenced by hydrothermal activity (hot water vents and fumaroles).  Mass
              balance suggests that microbes play an important part in modifying lake
              chemistry using vent chemical inputs.  It is the intention of the proposed work
              to identify and characterize denizens of the extreme high temperature (to 143C)
              and caustic mineral (pH to 4.5, H2S to 1mM, elevated trace metals, etc.) output
              of freshwater hydrothermal vents and identify their metabolic signature upon
              the geochemical record.

Using a Remote Operated Vehicle with well-developed
              sampling capabilities, we propose to sample water chemistry and microbial
              populations in underwater hot vents of the Yellowstone Geothermal Ecosystem. 
              We will then conduct microbiological and geochemical analyses aimed at
              determining the metabolic processes promoting life in the habitats and
              tolerances of the organisms to extreme conditions.  Particular effort will be
              directed towards elucidating mineral reactants and products of microbial
              metabolism under the harsh vent water conditions.



