Title       : New York City Urban Systemic Program (USP) in Science, Mathematics and
               Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0085062

Award Number: 0085062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold O. Levy chancellor@nycboe.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith A. Rizzo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell K. Hotzler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y City Board of Educ
	      52 Chambers Street - Room 320
	      New York, NY  10007    212/374-0200

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

New York City Board of Education
By-Borough Prototype
              Implementation Model
Building Standards Based Educational Environments as
              Models of Systemic Reform in Mathematics and Science
ESR-00-85062

The
              overarching goal of this effort is to provide the professional development and
              support to district and school teams that will build their capacity to develop
              Standards Based Educational Environments and become models for systemic reform
              in Mathematics and Science.  This one-year grant award provides limited
              resources to the New York City Board of Education (NYCBoE), in collaboration
              with the City University of New York (CUNY), for a scalable reform model in one
              of New York City's five boroughs. 

The NYCBoE Borough of Queens is a set of
              districts that are representative of the entire set of forty districts and
              serves approximately one-fourth of the entire student population.  Each
              district within the Borough of Queens will have six (6) elementary, four (4)
              middle and two (2) high schools engaged in the prototype model.  This will
              result in 84 schools that will serve as models and mentors for other schools in
              future years.  

The prototype borough model will include:
 Borough-wide
              professional development activities, individual district specific activities,
              and school specific activities.  Schools will have teams trained to provide
              professional development on mathematics and science standards, implementation
              of standards-based curricula and standards based assessment;
 Meaningful
              Action Research on Teacher Practice developed to track the progress of
              instructional reform;
 Formation of study groups and learning communities as
              one professional development strategy;
 The use of New Standards Performance
              Standards Applied Learning in Mathematics, Science and Technology curricula;

              Engagement of colleges and universities to supply support in improving the
              "content" knowledge of teachers and in increasing the number of "certified
              teachers;" 
 Collaboration with colleges and universities towards changing the
              Mathematics and Science Teacher Education Curricula to include the use of the
              New York City Customized versions of the New Standards Performance Standards in
              Mathematics and Science;
 Preference for teachers of model schools for
              participation in professional development with outside science-rich
              institutions; and
 Development of standards based field trip activities in
              cooperation with science-rich institutions.

Through a one-year grant, NYCBoE
              will engage in forging the necessary elements and demonstrating the efficacy of
              the "by-borough" model while building the capacity of the borough to move to
              full scale within the borough.  Further, the learnings from this prototype will
              be refined to assist the other four boroughs in moving towards full
              implementation of reform efforts leading to improved student achievement in
              mathematics and science for all students.  The NYCBoE will also continue
              citywide endeavors, which are not funded through this grant, for district teams
              from all the boroughs, in the sustained effort to support standards-based
              mathematics learning across the entire system.   

