Title       : ITR: A Multiresolution Analysis for the Global Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0085984

Award Number: 0085984
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2609584            (Estimated)
Investigator: Amos Ron amos@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Donoho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andy Ogielski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Willinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid Daubechies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1661,9102,9141,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   An interdisciplinary team, bridging academia and industry, proposes a
              united effort to study the dynamics of the global Internet, moving beyond the
              traditional single-timescale, single-network, single-protocol paradigm to a
              description that compactly incorporates a wide range of time-scales, a broad
              spectrum of spatial network topology structures, andmultiple protocols
              interacting with one another and across the different networking layers.
              Achieving such a global, multi-scale, and multi-layer understanding of complex
              large-scale networks is imperative for the successful design and development of
              the next-generation Internet protocols and engineering tools, where issues
              related to robustness,scalability, and efficiency take center stage.
     In
              this united effort, there are three main ingredients. First, the researchers
              plan to fully exploit a new breed of datasets of network-wide measurements -
              unprecedented in volume and quality - that are the result of recent exciting
              networking research projects, such as the National Internet Measurement
              Infrastructure project (NIMI). Another source of such data will be various
              Internet Service Providers (ISPs), such as AT&T, employer of one of the PIs,
              which will also provide supplementary funding if this proposal is accepted.
              Second, the researchers will rely on a new breed of network simulation tools,
              such as SSFNET, largely developed by another of our PIs, and capable of
              simulating internetworks unprecedented in scale and detail. All these new
              measurements, whether real or virtual, will constitute huge datasets with very
              high and networking-specific semantic content, creating completely novel
              challenges for data analysis. This is where the third ingredient comes in:
              multiscale and multiresolution/wavelet techniques, developed by several of the
              PIs, will take center stage when it comes to analyzing, visualizing, and
              uncovering the rich information that is contained in these network
              measurements. Although the flexibility and the speed of wavelet decompositions
              have been put to good use in the past in many applications, including the
              empirical observation of certain types of time-scaling behaviors in measured
              network traffic, the technology as it is known and used today cannot yet cope
              with the fascinating new challenges posed by the available and anticipated
              Internet data. A central objective of this project is to develop
              Internet-appropriate multiresolution techniques that match the multiscale
              nature of the underlying Internet structure and can be validated step-by-step
              against measurements. The researchers  expect that tools and theories that have
              been developed in the context of computer graphics, irregular sampling, and
              scattered data approximation will be utilized to this end.
     The ultimate
              goal of the proposed research effort is to identify interesting patterns that
              can be extracted from the measured data via fast algorithms, that are linked to
              physical concepts and are meaningful in the networking context, that
              characterize different states or behaviors of the network, and that can aid the
              development of novel network measurement analysis and visualization techniques
              in support of a new generation of monitoring and engineering tools for future
              Internet architectures. Given that so much of this area is still uncharted, it
              may be not realistic to hope to attain this goal in a few years' time.
              Nevertheless, we are convinced that only an interdisciplinary effort like ours
              can hope to achieve anything in this direction; we expect that our
              collaboration will lead to deeper insights and understanding; a first
              identification of models, patterns, the  influences of various external factors
              and protocols; and an initial glimpse at the underlying "physics of the
              Internet" - a solid understanding of how basic networking mechanisms and user
              behaviors contribute to the fascinating dynamic observed in today's Internet.

