Title       : Threading Information Pathways Through NSDL Video
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0085834

Award Number: 0085834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard D. Wactlar wactlar@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Christel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander G. Hauptmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The services being developed in this project will enable patrons of the future
              National Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Education Digital
              Library (NSDL) to efficiently locate video resources and meld them into
              compositions that effectively support particular objectives.

Video is a rich
              medium for communicating visual, time-dependent phenomena and for providing
              real-world footage capable of illustrating and motivating science and
              mathematics concepts. Vast collections of video have captured field studies and
              experiments, documented discoveries in space and throughout our planet, and
              recorded events in our world and in micro-environments not accessible to the
              human eye. However, despite their potential for use in educational settings,
              video resources are often discounted or overlooked by science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology (SMET) educators and students. Barriers
              include:

-- Loss of investment made by authors of video compositions who
              blaze pathways through the video information space. These pathways remain
              unmapped, and hence undiscovered by other information foragers with similar
              requirements.

-- Lack of support to tailor video resources to specific
              needs.

-- Frustration in searching and browsing video, as much time is
              invested in viewing numerous video clips to gauge their relevance.

--
              Inability to locate pertinent video material, due to insufficient indexing of
              its contents.

This project is exploring ways to overcome these barriers by
              capturing and managing the threads of video information access, use, and reuse
              within the NSDL. Specifically, the project is working on the following
              services:

-- Creation and organization of annotations for video compositions
              and information pathways, enabling a dynamic information repository where one's
              diligent work in producing a stellar video lesson plan can be recognized,
              rewarded, archived, and reused in future overlays of video information.

--
              Support for composition of video lesson plans and multimedia essays from
              component clips meeting the time, message, and pedagogical requirements of the
              NSDL patron.

-- Explicit video annotation mechanisms, whereby NSDL patrons
              can access reviews and other commentary aligned and synchronized with video
              resources.

-- Implicit annotation mechanisms for video, allowing information
              retrieval schemes with relevance judgments based on access frequency and
              incorporation of video resources into derivative works.

-- Enhanced
              content-based video search functionality derived from the integration of speech
              recognition, language processing, and image processing automated
              techniques.

The project's focus on video complements the research of others
              focusing directly on the text or image domains. The project team is
              well-positioned to pursue this work, given their past accomplishments with the
              "Informedia" project (NSF Award Nos. 9411299 and 9817496).
