Title       : One Hour Ahead Computation of Large-Scale Electric Power Network Transport
               Capability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0085717

Award Number: 0085717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Thomas rjt1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Sauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley A. Minch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1607,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport
              Industries (ETI) program solicitation.  This research involves the development
              of a scalable special-purpose hybrid computing architecture comprising
              fine-grained parallel analog processing and digital control and
              reconfigurability to accelerate the computation of large-scale electric power
              network transfer capacity.  The research in this one-year exploratory program
              will proceed concurrently along three lines.  First, the core analog
              computational units needed to solve the steady-state power-flow problem will be
              designed, simulated, fabricated, and tested experimentally to determine their
              potential accuracy and computational throughput.  Second, the parallel analog
              solution method will be developped and refined through simulation.  Third, work
              on a scalable architecture will be initiated.  The architecture should support
              digital reconfigurability as well as the control, communications, and data
              storage needed for the solution of large-scale network problems.  If this
              research is successful, it could result eventually in the development of a
              specialized chip set or an accelerator board that would interface with an
              engineering workstation and could perform a near real-time solution of the
              steady-state power-flow equations.  Such an accelerator board would be
              something like the specialized graphics cards that are widely for used for
              accelerating compute-intensive computer graphics tasks.
