Title       : ITR: High-Speed Distributed Wireless Communication Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0085929

Award Number: 0085929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1814162            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Hajek b-hajek@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Blahut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Naresh Shanbhag  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rayadurgam Srikant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1661,4095,4720,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research studies the design of agile wireless networks that
              accommodate time
variations in the communication channels, the information
              sources, and the network topology. The research will lead to design principles
              that, in addition to enabling more efficient use of the current cellular and
              PCS bands, will allow exploitation of frequency bands in the 10-100 GHz range
              to provide high-speed multimedia services for both indoor and outdoor
              applications. While the basic cellular paradigm of wireless access to a
              high-speed communication and computing backbone will be adhered to, nearly
              every other assumption in existing second-generation and projected
              third-generation cellular and PCS networks will be reexamined. Some of the
              significant differences from current designs are as follows. A dense network of
              base stations will provide connectivity despite the high path losses and sharp
              shadowing at higher frequency bands. Cells with well-defined boundaries may no
              longer exist, and mobile terminals will see a rapidly varying network topology.
              A variety of traffic classes, such as voice, data, and video, with diverse
              requirements regarding delay, loss, quality of reproduction, and number of
              potential receivers will be considered. Packetized transmission will be
              considered as a flexible means of supporting such multimedia applications so
              that current circuit-based cellular trunking is not applicable.
A key element
              of the approach is to envision new applications and new overall system
              architec-
tures. Modeling based on propagation studies and analysis of
              requirements for carried datastreams will be used both to continually revise
              the concept systems and to provide models for the design of algorithms for such
              things as joint implementation of source coding, channel estimation,
              interference suppression, routing and congestion control. The performance of
              the algorithms will be evaluated broadly, including aspects of implementation
              in VLSI as appropriate, and the results will lead to further revision and
              refinement of the overall system architecture. Many tradeoffs will be explored,
              such as the tradeoff_ between the performance of distributed soft detection and
              the network capacity needed to assemble the required information. The
              integrated research effort will be conducted by five overlapping research teams
              of University of Illinois faculty investigators and their students, organized
              around the following interdisciplinary
projects:

Concept Systems, Modeling,
              and Performance Limits

Design Principles for Wireless Packet
              Networks

Design for Time-Varying Channels

Jointly Optimized Source
              Coding, Channel Coding, and Estimation

VLSI Algorithms, Architectures, and
              Bounds
The bulk of the requested funding will be used to support the students.
              Most of the faculty and
students have adjacent offices within the Coordinated
              Science Laboratory, an environment carefully cultivated to promote intense
              interaction and collaboration. Regularly scheduled weekly meetings of the
              investigators are used to coordinate the research and identify opportunities
              for better integration of the design approach. An External Advisory Committee
              of key technical people from industry will help ensure that the research is
              focused on problems and issues likely to be important in the future.  This
              proposal is to supplement NSF grant NSF CCR 79381 \An Integrated Exploration of
              Wireless Network Communication." That grant is funded at a level of $700K for
              three years beginning October 1, 1999, whereas the original funding request was
              for $2.5M over five years. Although the proposal was rated as highly
              competitive, the funding received covers only six students and no faculty time.
              Additional funding will greatly enhance our ability to achieve our research and
              educational goals.  

Keywords: Wireless networks, fading channels,
              multimedia communications

