Title       : Scheduling, Communication and Control of Traffic Flow with Heterogeneous Vehicle
               Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0085695

Award Number: 0085695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juraj V. Medanic jmedanic@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tamer Basar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rahim Benekohal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher P. Barkan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1607,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This award is being made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering
              Transport Industries (ETI) Program solicitation.
 
Advances in Information
              and communication technology offer significant potential to relieve pressures
              of highway and railway operation. A class of problems is considered where
              technological advances offer significant potential to increase the capacity of
              the systems and reduce congestion (and thereby loss of human life and properly,
              lost time, pollution levels and fuel cost) by safer and more efficient
              scheduling and control of the system. The common features are the concentration
              on the Longitudinal dynamics of the flow of traffic (on highways or railways),
              the need to coordinate a large number of individual control units, and the use
              of simulation models to assess the characteristics of the longitudinal dynamics
              and the affects of controls on efficiency, capacity and safety. Communication
              means best suited to support the resulting control architecture are also
              identified.

Semi-automated or fully automated driving on multi-lane urban
              highway systems is one of the central issues in alleviating urban congestion.
              Considered is the system-wide lane assignment problem, whereby an Urban Highway
              System Control Center (UHSCC) assigns to each vehicle a lane of travel (in each
              section of the highway) so as to maximize highway capacity. Simple models show
              that maneuvers have a significant effect on capacity, and that their number
              should be kept at a minimum. Suitable algorithm are developed to assign lanes
              to vehicles depending on their trip itinerary, based on the assumption that
              trip itineraries are concentrated in the UHSCC so that this information, not
              available to individual drivers, can be used to resolve this system-wide
              control problem. The use of Arcs (in some or all vehicles) can also increase
              the capacity because the reaction curve of the AVCS does not increase the
              inter-vehicle distance in function of lane velocity, and will, theoretically,
              maintain a set distance between vehicles. The average reaction curve of the
              AVCS controlled vehicles is estimated through simulations and used in lane
              assignment algorithms to balance excess lane capacity and I the capacity of the
              highway.

Trains equipped with Positive Train Control (PTC) equipment and
              electronically controlled pneumatic (ECP) brakes have e significant potential
              to increase railway capacity. The problem of articulated braking of freight
              trains is one of the important control problems in railway transportation in US
              where the predominant type of railway transport is freight transport over long
              distances using trains consisting of over a hundred cars and three to four
              engines. Braking characteristics determine the safe stopping distance and the
              capacity of a railway section. A significant opportunity for better prediction
              of stopping times, safer braking on long grades, on undulating terrain and/or
              curved terrain, and for coordinated use of brakes in emergency conditions, is
              now available with ECP brake systems because the brake on each unit can be
              controlled individually. Algorithms are developed to better understand and
              exploit these possibilities.

