Title       : Separation and Recovery of Ions from Aqueous Media with Redox-Recyclable
               Metal-Complex Extractants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2001      
File        : a0085892

Award Number: 0085892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318429             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Strauss strauss@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

Proposal No.:		CTS-0085892
Proposal Type:		Investigator Initiated
              Renewal
Principal Investigators: 	Steven H. Strauss	
Institution:		Colorado
              State University 

Separation and Recovery of Ions from Aqueous Media with
              Redox-Recyclable Metal-Complex Extractants

Development of methods for the
              selective and efficient extraction of ionic species from water and the recovery
              of the target ions in a minimal volume of secondary waste using
one-electron,
              redox-active, recyclable molecular extractants continues along with an
              investigation of the underlying scientific principles.  The "redox-recyclable"
              extractants are sterically demanding iron complexes which are shuttled between
              their neutral (deactivated) states and their monoanionic or monocationic
              (activated) states.  New extractants with improved performance are being
              prepared, as are new composite ion-exchange materials made from them.  Some of
              the latter will be activated and deactivated electrochemically, avoiding the
              need for chemical oxidants and reductants in the complete
              extraction/deactivation-stripping/reactivation cycle. Recovery schemes that
              allow the target ions to be isolated as crystalline salts, a truly minimal
              volume of secondary waste, are also being developed.  The use of these new
              adsorbent materials for highly-sensitive FTIR or electrochemical real-time,
              in-pipe detectors for selected target ions is also being explored.

The
              capabilities provided by this new separation technique can have a significant
              impact in environmental protection.  Among the ions that have been selected for
              new extraction and/or detection processes are those that pose a direct threat
              to the environment, such as perchlorate (groundwater pollution in several
              western states), cyanide (runoff from many mining operations), dimethylarsenate
              (groundwater pollution), cationic pesticides such as monoquats, fluorinated
              surfactants (including perfluorooctylsulfonate, the manufacture of which has
              been recently discontinued because of its possible threat to human health). 
              In
addition, this project can contribute to the efficiency of important
              biotechnological processes.  Other target ions also include selected
              pharmaceuticals such as penicillins, prostagladins, and methotrexate cations,
              because the new extraction processes will be efficacious for their isolation
              from reaction mixtures and fermentation broths generated in current
              manufacturing processes.


