Title       : Collaborative Research: Self-organized Criticality Blackouts and Disruptions in
               Power and Communications System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0085711

Award Number: 0085711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64812              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Dobson dobson@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1607,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is made under the Exploratory Research on Engineering the Transport
              Industries (ETI) program solicitation.  The United States depends on the smooth
              functioning of its electrical power and communication systems infrastructure. 
              To minimize disruptions to these complex systems, it is necessary to
              understand, predict and control their responses to outside perturbations.  The
              concept of self- organized criticality (SOC) brings together ideas of
              self-organization of nonlinear dynamical systems with the often observed near
              critical behavior of many natural phenomena.  This work advances the
              understanding of self-organized criticality in these systems.  The primary
              focus of work is electric power system blackouts and the secondary focus is
              disruptions in communication systems.

Initial analyses of time series of
              power system blackout sizes and internet congestion show evidence of long time
              correlations, which are consistent with SOC behavior.  We will expand and
              deepen these initial analyses of experimental data.  We will develop and
              analyze simulation models capturing SOC effects in electric power systems and
              communication networks.  Initial work suggests a heuristic explanation of SOC
              in electric power system blackouts.  We will test and refine this initial
              heuristic explanation by analyzing simulation models.  We will determine the
              extent to which electric power system blackouts and communication system
              networks show SOC in their global complex dynamics.

