Title       : Modeling of Tool-Wear Based on Tool Temperatures and Decomposed Cutting Forces
               in Turning with Grooved Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a0085126

Award Number: 0085126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ibrahim S. Jawahir   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant is aimed at modeling tool-wear in grooved tools based on its
              relationships with cutting forces, stresses, temperatures and tool-chip contact
              in 2-D machining and turning.  Experimental work involves measurement of tool
              temperature distributions, tool-chip contact length and tool-wear parameters. 
              The results from the experimental work will provide important modeling
              parameters and boundary conditions for a predictive 2-D model (numerical) for
              forces, stresses and temperatures.  The first phase of the project is focused
              on establishing comprehensive relationships among tool-wear and tool
              temperatures, stresses and tool geometry parameters.  The effects of a finite
              cutting edge radius on tool-wear and tool temperatures will also be
              investigated. In the second phase, turning experiments with grooved tools will
              be performed to collect data on 3-D tool-wear, temperatures, forces and
              tool-chip contact.  A modeling approach based on decomposition of cutting
              forces at different wear regions of a grooved tool will be extended to
              correlate tool-wear with forces and temperatures using the effective 2-D
              chip-flow direction.  The results from this approach will be used in developing
              an integrated hybrid 3-D predictive model, involving
              analytical-numerical-empirical approaches. 

The anticipated major benefit
              from this project is the development of a new, fundamental modeling approach
              for tool-wear.  Machining operations constitute a large segment of the
              manufacturing sector in the US.  There has been a growing need for developing
              robust models and methodologies to enable reliable and accurate predictions of
              machining performance measures in process planning to ensure the highest
              quality of machined products with maximized productivity.  The tool-wear rate
              has significant correlation with other important machining performance measures
              such as chip-form/chip breakability, surface roughness/surface integrity and
              part accuracy.  Traditional models for tool-life/tool-wear have been heavily
              empirical due to the complexity of the problem; hence, the current project
              advocates the use of a hybrid modeling methodology.  The expected results from
              this project will provide fundamental new knowledge for tool-wear predictions
              in machining with grooved tools.  The results will also serve process planners
              in selecting the most appropriate cutting tools and cutting conditions for
              maximized machining performance, especially with respect to
              tool-wear/tool-life.
