Title       : Collaborative LExEn Research on the Role of Exopolymers in Arctic Sea Ice:
               Habitat Alteration and Microbial Cryoprotection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0085457

Award Number: 0085457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jody W. Deming jdeming@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hajo Eicken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Krembs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1075,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Exopolymeric substances (EPS), secreted in the form of mucous slime by aquatic
              microorganisms, are known to play important roles in marine ecosystems.  The
              proposed research will investigate the potential for exopolymeric substances to
              alter the microstructure of the sea-ice habitat and to serve as cryoprotectants
              for microorganisms dwelling within ice structures.  Main research goals are as
              follows: (1) to determine how and to what extent the pool of EPS present in sea
              ice may result in an alteration of the microhabitat; (2) to assess the
              potential role of EPS as cryoprotection; and (3) to determine the major sea-ice
              producers of EPS along with relevant environmental cues for bulk and specific
              exopolymer production.  These objectives will be pursued through a combination
              of laboratory and field studies, including culture-based and open-air
              ice-growth. The role of polymers in ice desalination processes (through their
              effects on brine viscosity and ice permeability) and in preventing pore closure
              at very low temperatures will also be investigated.  These findings will be
              compared to in-situ EPS production by bacterial and diatom communities under
              quasi-natural conditions.  The cryoprotectant effects of EPS and their
              associations with highly concentrated wintertime brines will be examined
              directly with in-situ experimentation in the Arctic ice sheet near Barrow,
              Alaska.  The proposed work is relevant not only to low-temperature survival
              strategies and their impact on the physical environment, but also in the
              general context of polar marine ecology and carbon cycling, radiative and other
              transfer properties of the polar ice cap, industrial applications in
              cryobiology, and the potential habitability of Jovian moons.

