Title       : Functional Restoration of the Intervertebral Disc Using Novel Hydrogel
               Copolymers as Nucleus Pulposus Replacements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0085383

Award Number: 0085383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele S. Marcolongo marcolms@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony M. Lowman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0085383
Marcolongo
Over five million Americans suffer from chronic lower back
              pain making it the number one cause of lost work days in the United States and
              one of the most expensive health care issues today.  While the causes of lower
              back pain remain unclear, it is believed that 75% of the cases are associated
              with degenerative disc disease, where the intervertebral disc of the spine
              suffers reduced mechanical functionality due to dehydration of the nucleus
              pulposus.  Current treatments include conservative bed rest, discetomy or
              spinal fusion.  Each treatment may be successful in alleviating patient pain,
              but no current treatment will restore biomechanical function to the disc or
              prevent further degeneration.  Our general premise is that if the initial
              dehydration of the degenerated nucleus can be arrested and a fully hydrated
              state returned to the disc, the degenerative process (including the associated
              pain) would be postponed or prevented and the mechanical function would be
              restored to the vertebral segment.  To accomplish this objective, the
              investigators propose replacement of the nucleus with a biocompatible, hydrogel
              polymer implant made from a novel polymer blend of poly vinyl alcohol (PVA)
              with poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP).  The investigators put forth that the
              addition of PVP to the PVA will result in a new hydrogel system that will
              exhibit high stability in vivo and provide adequate mechanical properties while
              maintaining biocompatibility.  The increased stability of these gels is due to
              hydrogen bonding between the PVA and PVP chains and the formation of
              interpolymer complexes.  In addition, the hydrogel is a memory material,
              meaning that it can remember or regain geometry from its hydrated to dehydrated
              states.  The investigators will exploit this material property in order to
              insert the implant into the nuclear cavity arthroscopically, enabling this
              procedure to be performed in a minimally invasive manner resulting in an
              approach that is extremely attractive to both patient and surgeon.

For this
              work, the investigators will establish a relationship between material
              composition, processing, and properties so that they more fully understand the
              material behavior of the PVA/PVP hydrogel blends.  The dehydration/rehydration
              characteristics of the hydrogel to establish its feasibility for arthroscopic
              implantation will be investigated.  The investigators will then optimize the
              hydrogel properties so that the mechanical behavior of a spinal segment with
              the implanted disc most closely matches that of the intact spinal segment.  In
              this project, the investigators propose to:

1.  Synthesize novel co-polymer
              gels based on PVA and PVP.  Characterize the degradation of the hydrogel in
              vitro  to establish the material stability over time as determined by weight
              loss, changes in surface chemistry and changes in the degree of crystallinity. 
              In addition, the investigators will examine the static mechanical and
              viscoelastic behavior of the hydrogels as a function of immersion time in
              vitro.

2.  Optimize the dehydration/rehydration conditions of the PVA/PVP
              hydrogel necessary to facilitate arthroscopic implantation of the disc while
              retaining adequate mechanical properties.

3.  Perform two-dimensional finite
              element modeling of a simplified lumbar segment to evaluate the effect of
              implant material properties on stiffness of the lumbar segment under
              compressive loading as compared to an intact lumbar segment.

4.  Compare the
              biomechanics of a natural lumbar vertebral segment with those after replacement
              with the hydrogel nucleus in a cadaver model to ascertain the ability of a
              nuclear prosthesis to restore function to the segment.



