Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: 'Free' Bits: The Challenge of the Wireless Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0085986

Award Number: 0085986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $856997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy D. Yates ryates@winlab.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Narayan Mandayam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1661,4095,4096,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Second and third generation wireless systems have been designed primarily for
              voice, so they are con-nection oriented, delay sensitive, and provide fixed bit
              rates. Additionally, since service is desired "any-time/anywhere," these
              systems must provide ubiquitous coverage. This coverage is achieved through
              rela-tively uniform grids of cell sites, which are placed to control
              interference and minimize outage rather than to maximize throughout. As a
              result, such systems deliver low bit rates and are relatively expensive when
              used for large amounts of information. At the same time, wireline connection to
              the Internet has encouraged uses (and users) that depend upon bits being
              virtually "free." We contend that this "economic" mismatch between wired and
              wireless access is the primary obstacle to the dramatic growth of a wireless
              Internet.  The solution may lie in designing systems specifically for wireless
              data, recognizing that data services are often connectionless, delay
              insensitive and have no specific bit rate requirements. These differences
              suggest that ubiquitous (anytime/anywhere) coverage is not a strict requirement
              for wireless data networks and makes possible systems in which small, separated
              coverage areas facilitate transfers of megabytes of data in fractions of a
              second, and for a fraction of the cost associated with conventional ubiquitous
              coverage.  Communication theory and simple link budget calculations tell us
              that it is possible to build such sys-tems, but the signal processing
              challenges are numerous and distinct from the historical challenges offered by
              connection-oriented wireless services. When a mobile user passes an
              Infostation, there will be a window of opportunity, perhaps as short as a
              fraction of a second, in which the user will have access to a high-rate
              communication channel. A key task is to identify that window and transmit at an
              appropriate rate. The mobile must make these decisions based on measurements of
              a wideband radio channel in which there is frequency selectivity and time
              variation in the fading as well as in the interference. In the specific
              context
of an Infostations system, we plan to divide our research into four
              components:  

Radio Channel Modeling: The characterization of typical
              Infostation radio channels. 

Transceiver Design: The analysis and
              performance evaluation of transmitters and receivers for both single carrier
              and multicarrier systems.

Radio Resource Management Transmitter power and
              rate adaptation policies derived from receiver measurements.

Algorithm
              Development Testbed A platform employing DSP and FPGA technology for the
              practical evaluation of transmitter and receiver algorithms. 

The activities
              of this project will encompass three research institutions in New Jersey (New
              Jersey In-stitute of Technology, Princeton University, Rutgers University)
              under the auspices of the N.J. Center for Wireless Telecommunications (NJCWT).
              The NJCWT is an inter-institutional research and educational or-ganization
              sponsored and funded by the N.J. Commission on Science and Technology. The
              focus of the center is a multi-year effort in Digital Radio Technology for
              Computing, Communications and Information Systems. This effort is supportive of
              and will enhance the present proposed project in wireless networks.

