Title       : Characterization of the Drosophila Four-Jointed Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9418450

Award Number: 9418450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Flora N. Katz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418450  Katz    The adult form is built on a scaffold of information laid down
              in three axes during development: the anterior-posterior, dorsal-ventral, and
              proximal-distal (PD) axes. The PD axis is used in the formation of the limbs,
              to set distance from the trunk. When molecules needed to initiate or interpret
              this axis are abnormal or absent, the limbs fail to form or are grossly
              distorted in morphology. In the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, we are just
              beginning to understand how PD axes are established at specific positions in
              the embryo, but virtually nothing is known about how the individual cells in
              the developing limb read this axis in order to elaborate segments with
              different lengths and identities. However, molecules must exist that can
              respond to this axis, set boundaries, and control growth regionally during limb
              morphogenesis. The four-jointed (fj) gene appears to have some of the
              properties expected for molecules involved in these latter events. It is
              expressed at prospective segment boundaries in the developing leg, its absence
              results in partial loss and fusion of segments, and it interacts with a group
              of genes that are required for growth control in the limbs. The molecular
              characterization of a suggests it encodes a cell surface molecule. The present
              proposal is concerned with further exploring the biochemical, developmental,
              and functional properties of this molecule, and revealing the biochemical
              pathway in which it participates. By looking for interactions with genes that
              produce similar abnormalities when they are mutant, we have recently shown that
              mutations in the abelson gene, which can mutate to a cancerous (oncogenic) form
              in humans, interacts with , fj mutations in Drosophila, suggesting these genes
              might share a common pathway. Since very little is known about the normal
              function of the abelson protein, our studies may also contribute to a better
              understanding of this important molecule. The richness of the genetic
              interactions already uncovered suggest thes e studies may reveal a new pathway
              of genes involved in limb development. As it has become apparent that molecules
              involved in setting the PD axis in flies are also involved in initiating the
              limb bud in vertebrates, demonstrating a remarkable conservation in strategy
              and function, molecules involved in the readout and realization of this axis
              may also be conserved. The exploration of, fj function may therefore not only
              provide insight into how a fly builds a leg, but may also provide clues to more
              general and fundamental morphogenetic mechanisms.
