Title       : Synthesis, Organization and Function of Ribonucleic Acid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1994  
File        : a9418632

Award Number: 9418632
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles D. Liarakos                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Perry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Cancer Research
	      7701 Burholme Avenue, Fox Chase
	      Philadelphia, PA  191112412    215/728-2490

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418632  Perry  The overall goal of this research is to elucidate molecular
              mechanisms that govern gene expression in eukaryotic cells. The proposed
              studies are aimed at understanding the role of an interesting DNA-binding
              protein, CHD1, in the determination of higher-order chromatin structure and the
              regulation of gene activity. CHD1 possesses certain structural features (a
              chromodomain and an ATPase/helicase domain), which relate it to other groups of
              chromatin-associated proteins that have been implicated in transcriptional
              regulation.  A broad spectrum of genetic and biochemical techniques will be
              used, including DNA transfection and microinjection experiments in a variety of
              cultured cells, immunofluorescence analyses, protein purification by column
              chromatography, gene cloning and sequencing, DNA-, RNA- and immuno-blotting,
              primer extension and nucleaseprotection assays, electrophoretic-mobility shift
              and DNA footprint analyses, and the production of wild-type and mutant proteins
              in bacteria. The studies will be carried out with mammalian cells, Drosophila
              and yeast.  The results of these studies should contribute substantially to our
              knowledge of gene regulation by defining factors that determine the
              accessibility of genes to the transcriptional apparatus and that help mediate
              cell-cycle dependent changes in chromatin condensation. Although an impressive
              body of facts pertaining to gene regulation has accumulated over the past
              several years, the general problems being addressed here remain largely
              unsolved.  %%%  The overall goal of this research is to elucidate molecular
              mechanisms that govern gene expression in eukaryotic cells.  The proposed
              studies are aimed at understanding the role of an interesting DNA-binding
              protein, CHD1, in the determination of higher-order chromatin structure and the
              regulation of gene activity, CHD1 possesses certain structural features which
              relate it to other groups of chromatin-associated proteins that have been
              implicated in transcriptional regulation.  A  broad spectrum of genetic and
              biochemical investigative techniques will be used and studies will be carried
              out with mammalian cells, Drosophila and yeast.  Although an impressive body of
              facts pertaining to gene regulation has accumulated over the past several
              years, the general problems being addressed here remain largely unsolved.  The
              results of these studies should contribute substantially to our knowledge of
              gene regulation by defining factors that determine the accessibility of genes
              to the transcriptional apparatus and that help mediate cell-cycle dependent
              changes in chromatin structure.  ***  ??
