Title       : Characterization of a Novel, Stationary-phase Gene in the Yeast Saccharomyces
               cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9418149

Award Number: 9418149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Anne Nelson manelson@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret C. Werner-Washburne  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9418149  Werner-Washburne  The long-term objective of this research is to gain
              insight into the molecular events involved in the process of entry into,
              survival during, and exit from stationary-phase arrest.  A novel protein whose
              synthesis is induced as cells approach stationary phase and whose accumulation
              is not detectable until 2 to 3 weeks after culture inoculation has been
              identified.  This protein, called p35, belongs to a family of proteins that is
              extremely conserved between prokaryotes (Archaea) and eukaryotes.  This gene
              family has not been isolated previously in yeast nor has it been described in
              the literature.  The broad phylogenetic conservation of the p35 gene family
              makes further study of this family compelling.  The novel, statimnary-phase
              expression of p35 makes studies of the function and regulation of the p35 gene
              family extremely likely to yield significant insights into the overall process
              of stationary-phase arrest in eukaryotes and, perhaps, also in prokaryotes. 
              This research involves classical genetic analysis in combination with molecular
              biological and biochemical approaches.  The specific aims are to:    1. 
              Characterize the p35 gene family.  This includes:   A) Isolating
              stationary-phase specific p35 and related genes as recombinant clones.    The
              method used for gene isolation will also allow the determination of how many 
              p35-related genes there are in yeast and their location in the genome.   B)
              Sequencing the isolated genes.   C) Preliminary examination of phylogenetic
              conservation. Hybridization analysis will be used to  determine the extent to
              which related genes are present in other eukaryotes and  prokaryotes.   D)
              Northern analysis to determine when mRNAs encoded by the p35-related genes 
              accumulate during the culture cycle.    2. Gain insight into the importance and
              function of p35 and related proteins in yeast.   This includes:   A) Disruption
              of p35 and related genes to determine if they encode essential proteins or if
              they  encode proteins with redunda nt, essential functions.   B) Phenotypic
              characterization of strains carrying mutations in p35 or p35-related genes. 
              Redundant genes will be identified by constructing strains carrying disruptions
              in two or  more p35-related genes. GALI promoter-p35 gene fusions, (which are
              repressed in  glucose and induced by galactose) will be constructed so  that 1)
              cells dying from lack of  p35 or a related protein and 2) cells expressing p35
              at high levels in exponential phase  may be studied.   C) Generation of an
              antibody to the conserved amino terminus of p35 and, later, to a  nonconserved
              region of the stationary-phase p35 to aid in identification of p35 related
              proteins and in quantitation of their accumulation during the life cycle.    3.
              Examine the regulation of expression of stationary-phase specific p35.  This
              includes:   A) Analysis of the relative importance of p35 transcription, mRNA
              stability, translation, and p35  protein turnover in regulation of p35
              expression in stationary phase. Transcription will  be measured using a p35
              promoter:lacZ fusion vector; mRNA stability will be  determined using a
              temperature sensitive  RNA polymerase II mutant; translation will be  measured
              by in vivo incorporation of labelled amino acids, and protein turnover will be 
              evaluated by a combination of biochemical and genetic approaches.  %%%  The
              study of yeast genes expressed during growth to high cell densities has
              application to the isolation of large quantities of gene products in industrial
              applications.  ***
