Title       : Regulating Stem Cell Fate and Proliferation in the Drosophila Male Germline
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1996   
File        : a9418271

Award Number: 9418271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen DiNardo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Stephen DiNardo  IBN 9418271    Cells within certain lineages must be
              continually replenished  throughout the life of an organism.  This is
              accomplished through  the establishment and maintenance of stem cells.  The
              mechanisms  that instruct stem cell fate and that regulate the proliferation of
               their daughter cells are poorly understood.  The overall objective  of this
              proposal is to investigate how stem cells are established  and maintained,
              using the model of Drosophila spermatogenesis that  provides a unique
              opportunity to combine experimental and genetic  approaches.  The experimental
              manipulations first proposed will  attempt to answer two questions:  does cell
              signaling instruct stem  cell fate?  and are the number of daughter cell
              divisions  internally programmed or controlled by neighboring cells?  The 
              first will be addressed by ablating the male hub cells, using a  diptheria
              toxin inducible system, to determine whether the  maintenance of the germline
              stem cell fate is governed by the  signals emanating from these somatic cells. 
              Heterospecific  transplantation experiments, using two species that differ in
              the  number of stem cell divisions, will determine if counting is  intrinsic to
              daughter germ cells, or imposed by signals from the  two somatic cells that
              surround them.  The genetic approaches  proposed will identify further
              mutations that interfere with these  decisions.  To identify genes that cause
              under- or  over-proliferation of germ cells, or that cause discrete  changes in
              the number of mitotic divisions, a powerful genetic  screen, using the FLP/FRT
              recombinase system, is proposed.   Molecular markers will be used to determine
              whether the primary  defect in the mutants selected is in the production,
              maintenace or  division of stem cells, or, alternatively, in the capacity of
              the  daughter cells to divide.       ***
