Title       : Nuclear Scaffolds and SARs in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9418491

Award Number: 9418491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Spiker steven_spiker@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418491  Spiker  In eukaryotic organisms, DNA is organized into a complex
              nucleic acid-protein structure called chromatin.  It has long been recognized
              that chromatin fibers can exist at varying levels of compaction and that the
              level has a controlling influence on gene expression.  In the last few years,
              evidence has accumulated that chromatin is organized into topologically
              constrained domains that are transcriptionally inert or transcriptionally
              active.  The domains consist of loops which are attached at their bases to a
              proteinaceous nuclear scaffold or matrix by DNA sequences called Scaffold
              Attachment Regions (SARs).  When cloned strong SARs from tobacco are used to
              flank a reporter gene construct, the SARs cause a 70-fold increase in
              expression of the reporter gene.  What causes this increase?  One hypothesis is
              that the flanking SARs allow the incorporated DNA to form its own independent
              loop domain--a domain free from the influence of the domain into which it was
              incorporated.  What then determines if such an artificial domain has an active
              chromatin structure?  The principal investigator will investigate these
              questions and related phenomena.  He will isolate a number of plant SARs and
              characterize and scaffold binding properties.  This will allow him to
              investigate what determines if a DNA sequence will bind to the nuclear
              scaffold.  His preliminary work has resulted in the discovery of a number of
              tobacco SARs with varying affinities for the nuclear scaffold.  These SARs will
              be used to test the hypothesis that SARs with greater affinity for the nuclear
              scaffold have a greater effect on transcription.  He will also isolate and
              characterize the specific proteins of the scaffold that are responsible for the
              binding.  He will investigate properties of the loop domains that may have an
              effect on the transcriptional activity of the domain.  These experiments are
              expected to yield valuable information about the chromatin structure of loop
              domains in plants and to have a practical applicati on in the control of gene
              expression in transgenic plants.  %%%  In eukaryotic organisms, DNA is
              organized into a complex nucleic acid-protein structure called chromatin.  IN
              the last few years, evidence has accumulated that chromatin is organized into
              loops or domains that vary in their degree of genetic expression.  The loops
              are attached at their bases to a proteinaceous nuclear scaffold by DNA
              sequences called Scaffold Attachment Regions (SAR's).  The investigator on this
              project will attempt to determine the defining characteristics of SAR's and the
              effects of various features of the SAR's on the degree of expression of the
              genes within their loops.  These experiments will be carried out in plants and
              are expected to broaden our understanding of basic plant genetics and to have a
              practical application in the control of gene expression in transgenic plants. 
              ***
