Title       : Collaborative Research: Global Phytogeography of the Early/Late Carboniferous
               Boundary Based on Spores and Pollen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9418424

Award Number: 9418424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Raymond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9418424  Raymond     Paleophytogeography, the study of the distribution of
              ancient land plants, helps us to understand the nature of ancient climate
              change and how climate change affects land-plant diversity.  The data for
              paleophytogeography studies come from two sources:  macrofloral assemblages
              (accumulations of fossil leaves, stems, seeds and other plant parts) and
              spore-pollen assemblages.  Compared to macrofloral assemblages, spore-pollen
              assemblages are easier to assign to narrow intervals of geologic time, have
              higher generic and species diversity, and may derive from a wider range of
              habitats (particularly more arid habitats).  These factors suggest that
              spore-pollen data should yield detailed and accurate phytogeographies;  however
              studies of spore-pollen and macrofloral phytogeography for the same interval
              seldom produce congruent results.  This proposal seeks funding to compile a
              mid-Carboniferous (333 to 315 Ma) spore-pollen database, identify and apply
              appropriate multivariate statistical techniques (including the Raup-Crick
              probabilistic similarity index, cluster analysis, and ordination techniques
              such as multidimensional scaling and reciprocal averaging analysis) for the
              phytogeographic analysis of spore-pollen data, and to complete phytogeographic
              studies of the mid-Carboniferous Eumorphoceras-, Homoceras-, Reticuloceras-,
              and Cancelloceras (G1)-goniatite zones (Namurian A through C).  Completion of
              this work will require detailed knowledge of North American spore-pollen
              assemblages during the mid-Carboniferous.  Thus, spore-pollen assemblages from
              the mid-Carboniferous of Kentucky, Alabama, Utah, and perhaps Nevada will be
              collected, studied, and described as a part of this project.  This will result
              in an improved spore-pollen biostratigraphic zonation for North America during
              the mid-Carboniferous, and improved global correlation for this interval.  The
              study interval includes the Early/Late Caroniferous boundary and coincides with
              the Laurussia-Gondwana collision as well as  glacial onset in the Southern
              Hemisphere, high-latitude cooling in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, and
              perhaps mid-latitude and equatorial climate change as well.  The results will
              establish the nature and timing of equatorial and mid-latitude climate change,
              yield insight into the development of ever-wet, ever-warm equatorial and dry
              mid-latitude floral communities as a result of glacial onset and/or continental
              collision, and document the effect of glaciation and continental collision on
              land-plant diversity.
