Title       : Permian and Triassic Palynostratigraphy of the Central Transantarctic Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1995      
File        : a9418093

Award Number: 9418093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Askin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project to establish a  palynostratigraphic framework for
              the Permian to  Triassic sedimentary rocks of the central Transantarctic 
              Mountains.  This will help provide a chronostratigraphic  reference for
              Antarctic studies.  Palynomorph data can  also add to knowledge of the
              composition of the Permian  and Triassic floras and has important biogeographic
              and  paleoclimatic implications.  This research will give a  clearer picture of
              the timing and nature of southern  high latitude biotic and climatic changes
              which are  vital for understanding causes and effects of the end-  Permian
              global biotic crisis and mass extinctions.    This work will concentrate on the
              Shackleton Glacier  area and includes one field season to collect samples  and
              two years of laboratory work.  Existing rock  collections as well as samples
              collected by other  geologists working in the Shackleton Glacier region will 
              also be utilized to obtain as complete a stratigraphic  section as possible. 
              Correlations will be made with  other parts of Gondwana and palynological data
              will be  integrated with other fossil and lithologic data to  establish a
              sound, process related stratigraphic  framework.    Field work will focus on
              the post-glacial sedimentary  units of the Victoria Group (Beacon Supergroup):
              the  Mackellar, Fairchild, Fremouw, and Falla Formations, and  their
              equivalents.  Except for marginally brackish,  inland-sea Mackellar beds, the
              succession consists of  fluvial and lacustrine deposits.  Palynomorphs in these
               rocks are almost entirely spores and pollen from land  plants, with occasional
              acritarchs.  The zonation will  build upon and formalize the preliminary
              zonation  established previously for southern Victoria Land.    Fossil spore
              and pollen assemblages can indicate their  parent plants and thus reflect at
              least part of the  indigenous vegetation.  This information can be added to 
              other plant fossil (leaves, wood, et cetera) and  paleosol data for
              paleoclimatic interpretations.  Certain p alynomorph taxa (and assemblages)
              have specific  biogeographical or environmental implications.  Furthermore,
              stratigraphic and geographic distribution  patterns of the palynomorphs yield
              information on  evolutionary trends and rates, provincialism of the  floras,
              and dispersal pathways.
