Title       : Structure/Function Analysis of Trans-Sialidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1995     
File        : a9418190

Award Number: 9418190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Eichinger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6693

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Sialic acid is an essential terminal sugar on glycoproteins and glycolipids in a
              variety of organisms and tissues, with roles for the sugar and its lectins in
              normal protein protein, cell cell and cell matrix interactions. A novel type of
              sialic acid metabolizing enzyme has recently been described that very
              efficiently moves sialic acid from one carbohydrate donor substrate to another
              carbohydrate acceptor. This enzyme, trans sialidase, does not use nucleotide
              sugar substrates in the transfer reaction, as do sialyltransferases of the
              Golgi apparatus, but instead it cleaves terminal (2,3 linked sialic acid
              residues found on glycoproteins and glycolipids, and transfers the sugar to
              suitable acce ptors. The nature of the mechanism of this transfer reaction is
              unknown. Another enzyme has also been described from a related organism which
              is capable of acting only as a sialidase on the same donor substrates, i.e., it
              will cleave sialic acid but not transfer it to another carbohydrate acceptor.
              This research compares the amino acid sequences of the trans sialidase and
              sialidase proteins to bacterial and viral sialidases of known secondary and
              tertiary structure. A molecular biological approach is taken to determine which
              regions of the enzymes account for the differences in enzymatic function by
              reciprocally exchanging subregions of the two gene types, and by using site
              specific mutagenesis, in each case followed by assays of the novel protein
              products for enzymatic activities. Recombinant constructs will also be created
              to overexpress the two enzymes for collaborative work aimed at deducing the
              enzymes'  tertiary structures via protein crystal analysis.  Knowledge of the
              sequence and domain structure of trans sialidase, and sialidases in general,
              will then be applied in attempts to create sialic acid transferring enzymes
              with novel substrate  specificities. Such novel enzymes would have extensive
              scientific and commercial potential for the  enzymatic synthesis of complex
              carbohydrate materials, which at the present time must be organically 
              synthesized.   %%%    Sugar (or carbohydrate) molecules are critical to the
              functioning of a variety of biological systems.  One of the most common types
              of sugars on the cell surface is sialic acid.  Many different normal
              developmental and immunological cell-cell interactions require sialic acid; and
              a number of different enzymes add or remove sialic acid. A novel enzyme, from a
              protozoan organism, has recently been described that efficiently transfers
              sialic acid to an acceptor molecule. This enzyme, trans sialidase, first
              removes sialic acid, and then transfers it to suitable carbohydrate acceptor
              molecules. Another enzyme from a related organism carries out on ly the first
              (sialidase) step of the trans sialidase reaction, and a comparison of the
              structures of these two enzymes should lead to suggestions about the unique
              sialic acid transfer reaction mechanism of trans sialidase. This research
              involves characterizing and comparing the protozoan trans sialidase and
              sialidase enzymes. With this information it should be possible to modify other
              sialidases to carry out the transfer reaction, and to create other enzymes that
              transfer these sugars to acceptors. Such enzymes could be used in large scale
              reactions to create new carbohydrate containing materials.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
