Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: A Multi-Wavelength Study of Southern Sefert
               Galaxies: Mapping Circumnuclear Star Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9418142

Award Number: 9418142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip N. Appleton pnapplet@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis J. Struck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,5912,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9418142  Appleton      This award will support the travel and communications
              expenses,  over a two year period, to enable Dr. Philip Appleton and   Mark
              Bransford, a doctoral student working with Dr. Appleton,  of the Department of
              Physics and Astronomy at Iowa State  University, to conduct research with Dr.
              Raymond Norris, Acting  Director of the Australia Telescope National Facility,
              and  Charlene Heisler of the Anglo-Australian Observatory.  The  cooperative
              research will focus on the study of radio emission  and star formation
              distribution in a sample of Seyfert galaxies.    This collaborative project
              involves astronomical observations  and numerical modeling utilizing a sample
              of galaxies containing  Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN's) which are observed from
              the  southern hemisphere.  The observational side of the project  requires the
              use of the unique Australia Telescope National  Facility (ATNF)
              aperture-synthesis radio telescope, which became  operational three years ago,
              and the Anglo-Australian Telescope   (AAT).  The ATNF is the only radio
              telescope in the southern  hemisphere capable of providing the detailed images
              of galaxies  required.  The special instrumentation available for infrared 
              imaging at the AAT is also unique in the southern hemisphere.  In order to gain
              an understanding of the possible causal  pelationship between starburst and AGN
              activity, high dynamic  range radio maps, at three frequencies, will be
              obtained at ATNF.  Near infrared observations at AAT will concentrate on the 
              distribution and strengths of key spectra lines which will be  used to
              distinguish between narrow-line emission and those  associated with the AGN
              spectra characteristic of star formation  regions.  These star formation
              regions will then be compared in  detail with the radio and optical
              morphologies of the galaxies to  search for causal connections which might link
              star formation  with non-thermal AGN processes. The Australian collaborators
              are  requesting support from the Department of Indus try, Science and 
              Technology (DIST) to fund their travel to Iowa State University   to make use
              of the special numerical modeling program being   conducted on galaxies in the
              Department of Physics and Astronomy.
