Title       : Characterization of Intracellular Proteolysis During Programmed Cell Death in
               Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9418377

Award Number: 9418377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric P. Beers ebeers@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9418377  Beers    Naturally occurring cell death is an active process that 
              serves a number of important functions.  In animals, cell  death affects
              morphogenesis, and removes a variety of cells,  including those that have
              completed their function, cells  that have developed improperly or  those that
              exist in  excess.  In plants, programmed cell death occurs as a  consequence of
              normal senescence, local lesion formation,  and as the terminal developmental
              event in the formation of  certain specialized tissues, such as the xylem.  The
               ultimate fate of the cells programmed to die in animals is  engulfment and
              degradation.   Degradation during programmed  cell death in plants appears to
              be mediated not by  engulfment, but rather by intracellular hydroytic enzymes 
              including nucleases, carbohydrases and proteases.  While  little is known
              concerning the exact role of proteolysis in  cell death, regulation of the
              ubiquitin-dependent pathway of  proteolysis appears to be important during
              programmed cell  death in animals and plants.  Using biochemical approaches, 
              the role of ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis in programmed  cell death will be
              investigated by characterizing changes in  activity of the ubiquitin pathway
              and identifying substrates  of this pathway unique to the autolyic phase of
              tracheary  element differentiation in Zinnia elegans mesophyll cell  culture
              system.   The results of these studies are  applicable to all higher plants and
              potentially to animals  because of the high degree of conservation of the
              ubiquitin  pathway and of mechanisms of programmed cell death among  species. 
              A more complete understanding of cell death in  plants may lead to genetic
              engineering strategies for  manipulating senescence and cell death for the
              purposes of  increasing productivity, nutritional value, and disease 
              resistance of food crops and may also enhance our  understanding of situations
              where cell death goes wrong in  mammalian systems, such as during abnormal
              tumor growth and  neurodegenerative  diseases.  %%%  Naturally occurring cell
              death is an active process that  serves a number of important functions.  In
              animals, cell  death affects morphogenesis, and removes a variety of cells, 
              including those that have completed their function, cells  that have developed
              improperly or  those that exist in  excess.  In plants, programmed cell death
              occurs as a  consequence of normal senescence, local lesion formation,  and as
              the terminal developmental event in the formation of  certain specialized
              tissues, such as the xylem.  The  ultimate fate of the cells programmed to die
              in animals is  engulfment and degradation.   Degradation during programmed 
              cell death in plants appears to be mediated not by  engulfment, but rather by
              intracellular hydroytic enzymes  including nucleases, carbohydrases and
              proteases.  While  little is known concerning the exact role of proteolysis in 
              cell death, regulation of the ubiquitin-dependent pathway of  proteolysis
              appears to be important during programmed cell  death in animals and plants.
              Ubiquitin is a macromolecule  that "tags" proteins for proteolysis.  The
              results of these  studies are applicable to all higher plants and potentially 
              to animals because of the high degree of conservation of the  ubiquitin pathway
              and of mechanisms of programmed cell death  among species.  A more complete
              understanding of cell death  in plants may lead to genetic engineering
              strategies for  manipulating senescence and cell death for the purposes of 
              increasing productivity, nutritional value, and disease  resistance of food
              crops and may also enhance our  understanding of situations where cell death
              goes wrong in  mammalian systems, such as during abnormal tumor growth and 
              neurodegenerative diseases.  ***
