Title       : Quantitative Studies of Coupled Fluid Flow, Rock Deformation, Heat Transfer and
               Mass Transport in Deforming Geologic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9418561

Award Number: 9418561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shemin Ge ges@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418561  Ge    Fluid flow, rock deformation , heat transfer, and ;mass transport
               are coupled processes in deforming geologic systems.  The coupled  effects
              among these factors have been recognized for their  importance in thrust
              faulting, ore formation, metamorphism, and  lubrication of faults during
              earthquakes.  One or more of the  coupling processes are often simplified or
              overlooked.  A fully  coupled numerical model will be developed and applied to
              study and  physical interaction processes in two geologic settings: 
              sedimentary basins and accretionary prisms.  As new features, heat  and mass
              transport are coupled with tectonic deformation, hydraulic  permeability is
              considered a functions of stress and time, and  tectonic loading is simulated
              as a gradual process rather than an  instantaneous event.  There are two main
              objectives of this study.  The first is to  construct a generic model to solve
              the coupled equations of  deformation , fluid flow, heat transfer, and mass
              transport in  geologic medial.  The second is to apply the model to study two 
              geologic systems: a sedimentary foreland basin, the Arkoma Basin in  Arkansas,
              and an accretionary prism, the Barbados Accretionary  Complex.  This research
              will improve current understanding of the  processes involving heat and mass
              transport in fluids during the  history of the tectonic evolution.  The
              application to the  sedimentary basin provides a quantitative connection
              between  tectonic events, fluid migration, and ore deposition.  The 
              application to the accretionary prism will contribute to the on-  going efforts
              to explain the thermal and chemical anomalies  observed in the Ocean Drilling
              Programs.  The work combines analytical scaling, numerical modeling, and case 
              studies.  Scaling analysis of the governing equations identifies  the relative
              importance of different coupling mechanisms under  simplified conditions.  The
              numerical modeling provides detail  solution to the coupled processes under
              more complicated and  realistic geologic  conditions.  The generic simulations
              will be  designed to test sensitivities of hydrologic, mechanical, and  thermal
              parameters.
