Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: (GRGC) Holocene Lacustrine Records of Decade- to
               Century-Scale Variation in Monsoon Precipitation, Northwestern India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9418189

Award Number: 9418189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa L. Ely ely@cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ely  9418189    The principal objective of this project is to document and 
              understand decade- to century-scale paleoclimatic variations in the  monsoon
              region of northwestern India, using detailed sedimentary  records from three
              lake in northwestern India.  The finely-  laminated sediments in these lakes
              preserve an exceptional record  of high-resolution lake-level variations over
              the last 10,000 to  13,000 years, possibly the most complete and detailed
              Holocene  paleoclimatic record within the Indian Monsoon region.  The lakes  
              lie in the arid/semiarid Thar Desert at the boundary of the region  dominated
              by summer monsoon rainfall (Singh et al., 1990), and are  thus particularly
              sensitive to fluctuations in the strength of the  monsoon.  Analysis of these
              lacustrine records will address   how  the decadal-scale variations in the
              monsoon respond to longer-term  shifts in the monsoon paleoclimate, providing a
              high-resolution  record that covers a sufficiently long time scale to fully
              capture  the natural range of variability in the monsoon system, information 
              that is essential for understanding near-term future climatic  variations in
              the monsoon region.  This is a collaborative project between researchers at
              Central  Washington University and the of University of Arizona (see 
              accompanying proposal).  The methodology involves reconstructine  decade- to
              century-scale changes in lake levels, salinity, and  sediment influx in three
              shallow, closed-basin lakes through a  combination of (1) detailed stratigraphy
              and sedimentology of  finely laminated sediments, (2) evaporite and clay
              mineralogy, and  (3) radiocarbon dating.  Potential application of microfauna,
              trace  elements, stable isotopes and pollen toward this problem will be 
              explored and tested, but will not be a main focus of the study.   These data,
              along with modern data on precipitation, water-table  elevations , evaporation,
              and temperature, will be used to  construct hydrological lake-budget models and
              quantify the changes   in hydro logic and climatic parameters necessary to
              produce the lake  fluctuations.  The analyses will concentrate on the
              high-resolution  variations preserved in the primary stratigraphy during
              extended  periods of high, low , and transitional lake-level conditions.  We 
              will emphasize specific periods of interest, including (a)  internals of high
              variability  and changing conditions, such as  wet-dry transitions, (b)
              short-lived, shallow lakes in the late  Holocene that reflect minor climatic
              fluctuations and/or extreme  events in the last 4000 years and (c) periods of
              particularly high  (e.g. 4000-6000 BP) or low lake levels.  Analysis of the
              high-  resolution paleohydrological variations will add a new dimension to 
              broader-scale reconstructions of Holocene paleoclimates in  monsoonal regions
              of India, Asia and Africa.
