Title       : The Polar T3 Syndrome: Metabolic and Cognitive Manifestations, Their Hormonal
               Regulation and Impact Upon Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9418466

Award Number: 9418466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292818             (Estimated)
Investigator: H L. Reed   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Burman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen R. Kowalski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H M Jackson Fdn Mltry Med
	      1401 Rockville Pike, Suite 600
	      Rockville, MD  20852    301/294-1276

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              62        Life Science Clinical Medical           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9418466     Reed  People who live and work in Antarctica for longer than four to
               five months develop a characteristic constellation of symptoms  and hormonal
              changes called the Polar T3 Syndrome.  These people  have previously been
              described as having a 40 percent increase in  energy requirement, frequent mood
              disorders, doubling of the  production, utilization, and tissue stores of the
              most active  thyroid hormone, triiodothyronine (T3), a decline in central 
              nervous system thyroxine (T4), and acquisition of physiologic  cold adaptation.
               These apparent discordant and compartmentalized  tissue responses will be
              studied over a four-year period  utilizing a multidisciplinary approach carried
              out by experienced  polar physiologists, endocrinologists and psychologists. 
              The  possible cognitive and metabolic changes in performance from  declines in
              central nervous system T4 and elevations in skeletal  muscle T3 content will be
              studed.  Placebo-controlled T4  replacement directed at the central nervous
              system deficit will  be carried out and measured with cognitive instruments. 
              T3  content within the cardiovascular system will be evaluated by  utilizing
              submaximal exercise testing to differentiate resting  from activity mediated
              energy use contributions by the skeletal  muscles.  Additionally, tissue
              samples of skeletal muscle will  provide information regarding the genetic
              coding for T3  responsive proteins to help better characterize the thyroid 
              status of these muscles.  Moderate energy restriction will be  used along with
              T4 supplementation to study the dependence of T3  production, distribution and
              tissue stores upon both pituitary  generation of thyrotropin and energy intake.
               Analysis will be  carried out using each subject's baseline determined in the 
              predeployment situation of California and compared with periods  and
              standardized measures obtained during the antarctic summer  and winter.  It is
              proposed that a correction of the low T4 state  in the central nervous system
              can be managed w ith T4  supplementation without dramatically changing energy
              requirements  as suggested by previous human studies using cold air chamber 
              experiments.  If this thesis is correct, then characteristic  declines in mood
              and memory during winter seasons in circumpolar  regions may be attenuated by
              T4 supplementation without  disadvantageous effects upon their energy
              metabolism.   Additionally, this project will expand information regarding the 
              ultimate regulation and maintenance of the increased T3  production which is a
              central determinant of the Polar T3  Syndrome.
