Title       : Sediment Transport by Glaciers on Unconsolidated Beds: A Laboratory Study of
               Entrainment Mechanisms and Bed Lubrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1995   
File        : a9418671

Award Number: 9418671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94643              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Iverson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9418671  Iverson      Under certain conditions water-saturated sediment may, in
              effect, lubricate glacier beds.  Such sediment, therefore, may have contributed
              to fast glacier flow and ice sheet instability during the Pleistocene.  There
              is at present insufficient understanding of entrainment mechanisms to define
              the conditions under which subglacial sediment either persists as a lubricating
              layer, or is eroded.  Similarly, the flow mechanism of glaciers on
              unconsolidated beds is not well known.  Although flow is usually assumed to
              arise as a result of bed deformation, continuous measurements of bed
              deformation beneath some modern glaciers suggest that under sufficiently low
              effective pressures, the bed does not deform, and motion, instead, is focused
              at the glacier sole.   To study both sediment entrainment and the coupling
              between glaciers and unconsolidated beds, a series of experiments is proposed
              with an existing apparatus that allows hypotheses to be rigorously tested under
              unusually well-controlled conditions.  A sediment bed will be slid at a steady
              speed beneath a fixed block of temperate ice.  One goal will be to study
              intrusion of ice into the sediment pore space by regelation.  Regelation of ice
              through porous media has been studied successfully in previous experiments with
              the apparatus and may be the primary mechanism by which glaciers entrain basal
              debris.  The principal uncertainty is the effect of sliding, which may impede
              intrusion.  Intrusion rates well therefore be measured as a function of sliding
              speed.  Post-experimental measurements of stable isotopes in debris-laden ice
              will be compared with isotopic data from modern glaciers.  A second goal will
              be to develop an empirical sliding law for ice motion over sediment.  In
              particular, the shear stress that ice exerts on the sediment bed will be
              measured as a function of effective pressure and sliding speed.  The range of
              conditions under which sliding is favored over bed deformation, therefore, will
              be elucidated.  Post-exper imental observations will also allow the relative
              importance of ploughing and sliding to be assessed under a range of conditions.
