Title       : Insect Cuticle Sclerotization: Interactions of Structural Proteins with
               Catecholamine Metabolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9418129

Award Number: 9418129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore L. Hopkins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl J. Kramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9164,9169,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hopkins  9418129  Insect cuticle sclerotization is a vital process that occurs 
              periodically during each stage of insect development to harden and  stabilize
              the newly secreted cuticular exoskeleton.  The structural  polymers of protein
              and chitin that make up the bulk of the   cuticle, and their chemical
              interactions with quinone tanning  agents are largely responsible for the final
              properties of the  exoskeleton.  Sclerotization is thought to involve the
              formation of  covalent cross-links between protein nucleophilic side chain
              groups  and the ring or side-chain carbons of N-acetyldopamine and N-Beta- 
              alanyldopamine.  Purified cuticular proteins from the pupal cuticle  of the
              tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta, involved in sclerotization  reactions and
              their post-translational modification by quinonoid  metabolites will be
              characterized as to molecular weights, amino  acid compositions and sequences,
              carbohydrate components and  catechol-amino acid adducts.  In vitro tanning
              reactions will be  studied between N-acyldopamine quinonoid derivatives and
              model  compounds that have nucleophilic functional groups representative  of
              amino acid residues in cuticular proteins.  The adducts formed  will be
              chemically characterized by electrochemistry, HPLC, NMR and  mass spectrometry.
               Solid-state NMR studies utilizing 13C-, 15N-, 17O  labeled protein and
              catecholamine precursors of cuticle, which will  provide information on the
              nature of the covalent bonds  formed in situ between the structural components
              during  sclerotization.  %%%  Insect cuticle sclerotization is a vital process
              that occurs  periodically during insect development to harden and stabilize the
               newly secreted cuticular exoskeleton.  The exoskeleton serves many  functions
              including protection, locomotion , respiration and  communication, and
              therefore must have very diverse mechanical and  chemical properties to provide
              for each function.  The structural  polymers of protein and chitin that make up
              the bulk of the  cuticle, and their che mical interactions with quinone tanning
               agents derived from catecholamines are largely responsible for the  final
              properties of the exoskeleton.  Purified cuticular proteins  from the pupal
              cuticle of the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta,  involved in sclerotization
              reactions will be characterized and  their modification by quinonoid
              metabolites determined.  The  products formed will be identified as to the
              types of chemical  bonding involved in sclerotization.  Solid-state NMR studies
              will  provide a non-destructive method for investigating the molecular 
              assembly of the exoskeleton.  Understanding how the multifunctional  insect
              exoskeleton is sclerotized at each stage of development  is  of major
              importance to insect biology and may facilitate the  development is of new
              approaches to selective insect pest control.   ***
