Title       : Mechanisms of Enzyme Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9418724

Award Number: 9418724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony L. Fink enzyme@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research involves studies on b lactamase catalysis and inhibition,
              using a  combination of site directed mutagenesis and structural probes,
              especially attenuated total  reflectance (ATR) FTIR.  b Lactamases are the
              major source of resistance to penicillin antibiotic  therapy, an increasingly
              common health problem, and are thus potential targets for the design of new 
              antibiotics. In spite of considerable study the mechanism of action of the b
              lactamases remains  somewhat of an enigma. Although the active site residues
              have been identified through structural,  chemical and mutagenesis studies, and
              several possible mechanisms have been proposed, there is no  consensus on the
              catalytic mechanism, and many outstanding fundamental questions remain. Through
               detailed kinetic and structural characterization of selected active site
              mutants we hope to answer a  number of specific questions regarding the b
              lactamase catalytic mechanism, including which ionizing  groups are responsible
              for the bell shaped pH rate profiles; the role of the conserved Lys73; why some
               substrates with wild type enzy me, and some mutants with all substrates, show
              a branched  path  mechanism (reflected in substrate induced inactivation or
              reversible suicide inhibition), and the  nature of the resulting inactive acyl
              enzyme species; and the reason why the deacylation rate is so  much faster in
              the Class A B lactamases compared to the penicillin target enzymes
              (transpept-idases  and D Ala,D Ala carboxypeptidases). We anticipate that the
              inform-ation learned in this investigation  will be very valuable in
              understanding how b lactamase catalysis works and in the design of new 
              inhibitors which would be potential antibiotics.  %%%   Lactamases are the
              major source of resistance to penicillin antibiotic therapy, an increa ingly
              common health problem, and are thus potential targets for the design of new
              antibiotics. In spite of considerable study, the mechanism of action of the b
              lactamases remains somewhat of an enigma. Through detailed kinetic and
              strutural characterization of selected active site mutants we hope to answer a
              number of specific questions regarding the B lactamase catalytic mechanism. The
              mutants will be characterized using both kinetic and stnuctural probes. We
              propose a novel approach to obtaining information about the structure of
              enzyme-substrate complexes (and enzyme-inhibitor complexes), namely the use of
              attenuated total reflectance (ATR) FTIR (Fourier Transform Infrared
              spectroscopy),in conjunction with immobilized  enzyme in a flow cell. Normally
              transient intermediates will be stabilized either with low  temperatures, or by
              using relatively inactive mutants. The information obtained in the proposed 
              studies should facilitate the development of improved b lactam antibiotics.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
