Title       : Soil Moisture, Subsurface Storage and Runoff as a Low Dimensional Dynamical
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9418674

Award Number: 9418674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Duffy cxd11@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Cusumano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418674  Duffy    This research will test the hypothesis that the
              rainfall-runoff process can be represented as a low-dimensional dynamical
              system, forced by topographic, soil, geologic and climatic variability.   By
              "low-dimensional " we mean the minimum number of state variables required to
              approximate the processes as a system of nonlinear ordinary differential
              equations.  We examine the case where rainfall-runoff is controlled by porous
              soils and shallow groundwater circulation, and where the ability of the
              catchment to store water and yield runoff depends on the nature of the
              storage-flux relationships of the system.  The role of evapotranspiration as a
              parametic function of soil-moisture storage will also be examined.  The
              "low-dimensional" model will serve as a physically-based alternative to the
              nonlinear partial differential equations (Richard's equation) representing the
              local processes.  In constructing the dynamical model, the essential problem is
              to separate or distinguish among spatial and temporal components of watershed
              dynamics, such that the important mechanics of the processes involved are
              elucidated, without loss of critical nonlinear structure.   The research has
              the following elements:  (1) Comprehensive numerical experiments based on
              finite element solutions to the partial differential equations for
              saturated-unsaturated flow will be performed To establish terrain-integrated
              constitutive relations (e.g. storage-flux relations).  the proposed  research
              will build on a series of steady-state numerical experiments  (Lee, 1993;
              Duffy, 1994) for two dimensional hillslope geometry with uniform soil
              properties.  This previous work found that recharge to the water table and
              subsurface flow to the stream were nonlinear functions of at least two state
              variables: the integrated soil moisture and integrated saturated storage.  The
              present objective is to extend these experiments to the case of fully three
              dimensional and time varying flow, and test the role of soil stratification and
               variability on nonlinear storage-flux relations and runoff response.    (2) 
              Develop and test procedures for scaling and spatial integration of the state
              variables and fluxes for the Shale Hills watershed,  8 hectare, forested,
              catchment in central PA (J. Lynch et al, 1976).  Shale Hills was the site of a
              unique experiment in the 1970's to evaluate the effects of antecedent soil
              moisture on stormflow volume and timing.  Rainfall was artificially applied for
              8 events with initial moisture ranging from dry to very wet.  a comprehensive
              accounting of soil moisture and saturated storage at multiple depths was made
              over the entire watershed.  Although if may seem to be a straight forward
              problem, spatial integration of scattered field observations requires an 
              appropriate weighting function.  Duffy (1994) has proposed weighting function
              derived from the hypsometric distribution, and a local rescaling of hillslope
              trajectories for each hillslope or zero-order basin.  This scaling and
              averaging method will be carried out for the Shale Hills data base.  
              Field-estimated storage-flux relations will be compared with the numerical 
              experiments in (1).  (3)  An independent method known as proper orthogonal
              decomposition (POD), allows the essential spatial structure of the dynamics to
              be reconstructed directly from random field data or from the governing pde's.  
              The method is widely  applied to detecting coherent structures in hydrodynamics
              turbulence (Lumley, 1967), the evolution of climatic fields (North et al,
              1982), and nonlinear vibration (Cusumano, and Bai, 1993, Cusumano et al, 1993,
              Lin and Cusumano, 1993, Cusumano et al, 1994).  The POD method will be applied
              to the field data of the Shale Hills experiment  and the  Richard's equation to
              provide a measure of the dimensionality, or number of state variables  required
              to model the system.
