Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Integrating Heterogeneous Geo- physcal Data by Combining
               Error Structures: An Inter- disciplinary Pilot Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1995      
File        : a9418904

Award Number: 9418904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88270              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gad Levy gad@ats.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Calton Pu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul D. Sampson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1303,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9418904  Levy       Operational weather and climate predictions models of  the
              near future have three fundamental requirements:       1. Data management
              facilities that allow the  assimilation and manipulation of massive amounts of 
              heterogeneous and imprecise data obtained from a variety of  sources.       2.
              A modeling technology, both physical and  statistical, that allows the
              integration of partial and  heterogeneous data, accounting for the realistic
              non-linear  physics of the problem and the often complex error structure 
              encountered.       3. Efficient support of these functions within the data 
              assimilation cycle.       Responding effectively to these requirements calls
              for  an interdisciplinary approach.  A collaboration which will  bring together
              complementary expertise in the computational,  statistical, and the geosciences
              for cross training and  joint research is proposed.  The goal is to initiate
              cross  training which will enable the collaborators to address, as  a team,
              crucial problems in the atmospheric data  assimilation cycle.  The feasibility
              of applying  sophisticated theoretical solutions in practice by building 
              software tools will be tested.  By implementing an intensive  interdisciplinary
              plan that will include a colloquium  series, cross-teaching, workshops, and
              regular conferences,  the collaborators will broaden their understanding of the
               complementary fields to be able to jointly propose and  develop a general
              methodology and a prototype for a specific  demonstration system.       In the
              demonstration system, a physical Boundary Layer  (BL) model will be used to
              integrate and manage massive  satellite sensed data.  The processing of such
              data  inevitably involves complex gridding, interpolation, data  quality
              control; and averaging, as well as the infusion of  arbitrary ancillary data
              sets and estimation of error  covariance structure.  Techniques to provide
              these functions  and apply them to the specific case of scatterometer (ERS-1) 
              stress data will be studied, a nd the feasibility of  synthesizing them from
              current disciplinary methods will be  explored.  The resulting data will be
              processed through a  Planetary Boundary Layer Model (PBLM) to link them to 
              atmospheric numerical prediction and general circulation  models. 
              Consequently, the system that will be proposed at  the end of the pilot project
              will make full use of BL  physics, heterogeneous error structure statistics,
              and high  quality data management to obtain better models.
