Title       : RUI: Flowering Plant Cell Surfaces: Characterization by Antibodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9418178

Award Number: 9418178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darlene Southworth southworth@sou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Oregon University
	      1250 Siskiyou Boulevard
	      Ashland, OR  975205001    503/482-3311

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In flowering plants, the process of fertilization underlies  production of seeds
              and fruits.  Although structural events  of double fertilization have been
              described, little is  known about molecular mechanisms of fertilization.  Plant
               sperm are embedded in pollen grains and move down growing  pollen tubes.  Near
              the egg, a pollen tube releases two  sperm:  one fuses with the egg to form the
              embryo, the  other fuses with the central cell, adjacent to the egg, to  form
              endosperm that supports growth of the developing  embryo.  A major unanswered
              question in plant reproduction  is how sperm recognize eggs and central cells,
              adhere, and  fuse. Recognition molecules may be located in or on gamete 
              membranes.  The goals of this project are to:  (1) identify  sperm membrane
              epitopes by screening antibodies to isolated  plant sperm cells; (2)
              investigate sperm cell dimorphism by  differential antibody binding; (3)
              determine the species  specificity of sperm antigens; (4) determine whether
              sperm  antigens change during sperm development; and (5) involve 
              undergraduates in a pioneering research project.  The  results will further
              understanding of basic developmental  mechanisms that function in plant
              reproduction.  Antibodies  will be raised to sperm of Brassica and will be
              tested on  sperm of Gerbera and Lilium.  The results will lead to a  basic
              understanding of fertility and sterility: producing  hybrids from incompatible
              species and preventing  fertilization where male sterility is needed to prevent
               selfcrossing.  The identity of sperm-specific membrane  molecules will be
              valuable for future genetic engineering  studies. Undergraduate students will
              gain valuable insight  into active research.  By solving problems and assisting
              in  attainment of goals, they will gain research experience  which will
              facilitate their development as scientists.
