Title       : Exocytotic Signalling Through Sperm Receptors for Eggs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9418077

Award Number: 9418077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Miller d-mille@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                David J. Miller  IBN 9418077  University of Illinois-Champaign    Exocytotic
              Signalling Through Sperm Receptors for Eggs    The overall goal of these
              studies is to gain a clearer  understanding of the process of fertilization at
              a molecular  levelwhich will result in a greater ability to increase or
              decrease  fertilization rates.  In order to manipulate this process,it is 
              imperative that we identify receptors on sperm and eggs that  interact to allow
              sperm to bind to eggs.  These studies build upon  previous work that has
              identified a receptor on mammalian sperm  that binds an egg coat glycoprotein. 
              ZP3 is a glycoprotein found  in the egg coat that binds to beta
              1,4-galacotosyltransferase  (GalTase) that is found on the surface of sperm. 
              Following  binding, ZP3 causes sperm to release the acrosome, an enzyme-filled 
              vesicle whose contents digest a pathway for sperm through the egg  coat.  The
              acrosome reaction is required for fertilization.   However, the mechanisms by
              which ZP3 induces the acrosome reaction  are not understood.  The lack of
              progress has been primarily due to  a gap in our knowledge of ZP3 receptors and
              signal  transduction molecules.  With the recent discovery that sperm  GalTase
              serves as a specific receptor for ZP3, signaling  events following binding may
              now be studied more rationally.   Importantly, recent evidence suggests that
              aggregation of sperm  GalTase by ZP3 elicits the release of the sperm acrosome.
               Thus  GalTase may act not only to bind ZP3, but also as a receptor to 
              initiate signaling mechanisms leading to the acrosome reaction.  Because it is
              difficult to study signaling during the acrosome  reaction in sperm, an
              analogous model system will be used that can  be made to express GalTase,
              Xenopus laevis oocytes.  Both sperm and  oocytes release vesicles (acrosome or
              cortical granules) in  response to appropriate activators.  For a variety of
              technical  reasons, vesicle release in Xenopus oocytes is easier to study. In 
              these experiments it is proposed to: 1).  confirm that GalTase  binding in
              sperm results in signal transduction and release of the  sperm acrosome, 2).
              determine if Xenopus oocytes expressing murine  GalTase on their surface
              specifically bind ZP3, 3). ascertain if  GalTase initiates signaling events in
              Xenopus oocytes, causing  release of vesicles, and 4). determine which
              cytoplasmic amino acid  residues in GalTase are required for GalTase-induced
              egg vesicle  release and to investigate which signaling molecules they
              activate.  Collectively, these specific aims will determine if GalTase is 
              simply a non-signaling adhesion molecule or if, like some other  adhesion
              molecules, it also transmits a signal intracellularly.   These studies will
              identify important signals during vesicle  release.  These aims will also
              determine the feasibility of  studying acrosome release using a new and
              innovative system.  This  system should allow a clearer understanding of how a
              sperm receptor  for the egg receives a cue from the zona pellucida and
              initiates  the process of the acrosome release.  ***
