Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeology of the Viru Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1994   
File        : a9418963

Award Number: 9418963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Burger richard.burger@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Burger    Under the direction of Dr. Richard Burger, Mr. Thomas Zoubek will 
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct  archaeological
              excavation at the site of Huaca El Gallo/Huaca La  Gallina which is located in
              the Viru Valley on the northern coast  of Peru. The site contains two large
              stone-faced platform mounds,  two sunken circular courts and extensive
              habitational remains. At  least one unlooted cemetery is associated with the
              mounds and  domestic structures. The site itself dates to the Formative 
              period, between 1800 and 50 BC and therefore documents the rise  of complex
              society in Peru. In the planned fieldwork, Mr. Zoubek  and his colleagues will
              construct a precise map of the site. They  will then excavate a representative
              sample of each type of  household and several domestic structures will be dug
              in their  entirety. Refuse areas will also be sought out for excavation in 
              order to establish stratigraphic sequences. Burials and  undisturbed tombs will
              also be examined. The cultural and  skeletal, as well as floral and faunal
              materials recovered  will  be analyzed.    The archaeological situation of the
              coast of Peru is interesting  for several reasons. First the Andes represents
              one of the few  regions of the world where highly complex stratified societies 
              appear to have independently evolved. During the Initial period  large
              ceremonial structures were built and maintained. Secondly,  the region is
              important because there are indications that, in  some parts of the Peruvian
              coast at least, this development took  place in a relatively egalitarian social
              context. Archaeologists  generally believe that political centralization as
              indicated in  monumental construction either results from or is intimately 
              related to the emergence of status inequality; the Peruvian case  however may
              disprove this hypothesis. Relatively little is known  about household
              organization at such sites since archaeological  work has concentrated on the
              more imposing monumental structures.  Mr.  Zoubek's work will focus on the
              former and provide direct  insight into social organization.    This research
              is important for several reasons. It will provide  data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will increase  understanding of how complex societies
              develop and will also  contribute to the training of a promising young
              scientist.
