Title       : Analysis of New Drill Core Samples from within the ChicxclubImpact Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9418652

Award Number: 9418652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119848             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virgil L. Sharpton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin C. Shuraytz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lunar & Planetary Inst.
	      3600 Bay Area Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  770581113    /   -

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418652  Sharpton         Recent analyses of drill core samples and geophysical
              data  have demonstrated that the buried Chicxulub structure in northern 
              Yucatan is the site of a major asteroid or comet strike 65 million  years ago
              at the time of the Cretaceous-Tertiary (KT) mass  extinctions.  The crater
              produced by this event is believed to be  between 165 km and 280 km in
              diameter.  As such, it is one of the  largest impact structures recognized on
              Earth and its study offers  important contributions to the understanding of
              large-body impact  and to disciplines ranging from research of carbonate
              platforms to  the evolution of the continental crust.         Universidad
              Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) has undertaken  a shallow drilling program
              to recover continuous core samples of  the basin fill deposits and underlying
              impact breccias.  More than   1000 m of core have been recovered from five
              wells located along  the flanks of the basin.  These samples will permit a more
              precise  estimate of the size and shape of the basin, and will constrain the 
              rate and nature of its infilling through the Cenozoic.  Samples of  the
              underlying breccias are critical for estimating the types and  proportions of
              rocks involved in this impact event and evaluating  its environmental effects. 
              These samples also provide an important  resource for additional investigations
              and will be available to the  international science community.         This
              project focuses on two scientific goals:  (1)  Derive the  basic Cenozoic
              stratigraphic and paleoenvironmental framework for  the Chicxulub basin based
              on these new core samples, augmenting the  existing information in Pemex cores
              and well logs.  This  information will provide important new insights into the
              shape of  the Chicxulub basin and the geological and paleontological  evolution
              of the southern Gulf of Mexico and Yucatan Platform.    (2)  Evaluate impact
              breccias from two core localities in terms of  lithological characteristics,
              depths, evidence of reworking, et c.   Each of these sites corresponds to a
              proposed basin rim location.   Consequently, how deep these breccias are
              located below the present  surface and what they are composed of will provide
              tests for  current basin models including size and shape of the final basin 
              and the original excavation crater.  These breccias will also aid  in
              constraining the proportions of target materials excavated and  heated in the
              Chicxulub impact event and help constrain the  magnitudes of potential killing
              mechanisms such as ocean  acidification, global cooling, or greenhouse warming
              due to  vaporization of sulfates or carbonates.  ***
