Title       : Protein Interactions During Replication of a Plant Rhabodovirus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9418086

Award Number: 9418086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew O. Jackson andyoj@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             l;                   C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    l;     
              l;                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              8   9   :   ;   <   =   >   ?   @   A                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   9418086
              Jackson  This proposal addresses the intracellular location of  viral proteins
              involved in replication and packaging the plant rhabdovirus, sonchus yellow net
              virus (SYNV), and the biochemistry of the events occurring during replication
              of the virus in the plant nucleus and subsequent budding from the nuclear
              membrane. This is a continuing study from one of the few labs in the world
              studying this important class of enveloped virus in plants at the cellular and
              molecular level.  The biology of SYNV challenges the paradigms of animal
              rhabdovirus biology.   Unlike the animal rhabdovirus, Vesicular Stomatitis
              Virus (VSV),  which replicates in cytoplasm and buds from the cell membrane, 
              thereby serving as a model for secretory membrane traffic,  SYNV replicates in
              the nucleus and buds from the nuclear membrane .   This proposal will study
              these differences, including examining the nature of a gene product, sc4, not
              found in animal rhabdoviruses.  The nuclear targeting of this product, which
              lacks a transmembrane domain, is of particular interest.  The nature of the
              nuclear targeting domains of th e other proteins is of interest in order to lay
              a firm groundwork for this system.    Since replication occurs in the nucleus,
              potentially novel aspects of the replication complex of SYNV will be explored
              through the analysis of protein-protein interaction of transcription-active
              proteins and the comparison of the transcriptionally inactive core particles
              from purified virus with transcriptionally active nuclear complexes. %%%
              Information on plant Rhabdovirusues is limited in comparison to their animal
              counterparts.  Yet, as has been shown in the case of other groups that
              encompass both animal and plant viruses, such as the picorna- and sindbis-like
              virus groups, and the Bunyaviridae, the study in parallel members of both
              kingdoms has often led to a much more rapid development of our understanding of
              replication of these viruses.  Investigations into targeting the components of
              this virus into the nucleus are also timely because the mechanism of targeting
              select proteins into the lumen of  the nucleus and of integration of proteins
              into the nuclear membrane of plant and animal cells is unclear.    There is 
              the potential here for developing model proteins to examine targeting to the
              inner nuclear envelope, an area where there is very little knowledge. The plant
              rhabdoviruses could also provide a valuable system to examine
              nuclear/cytoplasmic flow of protein and the intracellular flow of
              virion-containing vesicles in plants. ***                          ;           
                                                                 Oh     +'  0                
                  S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (            
                                                    7                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     $       H       l       
                                                     D       h                               
                                 R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                               
                     Lawrence R. Griffing                Una Solomon                 @    g  
                                         @                                   @               
                                                                                             
                         @                                           Microsoft Word 6.0      
                                                             4                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   e =       e                                               
                                             p       p   p       p       p       p       p   
                                                                                 C   1       
                                                                         Õ                   
                                         %       t   T       3   C                       p   
                                                                                   C         
                   p       p                                                                 
                   p               p               Õ                                       p 
                   p       p       p               Õ           7                             
                                                                                 9418086
              Jackson  This proposal addresses the intracellular lo
