Title       : Development and Testing of an Aberration-Correction System for Photoelectron
               Microscopes and Other High Resolution Imaging Systems.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1998     
File        : a9418884

Award Number: 9418884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379371             (Estimated)
Investigator: O. H. Griffith   (Principal Investigator current)
              G F. Rempfer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9163,9183,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                    The goal of this project is to achieve in electron optics what  was done
              in light optics over two hundred years ago: that is, to  develop the electron
              optical equivalent of the acromat. When completed,  this will be the first
              practical device to simultaneously correct both  spherical and chromatic
              aberrations in electron optics. The two key  elements are an electron mirror
              and a beam separating system. The  mirror has aberrations of opposite sign from
              those of conventional  electron lenses and thus provides a means of canceling
              out aberrations.  This grant renewal seeks funds to carry out the third phase
              of this  project. The first phase covered the design and construction of an 
              electron mirror, beam separator, and the electron lenses, and  theoretical and
              experimental investigations of the mirror properties  (G. F. Rempfer J Appl.
              Phys. 67, 6027-6040 (1990)). The second phase  (just completed) produced the
              first successful demonstration of the  correction of chromatic aberration by
              means of an electron mirror (G.  F. Rempfer and M. S. Mauck, Optik (1992) 86,
              3-8), and the completion  of an advanced electron optical bench to carry out
              high precision  testing of an aberration corrector. The goal of the proposed
              third  phase is to utilize this unique resource, (the new electron optical 
              bench, the only one in existence designed for branched systems), to 
              demonstrate correction of spherical aberration, and simultaneous  correction of
              chromatic and spherical aberration. When the conditions  for correction have
              been established, resolution tests will be  performed. Tests will be done first
              in the probe mode. The correction  parameters will then be adjusted for
              cancellation of aberrations in the  photoelectron microscope (PEM), and
              resolution tests will be performed  in the PEM mode. The bench studies will
              lead to optimum positioning of  the components of the optical system and
              locations of the feedthroughs,  manipulators, and ports, so that a less bulky
              vacuum housing can be  designed which wi ll serve the purpose of providing a
              workable prototype  instrument. The new housing will free up the optical bench
              for  continuing experiments with other branched systems.                A
              promising byproduct of this research is the beam separator,  which can serve to
              separate the incident and returning beams in a low  energy electron
              microscope/mirror electron microscope (LEEM/MEM). In  fact, the first LEEM and
              MEM images of biological specimens (cultured  mammalian cells) were recently
              obtained with the beam separating system  developed as part of this project (O
              H. Griffith et al., J Micros. 168,  249-258 (1991)). Because the branched
              system is common to both LEEM/MEM  and corrected PEM, the new vacuum housing
              for the corrected-PEM can be  designed to enable LEEM and MEM studies as well.
              The research planned  for this proposed five-year NSF grant renewal will result
              in an  aberration-corrected lens system (i.e. an electron optical acromat) and 
              a modular instrument intended primarily for corrected PEM, but capable  also of
              LEEM and MEM. The higher resolution PEM should produce sharp  imagines of DNA
              and DNA-protein complexes having information  (photoelectron contrast) not
              available in the present imaging methods.  Other applications include receptor
              distributions on the surfaces of  normal and malignant cells, and imaging
              membranes and cytoskeletal  elements. A hallmark of this research collaboration
              between a physics  and engineering team (at Portland State University in
              Portland) and a  molecular biology group (at the University of Oregon, Eugene)
              is the  rapid application in the biological sciences of the instrumental 
              advances funded by this NSF grant.
