Title       : (GRGC) Coll Research: Paleofloral and Stratigraphic Analysis and
               Eocene-Oligocene Climate Change in a Single Continental Section in
               North-Central Oregon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1995     
File        : a9418210

Award Number: 9418210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30288              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Smith gsmith@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418210  Smith    Climate change near the Eocene-Oligocene boundary was one of
              the most significant environmental changes of the Phanerozoic.  The nature of
              this geologically abrupt global cooling, and hypotheses for its cause, have
              come largely from study of continuous marine stratigraphic records.  In order
              to understand the dynamics of global climate change, it is essential to better
              understand the nature of the early Oligocene climatic deterioration on
              continents.  To date, the interpretation of climate change at the time in North
              America has been based on scattered, and in some cases poorly dated,
              paleo-floras.  Ambiguities remain, therefore, on age relationships of these
              climatically-sensitive floras and the extent to which differences between them
              represent true temporal change rather than variations in altitude and other
              environmental parameters between floral sites.  We will study a sequence of
              fossil floras preserved in a single stratigraphic sequence, in north-central
              Oregon, where reconnaissance work suggests a record of the entire climate
              change.  Detailed collection, study, and interpretation of these floras will be
              complemented by geologic mapping, sedimentological, and stratigraphic study to
              assure the stratigraphic framework of strata containing the fossils and the
              depositional environments (and thus environmental or taphonomic biases)
              represented by beds enclosing the floras.  The paleofloras are hosted in
              volcaniclastic sediment interlayered with tuffs and lava flows that will be
              dated by 40Ar/39Ar method in order to constrain the chronology of the
              climatically- driven floral change in central Oregon.
