Title       : Japan STA Program: Computer Modelling of Volcanic Eruptions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1994   
File        : a9418770

Award Number: 9418770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Dehn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418770  Dehn    This award supports a 12-month Science and Technology Agency of
              Japan Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Jonathan Dehn at the Geological Survey of
              Japan, Sapporo, Japan. Dr. Dehn will work with Dr. Takarada at the Hokkaido
              Branch on a research project entitled, "Japan STA Program:  Computer Modeling
              of Volcanic Eruptions."    The modeling of a volcanic system from eruption to
              deposition has been missing in volcanology.  Dehn and Takarada will study the
              volcanogenic particles created during low energy volcanic eruptions throughout
              Japan.  This data will be used to formulate modular quantitative models of the
              eruptions.  Each physical component of the volcanic eruption will be modeled
              including vesiculation, fragmentation, ejection, subaerial transport,
              subaqueous transport, deposition, deformation, secondary fragmentation and mass
              wasting.  The research team will develop a modular computer program for each
              component which can be added or deleted from the whole model in order to
              simulate nearly any volcanic condition.  This model would be an important basis
              for comprehensive modeling of volcanic systems, and could be come a useful tool
              not only in the understanding of active systems but also in interpretation of
              ancient volcanoes and their deposits.  The model would be of great use in
              volcanic hazard determination as well as modeling of eruptions on other
              planets.  ***
