Title       : Xyloglucan Glucosyltransferase in Plant Golgi Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9418281

Award Number: 9418281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. White alan_white@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin W. Fawley  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There are many unanswered fundamental questions in plant biology including the
              extent of influence cell wall biogenesis has over plant growth and development.
              The proposed research offers an opportunity for progress in this area.
              Xyloglucans are an important component of plant cell walls and there is
              evidence they may serve as signaling molecules in plants. Increased knowledge
              about the enzymes and genes that are responsible for xyloglucan biosynthesis
              will add significantly to understanding of cell wall polysaccharides and the
              process of cell wall synthesis. In addition, the proposed research will
              increase knowledge of the structure and functional organization of the plant
              Golgi apparatus. This proposal describes a program of research designed to
              complete purification of xyloglucan glucosyltransferase (XGT). Major objectives
              include:  1. Purification of XGT enzyme. 2. Reaction product characterization. 
              3. Accepter molecule requirements.  4. Characterization and enzyme kinetics of
              XGT.  Beyond the scope of this proposal, we plan eventually to use purified XGT
              as an avenue to determi ne patterns of subcellular  localization,
              spaciotemporal expression patterns, and molecular genetic control of the
              xyloglucan  synthesis enzyme system. A fundamental understanding of the plant
              cell wall's role in regulating plant  growth and development will be necessary
              to meet the practical goals of future plant biology research,  namely,
              genetically engineered agricultural plants, increased crop yields and
              productivity, improved  stress tolerance, and improved resistance to attack by
              disease organisms.  %%%   One of the fundamental differences between animal
              cells and plant cells is that each plant cell is surrounded by a cell wall made
              primarily of polysaccharides. Most of these polysaccharides are manufactured
              inside the cell in the membranes of the Golgi apparatus, and then are packaged
              and secreted to the wall outside the cell membrane.  None of the plant cell
              wall polysaccharide- synthesizing enzymes has ever been purified for detailed
              biochemical study. This project has the goal of purifying xyloglucan
              glucosyltransferase (XGT), the enzyme responsible for synthesis of the glucan
              backbone of the polysaccharide xyloglucan.  Xyloglucans are an important
              component of plant cell walls and there is evidence they may serve as signaling
              molecules in plants. Increased knowledge about the enzymes and genes that are
              responsible for xyloglucan biosynthesis will add significantly to understanding
              of cell wall polysaccharides and the process of cell wall synthesis. In
              addition, the proposed research will increase knowledge of the structure and
              functional organization of the plant Golgi apparatus. A more complete
              understanding of cell wall synthesis is crucial to an understanding of the
              plant cell wall's role in regulating plant growth and development.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
