Title       : Characterization of Heparanase in CHO Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9418559

Award Number: 9418559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen J. Bame bamek@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bame  9418559  Cell associated heparan sulfate proteoglycans have been
              implicated in a number of processes, including cell adhesion, growth and
              transformation.  The regulation of these activities will be determined. 
              Initially, cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans are internalized, the
              glycosaminoglycans is removed from the protein core and cleaved into small
              chains by heparanases.  These small chains are secreted or transported to other
              sites in the cell where they have been implicated in regulating proteoglycan
              functions or other cellular processes.  To determine how the metabolism of
              proteoglycans regulates, it is important to understand how many heparanases are
              involved in heparan sulfate proteoglycan catabolism, how the enzymes recognize
              and cleave the heparan sulfate substrate, and the functions of the short chains
              produced by the enzyme reaction.  To determine the number of enzymes involved,
              heparanase activities will be purified from Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells,
              using enzyme assays that differentiate between a heparanse activity that
              degrades free heparan sulfate chains and heparanase activity that cleaves
              glycosaminoglycans off core proteins.  The recognition sequence cleaved by the
              purified heparanase(s) will be analyzed to establish the modifications
              important for the enzymes(s) to bind to and cleave the glycosaminoglycan chain,
              while the size of the heparan sulfate formed in reactions will be obtained to
              determine if the glycosaminoglycan is cleaved randomly or progressively.  The
              short heparan sulfate chains in CHO cells will be purified and characterized to
              determine whether heparanases generate populations of glycosaminoglycans
              enriched in specific modifications or locations inside cells, and to determine
              their ability to bind molecules that interact with heparan sulfate to determine
              if heparanases produce short chains that in turn regulate proteoglycan
              functions.  %%%  Heparan sulfate proteoglycans, found inside cells or at cell
              surfaces, are composed of one or more g lycosaminoglycan, or sugar, chains
              attached to a protein.  They have been implicated in cell processes, including
              adhesion, growth and differentiation.  Little is known about how they work. It
              appears that heparan sulfate proteoglycans are degraded inside cells by enzymes
              called heparanases. Heparanase-dependent release the heparan sulfate
              glycosaminoglycans produced from larger proteins are then degraded to short
              oligosaccharides.  Some of these short heparan sulfate oligosaccharide chains
              are secreted from cells and affect the binding of proteins to the cell surface.
               The aims of this project are to (1) purify heparanases from Chinese hamster
              ovary cells, (2) to characterize how the enzymes work to cleave the heparan
              sulfate glycosaminoglycans, and (3) determine if the short heparan sulfate
              chains produced by the heparanases regulate binding of growth factors at the
              surface of cells.  ***
