Title       : Broad Band Crust/Upper Mantle Studies Around New Zealand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1999       
File        : a9418343

Award Number: 9418343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282333             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis T. Wu wu@sunquakes.geol.binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418343  WU           This project is related to an already funded Continental 
              Dynamics project directed by Thomas Henyey and David Okaya of the  University
              of Southern California (USC), titled "Geophysical  Investigation of a modern
              Continent-Continent Collisional Orogen:  The Southern Alps, New Zealand"
              (referred to as the main project).    The main project concentrates on the
              South Island, with an onshore  reflection transect, onshore/offshore
              refraction/wide angle  reflection transect and a passive seismic study using
              local  seismicity and teleseisms as the center pieces.  The last component 
              involves a six months deployment of broad band instruments on the  South Island
              to record local earthquakes and teleseisms for focal  mechanisms, SKS
              anisotropy and deep mantle structures directly  under the South Island.        
              This project aims to provide a broader regional coverage by  deploying stations
              on Chatham Island east of South Island; near  Auckland, North Island; in
              Southeast Australia, in cooperation with  Prof. Brian Kennett of Australian
              National University; and on the  South Island, for a total of 11-12 stations. 
              The stations would be  deployed for 14 months, with part of the deployment
              overlapping  with that of the main project.  The specific questions to be 
              addressed are: (1) What is the lateral extent of the lithospheric  deformation
              associated with the New Zealand orogeny?  Does it  involve flow of mantle
              materials on both sides of the orogen? (2)  What is the precise nature of the
              upper mantle anisotropy that has  been discovered to the west of the South
              Island?  Is it related to  the New Zealand orogeny or to flow under the Pacific
              plate to the  northwest of New Zealand? (3)  What are the deeper structures
              under  the Chatham Rise and the Lord Howe Rise?  Are there deep lateral 
              differences that drive mantle dynamics?  (4)  Are there high  velocity (and
              high density) zones under the South Island?  What is  their lateral extent? 
              ***
