Title       : Protein Import into Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9418257

Award Number: 9418257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Verner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418257  Verner    This proposal addresses the topic of cotranslational import 
              of proteins into mitochondria.  This is a question of  fundamental importance,
              since the "textbook" view is that  protein import into mitochondria occurs via
              post-translation  import (release of peptide from polysome unattached to the 
              targeted membrane).  This view has resulted from high  profile research which
              places perhaps an unwarranted degree  of reliance on in vitro import reactions
              vs the in vivo  situation.  This high profile research has shown that post 
              translational import can occur in vitro, whether it does  occur in vivo, to the
              exclusion of the co-translational  mechanisms, is the question addressed by
              this proposal.  The experiments proposed examine the properties of 
              mitochondrial precursor proteins that may influence the  coupling of their
              synthesis and import and explore the  function of cytosolic chaperone proteins,
              as well as other  cytosolic components in the import reaction.  In experiments 
              related to the structure of precursor proteins, gene fusion  technology will be
              employed to generate various artificial  proteins that will be studied in both
              in vitro and in vivo  import reacitons.  The effect of mitochondrial
              presequences  and the relative stability of overall precursor structure  will
              be examined in order to determine the characteristics  of precursor proteins
              that influence their ability to be  imported by either a cotranslational or
              posttranslational  mechanism.  In addition, in vitro import reactions will be 
              performed to evaluate the involvement of other cytosolic  components in
              mitochondrial biogenesis.  Such components  will be identified and isolated
              using standard biochemical  procedures.  %%%  Results obtained from the
              proposed studies are anticipated  to add significantly to our understanding of 
              protein import  into mitochondria and other organelles.  The bulk of the 
              proposed experiments are designed to explore the integration  of mitochondrial
              biogenesis with other cellular  phenomena  such as cytosolic protein synthesis,
              translation rates, and  interactions between precursor proieins and cytosolic 
              components.  This is an important step in viewing the import  process in the
              context of the overall complexity of the  living cytosol and will be
              complementary to other work in  the field in which the process tends to be
              studied in great  detail but often in isolation of other cellular reactions. 
              ***
