Title       : Calibration of Hydrologic Models Using Multiobjectives and Visualization
               Techiques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9418147

Award Number: 9418147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Soroosh Sorooshian soroosh@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hoshin V. Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418147  Sorooshian    The reliance on land surface hydrologic models as tools
              in the study of hydroclimatology is increasing as hydrologists and
              climatologists examine emerging problems and exploit new data sources. 
              However, hydrologic models can only be as reliable as model assumptions,
              inputs, and parameter estimates.  Field measurements, prior information, and
              calibration are three techniques used in parameter estimation.  While the use
              of field measurements is gaining in importance, experience has shown that as a
              practical matter, virtually all models require calibration of at least some
              parameters.  However, extensive experience with model calibration has indicated
              that it is very often not possible to find a preferred (best) solution.  That
              is, for a given model and calibration data, there are usually sizable regions
              of the parameter space that appear to give roughly equivalent results.  This
              can gives rise to questions about the reliability and realism of the model, and
              the confidence in its predictions.   The primary objective of this research is
              to develop techniques for calibrating hydrologic models that improve the
              prospects for finding preferred solutions.  Major objectives are to:   1. 
              Recognize the inherently multi-objective nature of the hydrologic model
              calibration       problem and pose the calibration procedure in the framework
              of multiple objectives.  2.  Explore innovative ways of using multi-criteria,
              data sub-sets (that emphasize different        hydrologic  processes or
              different aspect  of model performance), measures of information               
                   content and global  search algorithms in identifying the non-inferior
              solution space and                              preferred solutions.  3.  On
              test cases, determine if a satisfactory and reliable estimate of the
              non-inferior solution       space can be identified, from which a preferred
              parameter estimate (or set of estimates)        can be selected.  Develop
              techniques for estimating confidence intervals on paramete rs         and
              simulated variable, taking into account the non-inferior solution space and
              data errors.       Gain insights into the roles that data error, model error,
              and parameter interaction play in        producing non-inferior solutions.  4. 
               Determine, for test cases, how preferred solutions can be reliably,
              effectively and efficiently obtained        through a systematic computer based
              exploration of the non-inferior solution  space.  Implement a        systematic
              workstation based calibration stratigy and compare it with existing
              single-objective       strategies.  This research will focus its attention on
              the emerging generation of land surface hydrologic models being considered as
              viable land-surface soil-vegetation-atmosphere transfer schemes (SVATS); such
              models are receiving widespread attention among hydrologists and
              hydrolmeteorologists but the calibration issues surrounding them have yet to
              receive systematic attention.  It is expected that the proposed techniques will
              help hydrologists build more reliable and  more realistic models.  In terms of
              general scientific knowledge, it is expected that the research will result in
              insights into problems of hydrologic model identification can calibration,
              particularly in the area of reliability and uniqueness.
