Title       : Enzyme Structure-Function Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1996   
File        : a9418479

Award Number: 9418479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. James Remington jim@uoxray.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418479  Remington  X-ray crystallographic and mutagenesis studies will be done
              on two enzymes, citrate synthase from pig and Azotobacter and serine
              carboxypeptidase from wheat and yeast.   Atomic models for the pig, wheat and
              yeast enzymes are on hand and have been refined at high resolution .  These
              will be used as the basis for inhibitor binding studies that will probe several
              aspects for the catalytic mechanism.  Inhibitors have been designed that mimic
              proposed transition states of  various steps along the catalytic pathway, so as
              to provide "snapshots: of enzyme conformations and interactions with substrate
              along the catalytic pathway.  The yeast serine carboxypeptidase has been
              mutated, resulting in greatly changed substrate specificity, and binding
              studies with peptide aldehydes should reveal the structural consequences of the
              mutational change and the molecular basis for substrate specificity.    The
              structure of the Azotobacter enzyme will  be determined in order to study how
              bacterial citrate synthases are allosterically regulated by NADH, and how they
              differ in structure from the non-allosterically regulated enzyme from pig.  The
              bacterial enzyme will also be used as a vehicle for mutagenesis studies which
              will be designed to probe the functions of specific active-site amino acid side
              chains.  The impetus for this is that most of many interesting mutants of the
              pig enzyme that exist cannot be crystallized, so the structural consequences of
              the mutations are unknown.    These projects are expected to shed light on the
              enzymatic mechanisms for two different families of enzymes.  Each enzyme poses
              significant problems concerning the mechanism of catalysis that remain to be
              understood.  Citrate synthase is the only enzyme of  known structure that can
              form a carbon-carbon bond.  The energetics of the initial step in the reaction,
              the deprotonation of a carbon acid, are not understood.  Serine
              carboxypeptidases are serine proteinases that function optimally at pH 4.0-5.0,
              unlike the other  serine proteinases, and the structural basis for this is also
              not understood.  %%  X-ray crystallographic and mutagenesis studies will be
              done on two enzymes, citrate synthetase from pig and Azotobacter, and serine
              carboxypeptidase from wheat and yeast. These projects are expected to shed
              light on the enzymatic mechanisms for the two different families of enzymes.
              Each enzyme possesses significant problems concerning the mechanism of
              catalysis that remain to be understood. The structure of the Azotobacter enzyme
              will be determined in order to study how these bacterial enzymes are regulated
              and how they differ from the pig enzyme. The bacterial enzyme will also be
              mutated to probe the function of specific active-site amino acid side chains.
              The yeast serine carboxypeptidase has been mutated, resulting in greatly
              changed substrate specificity. Binding studies with substrate analogs should
              reveal the structural consequences of the mutational change and the molecular
              basis of substrate specificity.  ***
