Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Theoretical Study of the Physics of
               Neutrinos and of Quarks in Nuclei at Low Energies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1995     
File        : a9418683

Award Number: 9418683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20866              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard J. Stephenson gjs@baryon.physics.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
              11        Astronomy                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,5912,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9418683  Stephenson      This award will partially support the travel
              expenses, over a  three year period, to enable Dr. Gerard J. Stephenson, of the
               Department of Physics and Astronomy at the University of  New Mexico, to
              conduct collaborative research with  Dr. Bruce H. J. McKellar, of the School of
              Physics at the  University of Melbourne.  The focus of the research will  be on
              the application of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) effective  theory to low energy
              nuclear properties and the study,  mainly through low energy nuclear reactions,
              of the interactions  of neutrinos at energies where their masses, should they
              exist,  will be important.    In this theoretical study of the physics of
              neutrinos and   quarks in nuclei at low energies, two issues will be 
              investigated.  The first study concerns the behavior of quarks  in the atomic
              nuclei and the question of whether they remain  confined to individual protons
              and neutrons, or whether they  transfer between them.  The second study deals
              with neutrinos  and the development of a model in which the effective mass of 
              a particle depends on its surroundings, a model which could  explain some
              features of the experiments which have attempted to  measure the mass of this
              elusive particle.  The collaborative  work brings together the complementary
              expertise of the principal  investigators.  The visits by Dr. McKellar to New
              Mexico are  supported by the Australian Department of Industry, Science  and
              Technology (DIST) under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative  Science Program.
