Title       : Molecular Interactions Regulating Cell Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9418318

Award Number: 9418318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309200             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Cafiso cafiso@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418318  Cafiso  Proteins that can equilibrate between the cytosol and the
              membrane  surface are critical to cell signaling, and charge density at the 
              membrane interface plays a major role in determining this  equilibrium. 
              However, little is known at a molecular level  regarding the membrane binding
              of these proteins, and it has not  been possible to account for the
              electrostatic contributions to the  binding using simple electrostatic
              theories.  Neuromodulin and  MARCKS (the Myristoylated Alanine Rich C-Kinase
              Substrate) are  believed to play key roles as calmodulin buffers in the central
               nervous system. They bind calmodulin as well as membrane surfaces,  and this
              binding is eliminated when they are phosphorylated by  protein kinase C.  A
              goal of this work is to obtain structural and  kinetic information on a
              remarkable set of charged peptides derived  from neuromodulin and MARCKS which
              exhibit all the important  properties of their parent proteins.  This
              information will be used  to test more sophisticated electrostatic theories, to
              test the role  of these proteins as calmodulin buffers, and to identify
              structural  paradigms for proteins that interact in a purely electrostatic 
              fashion with membrane surfaces. This work will make extensive use  of
              site-directed spin-labeling and EPR spectroscopy.  Another goal  of the work is
              to investigate structural deformations that occur in  calmodulin in the absence
              and presence of substrates.  This work  will make use of NMR and paramagnetic
              enhancements of nuclear  relaxation which should provide distances weighted by
              a sixth root  average.  The modes of binding of peptides from MARCKS and 
              neuromodulin which associate with calmodulin in a Ca++ dependent and  Ca++
              independent fashion, respectively, will also be examined.   Proline appears
              with an unusually high frequency in the  transmembrane segments of membrane
              proteins, and a final objective  of this proposal will be to evaluate the role
              of proline in  controlling the flexibility or deformability o f hydrophobic 
              helices.  %%%   The control of cell growth and metabolism is an extremely
              important  process for the proper functioning of all organisms, especially 
              higher organisms such as plants and animals.  In a number of cases,  the
              pathways (or protein components) that mediate this control are  well
              established.  At a molecular level, however, little is known  regarding the
              interactions between the macromolecules mediating the  control of cell growth
              and metabolism.  The objective of the work  is to understand several
              fundamental molecular interactions that  are critical for cell control.  The
              understanding of this control  at a molecular level is important for several
              reasons.  First, it  will provide insight into how biological systems have
              evolved and  exploited physical properties of their molecular components.  
              Second it will provide information on the specific interactions  that mediate
              cell control.  Although it is not a primary objective  of the research,
              knowledge of such specific interactions will  ultimately be important in
              designing new drugs to treat diseases  that are associated with cell control
              such as viral infection and  cancer.  ***
