Title       : Conformational Coupling and the Basis for Metal Ion Specificity in Superoxide
               Dismutase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9418181

Award Number: 9418181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne-Frances Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418181  Miller  The research will employ Fe and Mn-containing superoxide
              dismutase  (SOD) as a model system and exploit the unique ability of nuclear 
              magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) to directly observe protein  groups and
              monitor structure in solution.  The objectives are to  elucidate the
              conformational interplay between the metal ion site  and the protein of SOD
              upon substrate analog binding to the metal  ion, and to determine why FeSOD
              protein is inactive with Mn bound  instead of Fe, and MnSOD protein is inactive
              with Fe bound instead  of Mn.  Isotope edited NMR will be used in conjunction
              with amino  acid-specific isotopic labeling to produce drastically simplified 
              spectra showing signals of labeled amino acids only.  Comparisons  of spectra
              of SOD with and without the substrate analog azide bound  will identify amino
              acids affected by azide binding and indicate by  what mechanisms the protein is
              conformationally responsive to  events at the metal ion.  By monitoring amino
              acids at the  interfaces between domains or subunits, it will be possible to 
              determine whether the conformation change involves potentially  general
              mechanisms for conformational change including (1) relative  motions of domains
              bridged by the metal ion, (2) relative motions  of subunits and (3) propagation
              of conformational effects via  hydrogen bonding networks.  These studies build
              on the known  structure for SOD and exploit the unique ability of NMR to
              directly  observe protons, provide information on their participation in 
              hydrogen bonds and provide qualitative and quantitative   information on both
              structure and dynamics of proteins in solution  unconstrained by crystal
              packing.  The work will also determine why  SODs containing the wrong metal ion
              are inactive, by evaluating  their competence for individual elements of
              catalysis including  each of the half reactions, the reduction midpoint
              potential,  proton donation, substrate analog binding and active site 
              structure, thus specifying the chemical reaso n for catalytic  incompetence. 
              Site-directed and random mutagenesis will be used to  convert MnSOD protein
              into a FeSOD.  Characterization of these SODs  will reveal what amino acid
              changes are important, the extent to  which these amino acid changes support
              activity with the wrong  metal, and at what cost to activity with the correct
              metal.  %%%  Metalloenzymes combine the reactivity of metal centers with the 
              exquisite specificity and control of enzymes.  The Fe-containing  superoxide
              dismutases (FeSODs) and the homologous Mn-containing  superoxide dismutases
              (MnSODs) are metalloenzymes that catalyze the  conversion of superoxide to
              dioxygen and hydrogen peroxide.  SOD is  relatively small, very stable and
              soluble but also embodies two  central features of metalloenzyme catalysis: 
              the metal site and  the protein are believed to affect each other's structure,
              and each  type of SOD, while able to bind either Fe or Mn, is only active  with
              one.  Thus, the structure and activity of the enzyme reflect  interactions
              between the protein and the metal ion, and these  interactions are metal ion
              specific.  The goal of the research is  (1) to determine how much of the
              protein is affected by binding of  small molecules to the metal ion, and (2) to
              describe the protein  structural change in terms of relative movement of the
              modules that  make up the protein structure.  The work will also determine why 
              MnSOD protein is not active with Fe bound and FeSOD protein is not  active with
              Mn bound.  This new understanding of the protein-metal  cooperation that is
              necessary for metalloenzyme catalytic activity  will advance ongoing efforts to
              design or modify metalloenzymes to  catalyze useful reactions in drug
              synthesis, waste detoxification  and chemical sensors.  ***
