Title       : Instruments for Fluorescence and Video-Enhanced Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1997      
File        : a9418205

Award Number: 9418205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47943              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy F. Boss wendy_boss@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds for equipment for fluorescence  and video-enhanced
              microscopy to include a cooled charged  coupled device (CCD) camera and imaging
              system for detecting  low intensity fluorescence, a fluorescence microscope 
              equipped with infinity corrected and differential  interference contrast
              optics, an image processing system and  Newvicon camera for video-enhanced
              microscopy, and a  micromanipulator and piezoelectric microinjector for use 
              with plant cells.    This is a joint proposal by 7 investigator (5 major users,
               Wendy F. Boss, Rebecca S. Boston, Mark Conkling, Dominique  Robertson, Ron
              Sederoff and Ross Whetten, and 2 minor users,  Tim Petty and Kelly Tatchell)
              from four departments and two  colleges.  To our knowledge there is no other
              cooled CCD  camera on campus and there is no comparable equipment for  high
              resolution video-enhanced microscopy in the College of  Agriculture and Life
              Sciences or the College of Forestry  Resources.    The principle investigators
              study basic cellular processes  and signal transduction using a combination of
              molecular,  genetic, biochemical, and microscopic techniques.  The  research
              projects include signal transduction (Boss),  protein trafficking and packaging
              to storage vesicles in  maize (Boston), root-specific gene expression and
              nematode  resistance (Conkling), viral pathogenesis (Robertson and  Petty),
              cell division and cell cycle control (Tatchell), and  lignin biosynthesis,
              fungal disease resistance and genetic  mapping in loblolly pine (Sederoff and
              Whetten).    For the above studies we need to visualize fluorescent  proteins
              within living cells, to monitor changes in protein  distribution and cellular
              morphology over time, and to  resolve fluorescent markers on metaphase
              chromosomes.  Our  research is currently limited by the sensitivity and 
              resolution of existing microscopic equipment.    The Botany Department has made
              a commitment to the facility  by providing space and technical support.  The
              equipment  will be under the s upervision of Dr. Wendy F. Boss and Mr.  Dana
              Moxley, and it will be housed in a central location.  The requested equipment
              will contribute significantly to our  ongoing efforts to strengthen cell
              biology at North Carolina  State University.
