Title       : Role of Intermediate Filaments in Particle Motion in Fish Melanophores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1996   
File        : a9418474

Award Number: 9418474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir I. Rodionov   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary G. Borisy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Boisy  9418474         The cytoplasm of cells is organized by means of a 
              dynamic filamentous framework called the cytoskeleton.  This  framework may be
              likened to a rail network along which move  many kinds of cellular "cargo." 
              The "cargo" moves along the  rail network after loading onto transport vehicles
               equivalent to "flatbeds" or "tanker cars" and these are  moved along the rail
              network by engines of various kinds.  The problem in understanding the
              organization of the  cytoplasm is to figure out the molecular workings of this 
              "rail network."  The network in cells is composed of three  kinds of
              filamentous "rails" actin filaments, microtubules,  and intermediate filaments.
               Some of the motors and "cargo"  for actin filaments and microtubules but the
              role of  intermediate filaments remain a mystery.       Special cells in the
              skin of fish provide a  particularly favorably system in which to investigate
              the  role of these intermediate filaments.  These cells display  spectacular
              cytoplasmic traffic; thousands of granules of  pigment can be induced to move
              rapidly and synchronously  either inwards towards the center of the cell or
              outwards  toward the periphery in response to a hormonal stimulus.  This system
              will be used to test whether intermediate  filaments participate in the
              movement of granules.  %%%       This study is important because will address a
               fundamental mystery about he organization of the cytoplasm  and the traffic
              which takes place within it.  This study  will be the first to investigate the
              potential role of  intermediate filaments in the translocation and specific 
              positioning of cellular components.  Such process  necessarily entail molecular
              motors and have the potential  to affect numerous cellular functions including
              uptake and  secretion of materials from cells, positioning of organelles  and
              segregation of genetic material at the time of cell  division.  ***
