Title       : Homeotic Genes and Other Genes Involved in Organizing the D.melanogaster Tail
               Segments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1995    
File        : a9418119

Award Number: 9418119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Kuhn fdkuhn@ucf1vm  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418119  Kuhn  It is proposed to establish by immunocytochemistry the precise
              embryonic expression patterns for genes required in the tail region of
              Drosophila melangaster.  A hierarchy of gene function will be established by
              examining how null mutants for the different genes affect the distribution
              patterns of genes expressed in different regions of the tail.  The normal
              embryonic segment/parasegment distribution patterns for the genes will be
              compared to the expression patterns of the same genes in the larval genital
              disc in order to determine the extent to which each embryonic tail segment
              contributes to the sexually dimorphic genital disc.  Clonal analysis will be
              used to define the segment borders in the genital disc and in the adult
              genitalia.  Finally, the adult transformations caused by mutant genes with
              homeotic phenotypes will be examined to establish how each gene contributes to
              the identity of the adult tail region.  Since null mutants for all of these
              genes are early lethals, the homeotic transformations will be studied by
              mitotic recombination in clones of mutant cells.  %%%  Drosophila melanogaster
              provides a superb animal model for studying the gene network required to take
              the animal from a single cell to a differentiated multicellular organism.  The
              goal of this study is to determine how the early acting pair rule genes,
              segment polarity genes, homeotic selector genes and other genes with homeotic
              phenotypes contribute to formation of the tail segments (defined as abdominal
              segments A8 through A11).  Whereas the segmental organization of the thorax and
              anterior abdomen is morphologically delineated in the Drosophila larva and
              adult, tail segments lack such well-defined boundaries.  Thus, the organization
              of the tail region has been difficult to decipher.  Results from these studies
              will help us understand how the Drosophila tail segments form and how the
              segments have been genetically modified through evolutionary time into the
              specialized female and male genitalia.  The lesson s learned in Drosophila may
              provide some insights into how some of these same genes developmentally
              interact in the tail region of more complex organisms where they are also
              expressed.  ***
