Title       : RUI: Carbonic Anhydrases Involved in Algal Inorganic Carbon Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9418502

Award Number: 9418502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. David Husic husicd@lafcol.lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The enzyme carbonic anhydrase catalyzes the interconversion of the two forms of 
              inorganic carbon, carbon dioxide and bicarbonate ion, that predominate in
              aqueous media at  physiological pH values. In the alga Chlamydomonas
              reinhardtii, one or more forms of carbonic  anhydrase are components of a
              system for inorganic carbon acquisition and concentration. This system  enables
              this and other algae to efficiently utilize low levels of carbon dioxide that
              could otherwise  limit their growth. The role of a periplasmic carbonic
              anhydrase in inorganic carbon acquisition is  well established, and there is
              substantial evidence that intracellular carbonic anhydrase activity is  also
              essential for efficient inorganic carbon u tilization. However, the proteins
              responsible for this  intracellular activity have not been specifically
              identified. We propose to utilize a novel carbonic  anhydrase specific active
              site directed radiolabeled photoaffinity reagent as a tool both in the 
              identification and isolation of physiologically important intracellular forms
              of carbonic anhydrase  that are present in levels too low to be readily
              identified and quantified by other methods, and in  studies leading to the
              identification of genes encoding intracellular carbonic anhydrase. Studies to 
              apply this photoaffinity reagent to the identification and localization of
              carbonic anhydrases in  cyanobacterial systems will also be initiated. In
              addition, we propose to continue studies to  investigate the relationship
              between the subunit structure and disulfide bond reduction status on both  the
              catalytic and inhibitor binding properties of the predominant extracellular
              form of carbonic  anhydrase from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. The overall
              objective of these studies is to enhance our  understanding of the role of
              carbonic anhydrases as important components of the systems by which algal 
              cells are able to efficiently concentrate inorganic carbon to provide carbon
              dioxide for  photosynthesis.   %%%   The unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas
              reinhtardii and a variety of other aquatic photosynthetic organisms have
              developed systems that allow them to acquire atmospheric carbon dioxide much
              more effectively than most terrestrial plants. This is important because
              photosynthetic organisms utilize carbon dioxide for the light dependent
              synthesis of carbohydrates, which in turn leads to plant growth and biomass
              production.  Furthermore, many plants can be growth limited because of the low
              levels of carbon dioxide that are present in the atmosphere. An understanding
              of how the highly efficient carbon dioxide acquisition systems work in
              organisms like Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, may be of value in learning how to
              improve carbon dioxide utilization in higher plants. Alt hough all of the
              details of the way in which this system functions in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
              are not yet understood, it is apparent that a particular enzyme, carbonic
              anhydrase, is an important component of this process. Carbonic anhydrase
              accelerates the interconversion of carbon dioxide and bicarbonate, and this
              interconversion is important to facilitate the transfer of these species of
              inorganic carbon among cellular compartments, and plays a role in making carbon
              dioxide available to the chloroplast, the intracellular site of conversion of
              carbon dioxide to carbohydrates. In Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, there is
              considerable evidence that several different forms of this enzyme are important
              for the process of carbon dioxide utilization, and that these forms are found
              in different parts of the algal cell. It is a primary goal of this work to
              isolate the form of the enzyme that is present in the chloroplast. This in turn
              may lead to the identification of the gene that encodes this protein, and to an
              understanding of how the gene is turned on and off in response to environmental
              stimuli.  Other  parts of the work may lead to the identification of other
              forms of carbonic anhydrase that are present  in other compartments of the
              algal cell. We believe that this information will significantly enhance  our
              understanding of the efficient mechanism for carbon dioxide acquisition in
              Chlamydomonas  reinhardtii.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
