Title       : Coordinated Theoretical and Analytical Investigations of Organic Transformations
               During Diagenesis and Hydrothermal Alteration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9418500

Award Number: 9418500
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Everett L. Shock   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1043,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9418500  Shock      Despite the enormous amount of research that has gone into
              characterizing the organic composition of geologic fluids, there still remains
              only a rudimentary understanding of the fundamental reaction pathways and
              mechanisms by which transformation  occur when hot aqueous solutions interact
              with organic matter in natural processes.  The emerging paradigm of metastable
              equilibrium provides a framework with which the dynamic relationships among
              organic compounds in geologic fluids such as oilfield brines and hydrothermal
              solutions is leading to a clearer understanding of the organic transformations
              responsible for the observed composition of these fluids, and has lead to new
              ideas about the origin, transport, accumulation and alteration of petroleum. 
              The proposed research seeks to expand our knowledge of metastable equilibrium
              states, and improve their applicability for understanding geochemical
              processes.   Specific issues to be addressed in the proposed research include: 
              The breadth of metastable equilibrium states.  At present, metastable
              equilibrium arguments are based largely on carboxylic acids in oilfield brines.
               Which other organic compounds present in natural solutions participate in
              metastable equilibrium states, and which do not?  Do specific families of
              compounds reach metastable equilibrium, while others do not?  The mechanistic
              implications of metastable equilibrium states.  Can the observed metastable
              equilibrium relationships be used to construe the reaction pathways that
              actually occur in natural settings?  The need for catalysts.  Do the inferred
              pathways require the participation of a catalyst?  What catalysts are available
              in these environments and in what from?  To what extent do microorganisms
              catalyze these reactions?    These issues are to be addressed through an
              approach that coordinates theoretical calculations with sampling and analysis
              of organic solutes in natural and experimental solutions.  This effort will
              include: 1) collection and analysis of  geologic fluids (initially oil-field
              brines) to achieve a more thorough inventory of their organic composition than
              is presently available, 2) incorporating these analyses into new tests of
              metastable equilibrium which will allow us to identify which compounds
              participate in metastable equilibria, 3) using the results of these
              calculations, identify the pathways by which organic compounds are transformed
              in natural settings, 4) comparison of these results with laboratory studies to
              identify which reaction pathways require catalysis, and 5) initiating the
              search for likely catalysts.
