Title       : The Bransfield Strait-South Shetland Islands/Trench: Structural and
               Stratigraphic Evolution of a Linked(?) Back-arc/Fore-arc System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1996   
File        : a9418135

Award Number: 9418135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59276              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian W. Dalziel ian@utig.ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Austin, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  This award supports a geophysical study of the Bransfield  Strait
              region of Antarctica using recently collected  multichannel seismic data. 
              University of Texas Institute of  Geophysics (UTIG) multichannel seismic (MCS)
              data (EW91-01  data) has enabled detailed analysis of structural style and 
              rifting processes in Bransfield Strait to be carried out.  The analysis has
              brought new insight to the ongoing  extensional processes in Bransfield Strait.
               This project  will build on this work to consider Bransfield Strait in the 
              full context of a fore-arc/back-arc tectonic system.  This  project will
              primarily use UTIG (EW91-01) MCS data, but will  also incorporate other
              geophysical data from the region that  are available from the United Kingdom
              and Italy.  Bransfield Strait is a young basin apparently undergoing  active
              (intracontinental?) extension located between the  Antarctic Peninsula and the
              South Shetland Islands, a small  chain of islands to the northwest trending
              roughly parallel  with the Peninsula.  Although the South Shetland Islands 
              show no recent arc volcanism, they lie above a subduction  zone which still
              appears to be active, albeit with  subduction occurring at a slow rate. This
              tectonic setting  and interpretation of other events affecting plate motions 
              in the vicinity have lead to the currently-held view that  Bransfield Strait
              has opened as a backarc basin in response  to South Shetland Trench roll-back
              or retreat.  However, the  modern stress regime is unclear.  The focus of study
              thus far has been on the structural style  and rifting processes observed in
              recently-acquired UTIG  (EW91-01) MCS data in Bransfield Strait.  Initial
              seismic  interpretation indicates that intracrustal diapirism, as  evidenced by
              faulting of overlying sediment and associated  high-amplitude seismic events,
              may be an important element  of observed extension. Besides the significance of
              this  diapirism with respect to active rifting processes, it also  has
              implications regarding the evolutio n of the extensional  stress regime in
              Bransfield Strait. It is possible that  transtensional tectonics to the
              northeast of the Strait are  increasingly important relative to trench rollback
              in  driving extension in the Strait.  This project will consolidate the
              geophysical analysis of  Bransfield Strait and build upon it by considering the
               Strait's relationship with the adjacent South Shetland  Trench and "forearc".
              EW91-01 MCS data are ideally suited to  an analysis of whether structures seen
              in the "back-arc"  relate to structures and processes at the trench and "fore- 
              arc".  A key part of this analysis will be to test the  hypothesis that trench
              roll-back is causing "back-arc"  extension in Bransfield Strait.  High quality
              MCS data from  Italy and the United Kingdom will be integrated with the 
              EW91-01 MCS data for more comprehensive areal coverage and  seismic analysis of
              structural style in the "back-arc" and  `fore-arc". EW91-01 potential field
              data  will also be  incorporated in the study.  Comparison of the northern
              Antarctic peninsula with other  regions characterized by similar, though not
              necessarily  identical, active tectonic settings (e.g., Lau Basin, Gulf  of
              California) should allow an estimate of the relative  importance of processes
              of marginal basin formation and  evolution on global versus local scales. 
              Furthermore, the  common history that the Antarctic Peninsula Pacific margin 
              shares with the South American Pacific margin as parts of  the convergent plate
              margin of Gondwanaland means that  Bransfield Strait can be considered a modern
              analog for  Early to mid-Cretaceous evolution of the Rocas Verdes  marginal
              basin of southern Chile.  The Rocas Verdes Basin  history  is critical to
              understanding early stages of Andean  orogenesis.
