Title       : Ultrafast Studies of Electron Transfer in Photosystem II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1994  
File        : a9418390

Award Number: 9418390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roseanne J. Sension rsension@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418390  Sension  A proper understanding of the primary energy transfer and
              electron  transfer processes in photosynthetic systems is one of the keys to  a
              complete understanding of natural solar energy conversion.  In  this research
              project state-of-the-art ultrafast spectroscopic  techniques will be uqed to
              study the primary electron transfer  processes in photosystem II.  Several
              types of experiments will be  performed to try to elucidate the time-scale and
              mechanism for  primary charge separation in PSII.  These include the following:
                The ultrafast kinetics will be measured using various reaction  center
              preparations to determine whether the method of preparation  can affect either
              the energy relaxation kinetics or the rate of  primary charge separation. 
              Larger PSII complexes will be prepared  in order to study the electron transfer
              rate in active centers and  set to rest any speculation as to whether or not
              the D1-D2-Cyt b559  complex retains the native reaction center structure and
              dynamics.   Transient absorption measurements will be made with ultrashort (<50
               fs) pulses to explore the possible involvement of coherent protein  motion in
              the initial dynamics of PSII.  Resonance Raman  measurements will be attempted
              to probe the production of the  initial charge separated state directly,
              overcoming the limitation  of highly overlapping electronic absorption
              features. Combining the  slight differences in the electronic spectra with the
              selectivity  introduced by resonance enhancement and the differences in the 
              vibrational spectra of the charged and neutral pigments, it should  be possible
              to detect the charge separated state with much less  ambiguity.  %%%  A
              rigorous understanding of the primary electron transfer reactions  in
              biological photosynthetic systems is one of the keys to a  complete
              understanding of natural solar energy conversion.  The  protein complex
              referred to as photosystem II (PSII) is responsible  for the ability of green
              plants to utilize light energy to fuel the  pr oduction of oxygen from water. 
              The PSII protein complex works in  conjunction with a second complex,
              photosystem I (PSI), to form  carbohydrates from carbon dioxide.  In this
              research project,  state-of-the-art laser technology will be used to study the
              light  initiated electron transfer reactions of photosystem II (PSII).   The
              overall goal of this investigation is to obtain a detailed  understanding of
              the factors that control the efficiency and  robustness of photosynthesis in
              green plants.  ***
