Title       : Neoproterozoic Paleogeography and Global Climate: Paleomagnetic and
               Magnetostratigraphic Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1995      
File        : a9418523

Award Number: 9418523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Kirschvink kirschvink@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kirschvink  9418523   The Neoproterozoic interval of Earth history is remarkable
              in many respects:  not only did the planet suffer perhaps its worst glaciation,
              but an explosive radiation of metazoan fauna followed shortly thereafter.  At
              the same time, a supercontinent may have dispersed as Gondwana amalgamated. 
              Despite the importance of understanding these events in terms of Earth's
              dynamic evolution, existing constraints of Late Proterozoic paleogeography are
              rather poor.  Although the many existing reconstructions which have been
              proposed for this time rely largely on the same paleomagnetic database, they
              differ greatly because the data are commonly suspect, and different workers
              choose different paleopoles to constrain their models.  In particular, the
              Vendian position of Australia, Laurentia, Baltica, and Africa, have been the
              subject of heated recent debate.  Resolution of these problems require new,
              high-quality, paleomagnetic data of Late Proterozoic rocks from these
              continental blocks, with unambiguous determinations of primary magnetization
              and geological ages.   Also under debate are the timing and severity of the
              Late Precambrian glaciations.  Neoproterozoic glacial deposits are found on
              virtually every present continent, and this can be explained by either a global
              icehouse state with synchronous glacial episodes, or by rapid drift of the
              continents in and out of the polar regions of a cool but not frigid Earth. 
              Precise dating of the various glacial units is the most obvious way to test the
              two alternatives, but this is hampered by the limited Vendian fossil record and
              the general inability to determine isotopic ages directly from the glacial
              units.  Although such studies have been attempted previously, many neglected to
              include geological field tests on the primary magnetization, crucial for rocks
              of this age.   We propose to conduct intensive paleomagnetic studies of
              sedimentary successions on four Vendian continents:  East Gondwana (Australia),
              Laurentia, Baltica, and Africa ( Kalahari craton).  Our sampling strategy will
              emphasize field tests for primary magnetic remanence as well as stratigraphy
              continuity and consistency.  This project will thus extend the Late Proterozoic
              portion of the study, "Low-Latitude Glaciations in the Precambrian...", to
              include magnetostratigraphy and interbasinal correlation.  This should provide
              reliable paleomagnetic poles for Vendian time and also lead to a
              well-calibrated, multidisciplinary stratigraphic timescale for this pivotal
              interval of Earth history.
