Title       : Effects of Reactive Flow & Faults in Carbonate-Hosted Lead- Zinc Ore Formations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1998  
File        : a9418011

Award Number: 9418011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108138             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grant Garven garven@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Garven  9418011   This proposal seeks to increase our basic understanding of the
              role of large-scale groundwater flow in geologic processes such as stratabound
              ore formation in carbonate rocks.  Ancient limestone-dolostone aquifers in
              North America contain significant ore deposits of lead, zinc, barite, and
              fluorite that appear to have origins related to the migration of deep
              groundwater over 10's and 100's of kilometers.  A large ore district has been
              the focus of exploration and intensive geologic research over the past two
              decades:  The Ozark Dome in southeast Missouri.  Although much has been
              revealed about the geologic characteristics and conditions of ore formation in
              this setting, much controversy still surrounds issues such as the geochemical
              reactions causing ore mineralization, the actual pathways for brine migration
              (aquifers or faults), and the mechanisms causing migration of the ore-forming
              fluids.  Geological and geochemical data are now abundant for this
              carbonate-hosted ore district.   Recent work aimed at understanding
              hydrogeologic processes at the basin-scale has shown that the ores in Missouri
              were probably formed by deep groundwater moving updip through foreland basins
              and rifts adjacent to the Ozark Dome (Garven et al., 1993), but the actual flow
              patterns have yet to be mapped at smaller scales (L<10km).  Many geochemical
              models have been conjectured for ore deposition in the Southeast Missouri
              district, yet no mechanisms have been tested in a framework that includes the
              effects of fluid flow and heat transport.   A primary objective of this
              proposal is to use recently developed hydrogeologic-geochemical modeling tools
              to explore and compare the paleohydrogeology of ore formation in the Southeast
              Missouri.  Prior NSF support of the Hydrogeology Program at Johns Hopkins
              University has resulted in the development of a new three-dimensional finite
              element code for modeling coupled groundwater and heat transport in sedimentary
              systems.  Additional research at JHU has resulted i n the development of a new
              two-dimensional, reactive flow computer code that can be used to simulate
              groundwater chemistry, patterns of rock alteration, and ore mineralization over
              geologic time.  The proposal project will apply theses tools to test conceptual
              models of ore formation in Southeast Missouri.
