Title       : Collaborative Research: The Advance of Colloid Mobilization and Transport Fronts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1996       
File        : a9418472

Award Number: 9418472
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph N. Ryan joe.ryan@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1043,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9418172  Elimelech    The transport of radionuclides, metals, and non-polar
              organic compounds in groundwater is severely restricted by adsorption to
              immobile aquifer sediments.  In the presence of colloids, however, these
              low-solubility contaminants migrate over distances much greater than those
              predicted by models that consider only the distribution of the contaminant
              between the dissolved and the adsorbed, immobile phase.  The presence of
              colloids requires inclusion of an adsorbed, mobile phase of the contaminant in
              transport models.  This requirement has shifted our attention to the
              mobilization, transport, and deposition colloids in aquifers.    Colloid
              formation may occur by in situ precipitation or mobilization caused by chemical
              or physical perturbations in the aquifer.  When a chemical perturbation
              increases the repulsive forces between the colloid and grain surfaces, colloids
              are mobilized and transported with the groundwater.  If the transport of the
              solute causing that perturbation is retarded relative to the groundwater, the
              mobilized colloid will eventually pass the solute front and encounter sediments
              that have not yet been affected by the solute, or colloid-mobilizing agent. 
              Under these conditions, we expect that the colloids will be re-deposited on
              grains and will remain there until the solute "catches up."  We hypothesize
              that the transport of colloids mobilized by a chemical perturbation will never
              exceed the transport of the colloid-mobilizing agent.   To test this
              hypothesis, we propose to (1) develop a model that will simultaneously account
              for the transport of the colloids and the colloid-mobilizing agent and (2)
              conduct a series of small-scale, intermediate-scale, and field experiments
              simulating and testing colloid mobilization and transport.    The model will be
              developed and rigorously tested by the UCLA researchers.  The model will
              account for colloid deposition and release, microscopic and macroscopic charge
              heterogeneity of colloid and grain surfaces, the effect of  retained colloids
              on the deposition and release of colloids, solute adsorption and desorption,
              and "megascopic" heterogeneities (i.e., laying in aquifer sediments).  It will
              be formulated to model colloid and solute transport in one and two dimensions
              for the laboratory experiments and it will be extended to three dimensions for
              the field experiment.    The small-and intermediate-scale experiments will be
              conducted at the University of Colorado's Water Resources laboratory.  The
              materials used in the experiments will include hematite and kaolinite colloids,
              quartz and ferric oxyhydroxide-coated quartz porous media, and phosphate
              dodecanoic acid (a surfactant), and isolate NOM from the field site as
              colloid-mobilizing agents.  Small-scale column experiments will be conducted to
              identify parameters for the intermediate-scale and field experiments.  The
              intermediate-scale experiments will be conducted in a two-dimensional tank of
              10 m length 2 m  height, and 5 cm width filled with homogeneous and
              heterogeneous (layered) porous media.  The tank experiments will directly test
              the hypothesis relating colloid transport to the transport of the
              colloid-mobilizing agent.  The field experiment will be conducted at the
              Barouch Forest Science Institute site in Georgetown, S.C. The surficial aquifer
              at the BFSI site is composed primarily of quartz sand, ferric oxyhydroxides,
              and layered heterogeneity.  A field experiment is proposed that will examine
              the deposition and mobilization of synthesied kaolinite collids labeled with a
              stable isotope (deuterium or 18O) or titanium as an isomorphous substitute for
              silicon.  Separate injections will test the effects of dodecanoic acid and
              NOM-rich water from a nearby pond as the colloid-mobilizing agent in both oxic
              and suboxic portions of the aquifer.
