Title       : Enzymatic Properties and Biological Roles of Novel Beta-Hydroxyacid
               Dehydrogenases in Plants and Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0119441

Award Number: 0119441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Hawes Jhawes@iupui.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The beta-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases are a structurally and mechanistically
              related family of enzymes with a predominance of homologues specific to
              bacteria and plants.  The only two known mammalian family members include
              beta-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase. 
              Two of the bacterial family members have recently been identified as isozymes
              of tartronate semialdehyde reductase (TSR) with differences in substrate
              specificity.  TSR is part of a pathway for glycerate biosynthesis from
              glyoxylate, hydroxypyruvate, and other substrates in bacteria and plants.  Most
              bacterial and plant genomes display multiple homologues of TSR.  The
              Escherichia coli genome contains 4 homologues, of which two have been cloned
              and enzymatically characterized.  The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains 6
              homologues of TSR, none of which have been cloned or identified in terms of
              substrate specificity and enzymatic properties.  Most of the bacterial
              beta-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase genes contain apparent binding sites for
              cAMP-CRP and are likely regulated by catabolite repression. These enzymes may
              serve alternative metabolic pathways, such as glycerate biosynthesis, in
              anaerobiosis and in conditions of nutrient deprivation when TCA cycle activity
              is inadequate.  This hypothesis is fitting with the organization of surrounding
              genes and cAMP-CRP sites observed in E. coli and Haemophilus influenzae loci
              containing beta-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase genes.  This project will examine the
              enzymatic properties and substrate specificities of cloned and over-expressed
              beta-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases of A. thaliana, to determine what biological
              functions the plant TSR isozymes may serve.  The identities and relative
              quantities of these and other co-expressed proteins will be determined by a
              proteomic approach, utilizing isotope-coded affinity tags, in order to
              understand more clearly what metabolic pathways are functioning together under
              conditions of specific substrate limitation and/or anaerobiosis in E. coli and
              H. influenzae.  
It is not clear, biologically, why certain bacteria and
              plants should require multiple isoforms of TSR, but this genetic capacity may
              reflect a previously unrecognized importance of glycerate biosynthesis in
              bacteria and plants.  This project will expand our understanding of this
              recently discovered family of enzymes, and their apparently specific metabolic
              roles in plants and bacteria.  This research will also bring new information
              about what enzymes and other proteins are predominantly expressed in two
              different bacterial species when grown under various limiting and anaerobic
              conditions.




