Title       : Proposal for Acquisition of an 800 MHz NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0119304

Award Number: 0119304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Wemmer dewemmer@LBL.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tracy M. Handel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ignacio Tinoco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for the purchase of an 800 MHz NMR
              spectrometer to be used to study the structure, function and dynamics of a
              variety of biological macromolecules. The use of NMR for study of the structure
              and behavior large biological molecules has rapidly expanded in recent years as
              the availability of instruments capable of operating at high frequencies and
              field strengths has increased, and as techniques for the use of high-field NMR
              have been perfected.  Only at the highest frequencies can instruments resolve
              the minute differences in the NMR signals of each atom in a large protein or
              nucleic acid.  These minute differences allow researchers to locate the
              relative positions of each atom with the precision needed to establish
              structure at the atomic level.  The three major users of this instrument will
              study the structure of NtrC, a bacterial two-component signaling system, the
              design of sequence-specific DNA binding proteins, the structures of RNAs with
              group I introns, and the structure of the 3' ends of the RNA genome of brome
              mosaic virus, among other problems.  Six other users will investigate free
              energy landscapes for protein folding, tubulin interactions with transcription
              factors,  RNA folding, the structure of ribonucleoprotein complexes, and the
              structures of a variety of proteins that function in multi-subunit complexes. 
              
The request for NSF support was submitted through a joint program of the NSF
              and the NIH that allows both agencies to support the purchase of very expensive
              research instruments to be shared by three or more independent users.  NSF
              funds for this award are provided jointly by the Division of Biological
              Infrastructure and by the Office of Multi-Disciplinary Activities of the
              Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. In addition to funds
              provided by NSF, partial support for the purchase is being provided by the
              Shared Instrumentation Grant program of the NIH.  In addition to the support
              provided by federal sources, the University will provide approximately $1
              million of its own funds to purchase the instrument. 

