Title       : Solar Wind Streamer Belt Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0119700

Award Number: 0119700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy U. Crooker crooker@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will work towards an understanding of the region of the solar
              atmosphere known as the streamer belt. The main effort is to apply new tools to
              analyze the topology of coronal mass ejections in the solar wind and the local
              structure of the principal remnant of the streamer belt in the solar wind, the
              heliospheric current sheet. On a global scale the current sheet forms a tilted,
              warped, heliospheric equatorial plane, but data patterns consistent with
              convoluted, intertwined magnetic structures are found on the local scale. Tools
              used to untangle this structure will be combined with newer tools to analyze
              other streamer belt structures and their interrelationships. Primary among the
              newer tools will be composition data, which give fingerprints of solar sources.
              The anticipated results will advance our understanding of the sources and
              structure of the most complicated part of the solar wind. Some of the open
              questions are: To what extent does slow flow come from the edges of the coronal
              holes, from the streamer belt proper, or in the form of multiscale transients?
              To what extent can complex structures in the slow wind be ascribed to
              interplanetary processes rather than to solar origins? What are the magnetic
              topologies of the many types of structures identified in the slow wind? Why do
              coronal mass ejections observed as intrusions in fast flow have composition
              fingerprints of coronal holes if their origins are in the streamer belt? Do
              coronal mass ejections gradually evolve from magnetically closed to open
              structures? To what extent can answers to these questions be resolved in terms
              of a recently proposed model of general circulation of the footpoints of solar
              magnetic fields, which requires ubiquitous merging between open and closed
              field lines in the streamer belt?  In addition to basic research, a handbook
              will be prepared as a public outreach project. Its primary purpose will be to
              provide guidelines for communicating to the public how coronal mass ejections
              can cause geomagnetic storms. In terms intelligible to the lay reader, it will
              point out common misconceptions and provide material for attention-grabbing
              descriptions that do not misinform. The handbook will be suitable not only for
              the press but for use as supplemental educational material for introductory
              courses in solar-terrestrial physics.
