Title       : Biophotonics: Biophotonic Sensors Based on Polymer Microspheres Evanescently
               Coupled to Optical Fiber
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0119273

Award Number: 0119273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Arnold arnold@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Iwao Teraoka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1606,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0119273
Arnold
The applicant proposes to investigate photonic sensors based on
              dielectric microspheres evanescently coupled to optical fibers, and to develop
              microsphere sensors for biochemical and biological sensing. The unprecedentedly
              narrow optical resonances in such microspheres open an avenue for a novel class
              of all-optical sensors which can measure local properties by detecting optical
              frequency shifts of the resonances. Many photonic resonance modes occur in a
              microsphere in an extremely narrow linewidth. The resonance spectrum is
              obtained by scanning the wavelength of the laser transmitted through the fiber
              into the microsphere and observing the intensity through a read-out fiber
              coupled to the microsphere. Resonance wavelength shifts are extremely sensitive
              to changes in the diameter and the refractive index of the sphere as well as
              the refractive index of the medium surrounding the sphere. The latter
              quantities are determined by the temperature, adsorption of a second substance
              onto the sphere surface, the isotropic and anisotropic stress, and the
              concentration of a chemical in the solution surrounding the sphere.   Efforts
              will be especially targeted at developing microscopic sensing heads for
              biofluids. For this purpose fibers and microspheres, all made of polymers that
              can be rendered biocompatible will be used. The high specificity in
              biomolecular interactions will enable detection of a specific RNA, protein,
              enzyme, substrate, and antigen. The goal is to allow one to prepare as many
              kinds of sensors as the number of biomolecules. Availability of miniature,
              high-sensitivity biophotonic sensors will facilitate the development of 'device
              on a chip' and other parallel chemical and biological analysis systems in
              combinatorial chemistry.

