Title       : Biocomplexity IDEA: Portable Devices To Map The Distribution of Arsenic In
               Bangladesh Groundwater & The Relation To Sediment Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0119933

Award Number: 0119933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander van Geen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yan Zheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Stute  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew E. Gelman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roelof J. Versteeg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1692      BE: COUPLED BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1689,9169,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
0119933
Van Geen

Arsenic concentrations in groundwater of Bangladesh can
              vary by three orders magnitude within lateral and vertical spatial scales of
              tens of meters.  This extreme variability is the result of a poorly understood
              set of hydrological, microbial, and geochemical interactions that reflect the
              complex evolution of the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta over the past 10,000 years. 
              There may also be a temporal dimension to these complex pattems on shorter time
              scales with, potentially, a response of groundwater arsenic to the monsoon and
              to increased groundwater usage for irrigation.  Understanding these pattems has
              immediate societal relevance because at least 25 million people are currently
              poisoned by drinking groundwater from millions of tube wells containing >50
              ug/L arsenic, the Bangladesh and (until very recently) US drinking water
              standard.
T'his proposal for exploratory work under the topical area
              "Instrumentation Development for Environmental Activities (IDEA)" is centered
              around the notion that the principles underlying the distribution of arsenic in
              Bangladesh groundwater can be understood only through the collection of
              geophysical, geochemical, and eventually microbiological, data representative
              of in situ conditions on spatial scales ranging from meters to kilometers. 
              With this objective in mind, and as a complement to its current work in
              Bangladesh supported by the NIEHS/Superfund Basic Research Program, this
              interdisciplinary team of scientists seeks to develop and test two portable
              devices that measure key properties of the subsurface by taking advantage of
              the enonnous ar-ray of existing tube wells: (1) groundwater arsenic
              concentrations with a high-precision, double-beam calorimeter, (2) the vertical
              sediment structure by electromagnetic conductivity.  In parallel, we will start
              to develop the statistical tools needed to interpret and integrate the complex
              data sets that can be generated with these instruments.  Our intention is to
              set the stage for a full-scale Biocomplexity proposal aimed at improving our
              ftindamental understanding of the complex set of interactions, including
              microbial and societal factors, that resulted in a human tragedy of staggering
              dimension.














0119933



