Title       : SGER: Axiomatizing Fixed Points
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0119916

Award Number: 0119916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23441              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Bloom bloom@guinness.cs.stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Stephen L. Bloom
"Axiomatizing Fixed Points
Stevens Inst. of Technology

The
              purpose of the proposed work is to obtain complete, but simple, descriptions of
              the properties of the "fixed point" or "iteration" operation in computation. 
              Simpler axioms may lead to concrete discreptions of free structures and we
              intend to use the axioms and/or these concrete descriptions to find and improve
              decision algorithms.  Previous work by Bloom, Esik and others has resulted in a
              complete description of the equational laws satisfied by the iteration
              operation.  This description takes the form of the axioms for Iteration
              Theories, which capture important features of many classes of structures of
              interest in the theory of computation.  The original axiomatization of
              iteration theories contained a complicated equational scheme.  Recently, this
              scheme has been replaced by the "group identities".  Nevertheless, further
              simplifications seem to be possible.  Another goal is to find relative finite
              axiomatizations of iteration theories enriched by additional operations and/or
              relations.  If successful, there are major beneficial corollaries.  For
              example, a relatively simple set of axioms for the concurrent behavior of
              finite state processes (both for bisimilarity equivalence and for trace
              equivalence), for Kleene relation algebras with and without conversion, for the
              behavioral equivalence of recursive program schemes or recursive data type
              definitions and others.

Lastly, some previous work of the investigators and
              others has indicated that the laws of iteration theories hold in the extremely
              general setting of 2-categories, and we intend to investigate this phenomenon
              in detail.


