Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY (IDEA): In Situ Measurement of Marine Microbes to Investigate
               Mechanisms of Community Structure Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0119915

Award Number: 0119915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1691000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Olson rolson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi M. Sosik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca J. Gast  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is supported by the program Biocomplexity in the Environment,
              subprogram Instrumentation Development for Environmental Activities (BE-IDEA).
              The objective is to develop instrumentation and software for automated in situ
              monitoring of marine microbial communities.  Microbes account for almost all
              the primary productivity and a majority of the biomass in the ocean, and the
              structure of the microbial community affects higher trophic levels, including
              species consumed by humans.  A fundamental understanding of the complex
              interaction between physical and biological factors that regulate community
              structure requires more detailed and sustained observations than are possible
              with current equipment.  

This project will develop and deploy in situ
              instrumentation to monitor individual cells of microscopic plankton.  The
              planned approach will combine in situ flow cytometry and imaging-in-flow
              techniques to measure the abundance and properties of cells (and other
              particles) ranging from the smallest phytoplankton (less than 1 um) to large
              chain diatoms (>100 um). An automated image analysis system will be used to
              determine taxonomic affiliation of each cell for the larger size classes. 
              Smaller cells (which often lack distinctive morphological features) will be
              evaluated by pulse-shape analysis of individual cell light scattering and
              fluorescence.  For more detailed investigation of particular groups or species,
              a module capable of applying group-specific rRNA probes (via Peptide Nucleic
              Acid in situ hybridization) will be developed.  The probed samples will be
              analyzed in real time by the in situ flow cytometer. The same module will also
              be used to apply fluorescent probes for other properties such as DNA content
              and cell viability.  Software to analyze and integrate the flow cytometric and
              image data in near-real time will also be developed.  The instrument will be
              based on an in situ flow cytometer developed at WHOI (plus hybridization
              technology currently under development) and integrated with a commercially
              available imaging-in-flow system. When completed, the instrument package will
              be field tested near the Marthas Vineyard Coastal Observatory (MVCO).

In
              combination with physical oceanographic, meteorological, and bulk fluorescence
              data, individual particle data will facilitate an understanding of processes
              affecting coastal ecosystems, including the mechanisms regulating phytoplankton
              blooms, species succession, and trophic interactions. The planned work will
              form the foundation for an unprecedented long term high resolution time series
              of natural microbial populations, whose members vary in size by many orders of
              magnitude. These kinds of observations are critical for evaluating and
              developing models of long-term ecological change.

