Title       : BE/CNH: Climate Information and Forecasts in Agricultural Production Systems of
               the Argentine Pampas: Planning for Their Effective Use in Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0119851

Award Number: 0119851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo P. Podesta gpodesta@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Letson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Broad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1691      BE: DYN COUPLED NATURAL-HUMAN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5209,5911,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Agricultural production is a complex natural-human system that involves multiple
              value-laden objectives and various sources of risk.  One of the major risk
              sources to agriculture is climate variability.  In many parts of the world, the
              El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon is the major single source of
              climate variability on seasonal-to-interannual scales.  Links between
              ENSO-related climate variability and agricultural production have been
              established for many regions, including the Pampas of Argentina, a major
              production region and the geographic focus of the proposed effort.  Recent
              scientific and technological advances have made it possible to forecast, with
              moderate skill, ENSO events with a lead time of months. In the agricultural
              sector, ENSO-related climate forecasts may help to reduce risks of adverse
              conditions or to take advantage of favorable conditions.  Simply documenting
              the effects of climate variability and providing better climate forecasts is
              not sufficient to derive benefits from the emerging predictive capability,
              however.  The factors that make many farmers reluctant to respond to climate
              information requires scientific attention in order to derive significant
              benefits from to the climate predictions.  This collaborative project between
              U.S. and Argentine researchers seeks to enhance understandings of the use of
              probabilistic climate information to support decision making in agricultural
              production systems; to anticipate and possibly prevent unintended negative
              societal consequences of climate prediction, and to inform the design of a
              future operational system to disseminate climate information relevant and
              useful to decision and policy making in agriculture.  The project will involve
              planning workshops and preliminary research to inform the planning effort.  Two
              planning workshops will help to frame the problems to be addressed during the
              planning process, identify major research needs, and design a detailed plan for
              future work.  Major issues to be addressed during planning workshops include
              the major sources of uncertainty in each component of the modeling approach and
              the identification and explication of the assumptions and limitations
              associated with all models that are used.  Preliminary research activities to
              be undertaken include individual interviews and focus groups with farmers and
              technical advisors in the Argentine Pampas.  The preliminary work also will
              include a survey of institutions that produce and disseminate climate
              information or agricultural advice and a description of existing
              decision-support tools that could be adapted to include climate forecast
              information.

This end-to-end exploration of components of a system for the
              use of climate information and forecasts in agriculture and other sectors will
              help assemble an effective multidisciplinary team of researchers drawn from the
              natural and social sciences.  This project should foster greater knowledge
              about the ways through which newly available climate information can influence
              the complex interactions among human and natural systems like agricultural
              production in the Argentine Pampas may respond to the.  The project should also
              help to lay the foundation for future work on the constraints and incentives
              for the effective use of climate information in benefit of society.  This
              project is an award emanating from the FY 2001 special competition in
              Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
              and Human Systems.

