Title       : BE/CNH: Biocomplexity, Spatial Scale and Fragmentation: Implications for Arid
               and Semi-Arid Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0119618

Award Number: 0119618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1900002            (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Thompson Hobbs nthobbs@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Ellis  (Principal Investigator former)
              Roy Behnke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall B. Boone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip K. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal argues that spatial complexity of vegetation plays a central role
              in the structure and function of temporally variable, arid and semi-arid
              ecosystems. Complexity results from movement-mediated linking of less complex
              spatial units by herbivores and humans into spatially extensive, complex
              systems. But modern human land use and land tenure systems tend to deplete
              spatial biocomplexity through fragmentation of ecosystems into isolated and
              simplified units. Ecosystem fragmentation is often justified as a means of
              economic intensification in the neo-classical framework, but in fact, it costs
              money to replace the natural capital lost through fragmentation. As a result of
              fragmentation, many of the world's arid and semi-arid grazed ecosystems are
              dysfunctional to varying degrees. The goal of this project is to demonstrate
              the importance of spatial complexity, the costs of fragmentation, and to
              identify options for sustainability at sites around the world by linking
              ecological and socio-economic research, and in the process, create an
              international network of scientists addressing these issues. The project
              focuses on 21 sites in nine countries on four continents. The interdisciplinary
              scientific team includes ecologists, anthropologists, economists, and political
              scientists. The project will include case study syntheses, field-based
              investigations, and model experiments and analyses. The project is expected to
              promote a higher level of understanding of spatial-temporal distribution of
              complexity, its importance in grazed systems, why and how complexity is reduced
              through fragmentation, and what this means for ecosystems and economic
              activities. 


