Title       : Provision Of A Marines Culture Laboratory At The Shannon Point Marine Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a0119769

Award Number: 0119769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52140              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Sulkin sulkin@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Stephen Sulkin at the Shannon Point Marine
              Center (SPMC), Western Washington University (WWU) to renovate a current
              lecture hall into a training and research laboratory. The goal of SPMC is to
              develop a facilities base that can support the research of resident and
              visiting scientists; can promote a focused, sophisticated instructional
              opportunity for students; and can contribute scientific information to marine
              resource agencies. The new facility will meet a critical need at SPMC for
              appropriately designed space that can support the maintenance of marine
              organisms in laboratory culture.  The marine plants and animals cultured in
              this facility will be used to train undergraduates and Masters of Science
              students.  These cultured species are used extensively by resident and visiting
              scientists and form the basis of collaborative scientific efforts among
              scientists and students at SPMC and between SPMC and other institutions
              nationwide. 

The space to be renovated has become available with the
              completion of a lecture hall in a new building.  Project renovations will
              include installation of a glassware wash sink, laboratory preparation area, and
              laboratory benches, replacement of carpeting with tile flooring, addition of
              ventilation to an adjacent microscope room, provision of seawater to the main
              lab room, and extension of emergency standby electrical power to support
              temperature control cabinets.   

Research and training of undergraduates are
              closely linked at SPMC.  Students from around the nation participating in a
              Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site and Minorities in Marine
              Science Undergraduate Program will use the new facility, as will WWU
              undergraduates and graduate students.  The renovated facility will support
              student research on the role of climate change on food webs and coral reef
              biology, the use of chemical defenses by prey to avoid predation (and thus
              influence food web dynamics), and the importance of early life stages in the
              population dynamics of ecologically and commercially important fisheries
              species (such as the Dungeness crab and Pacific herring).

