Title       : Scaling the Shape, Motion, and Function of Oscillating Wings, Fins, Legs, and
               Feet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0119643

Award Number: 0119643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Walker walker@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0119643
Jeffrey A. Walker

When an object, such as a cube, is reduced to
              smaller and smaller sizes, its surface area to volume ratio increases
              proportionally. This scaling relationship has large consequences on how animals
              move through air and water because inertia (mass) and friction are functions of
              volume and area, respectively. Animals slightly larger or faster than a
              fruitfly (about 2 mm long) live in a world dominated by inertia. In this world,
              oscillating wings or fins create swirling vortexes that result from the fluid
              "separating" from the propulsive structure as it flows by. These separations
              create unusually large forces that wreak havoc for airplanes with rigid wings
              (they are the source of stall) but recent work has shown that the separations
              and sometimes the vortices can be exploited by animals with oscillating
              appendages. Animals that are slightly smaller or slower than a fruitfly live in
              a world where friction results in a significant component of the net force
              generated by a propulsive structure. Friction weakens vortices and delays or
              entirely stops separation. A large friction component, then, must have profound
              effects on the design of small swimming and flying animals and, indeed, the
              propulsive appendages of small animals show remarkable convergence among
              diverse taxa (the phyla Arthropoda, Chordata, and Mollusca), anatomy (antennae,
              wings, fins, legs, feet), behaviors (swimming and flying) and fluid media (air
              and water). The objective of the current proposal is to investigate how small,
              oscillating appendages generate forces in air or water, how the propulsive
              mechanisms change with scale (size and speed), and how the optimal design of an
              appendage changes with scale. Appendage shape and motion will be measured in
              various groups of small animals that span the relevant size range including the
              sea butterflies (swimming snails with reduced or lost shells), small wasps, and
              water beetles. Forces on oscillating plates that replicate the conditions found
              in oscillating appendages of small animals will be measured across a range of
              sizes. Despite the fact that animals swimming or flying with oscillating
              appendages at small scales comprise a large portion of described animal
              species, little is known about how oscillating appendages work at the low end
              of this range and how the force generating mechanisms scale with size and
              speed. The proposed research will be the first to systematically study the
              scaling of appendage shape, motion, and function in this important size
              range.

