Title       : Educational Innovation: An Investigation into Aesthetic Computing within the
               Digital Arts and Sciences Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0119532

Award Number: 0119532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Fishwick fishwick@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Douglas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy A. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1709      CISE EDUCAT RES & CURRIC DEVEL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 2888,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 0119532 Paul Fishwick University of Florida
Title: An Investigation
              into Aesthetic Computing Within the Digital Arts and Sciences Curricula

This
              project integrates research in "aesthetic computing" directly into a new set of
              CISE programs, collectively called Digital Arts and Sciences (DAS). The thrust
              of DAS is to create a student who is endowed with a hybrid-knowledge of
              computer engineering and the arts. This enables the student to work effectively
              in production-oriented teams centered on projects involving videos, interactive
              games, education, scientific and engineering visualization, and software
              engineering. The research integration is accomplished through the addition of
              an Aesthetic Computing course and a series of Digital World Production Studio
              courses. Both Fine Arts as well as CISE students take these courses, and the
              PIs team-teach the studio course. Aesthetic Computing refers to the use of
              genres and styles in fine art employed as metaphors for formal and
              diagrammatically rendered model structures commonly found in computing, such as
              automata, data flow graphs, data models and the comprehensive Unified Modeling
              Language (UML). This work builds upon many areas outside of CS such as
              semiotics, linguistics, analogy, metaphor, and the arts. Ongoing progress in
              the information and program visualization literature is most related; however,
              the project's focus is on a stronger arts component that both personalizes and
              enriches the user's modeling interface. For example, the representation of a
              finite state machine may be crafted, through metaphor mapping, to a scale or
              virtual model of a building. The style of the building can be taken from the
              huge variety of possible genres existing in architecture, without limiting the
              representation to abstract entities. And, elements of music and story schemata
              can be simultaneously mapped onto the architecture, further personalizing the
              interface. The goal of the project is to develop practitioners who understand
              both the formalisms of visualization and the practical aspects of human
              communication that deal with aesthetic interpretation.

