Title       : The Center for Learning and Teaching in the West
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0119786

Award Number: 0119786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9999618            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth C. Swanson eswanson@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward E. Geary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn S. Krussel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Cummings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl C. Wamser  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 7181      CENTERS FOR LEARNING & TEACHIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Center for Learning and Teaching in the West (CLT-West) is a consortium of
              five universities -- Montana State University, Portland State University, the
              University of Montana, Colorado State University, and the University of
              Northern Colorado -- formed to meet the needs of underrepresented students who
              have traditionally not benefited from SMET educational reform.  It includes
              partnerships with Ft. Belknap College in Montana, other community and tribal
              colleges, Portland Public Schools, and sixty-eight rural and reservation
              schools in Montana and Colorado.  The project's goals are to increase the
              number of qualified mathematics and science teachers; provide professional
              development and support to math and science teachers in low-income and high
              minority schools in the West's inner city and rural schools; investigate how
              technology can improve graduate education programs; and prepare leaders in
              science and mathematics education.

The project addresses CLT program goals
              in a variety of ways.  It builds an infrastructure that is likely to be
              institutionalized in these states and supports new approaches to reaching a
              broader community.  CLT-West establishes "Fellows", a multi-disciplinary group
              of pre-doctoral and post-doctoral students, and "Faculty Fellows" to conduct
              research, team teach new courses, work with colleagues on the reform of upper
              division science and mathematics courses for preservice teachers and/or provide
              professional development to schools and districts involved with the Center. 
              The Center will educate 75 pre-doctoral and post-doctoral students.  In
              addition, the professional development plan will impact 520 math and science
              teachers with programs consistent with the Center's goals yet catered to the
              local needs.  Those teachers come from schools that serve just under 40,000
              students, who are predominantly from underrepresented groups in SMET.

The
              extensive collaborative effort across departments, campuses and states is a
              model for sharing expertise, curricula and reform methods, and the utilization
              of technology to maximize learning.  CLT-West's work with targeted populations
              and districts should produce a national research base for connecting university
              and college faculties with the needs of underrepresented students in science
              and mathematics.  



