Title       : Earth Science Pipeline: Recruiting and retaining under-represented ethnic groups
               in Earth Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0119934

Award Number: 0119934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Cook                              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $644798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan E. Fryxell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sally F. McGill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Britt Leatham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie J. Brunkhorst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      5500 University Parkway
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    909/880-5929

NSF Program : 1697      OPPORT FOR ENHANCING DIVERSITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Earth Science Pipeline: Recruiting and Retaining  Under-Represented
              Ethnic Groups in Earth Sciences
 
California State University San Bernardino
              (CSUSB) has a minority student population large enough for it to have been
              designated a Hispanic Serving Institution.  However the Department of
              Geological Sciences has an enrollment of under-represented ethnic groups not
              only less than the surrounding community but also below that of the national
              average.  CSUSB has initiated a project entitled "Earth Science Pipeline:
              Recruiting and Retaining Under-Represented Ethnic Groups in the Earth
              Sciences".  This project conducts activities designed to (1) increase
              under-represented minority enrollment in the Department of Geological Sciences,
              (2) retain these students once they have entered the program, and (3) feed
              these students into the geosciences pipeline so that they either enter graduate
              school or the geosciences profession. The overall theme that unifies the
              proposed activities is that studying geology can be exciting, and that it is
              possible to pursue a rewarding career in geosciences. 

Specific activities
              include the development of a collaborative program for the teaching of
              geological sciences with local schools with high minority enrollments, and
              interaction with, and training of sixth to twelfth grade teachers through
              activities such as workshops, demonstrations and formal field trips. Teachers
              will also be involved in designing demonstrations and hands-on activities for
              use in their classrooms.   Activities include annual summer geological field
              trips conducted by faculty from the Department. Students will also be invited
              to participate during the summer and/or academic year in research projects
              under the supervision of a faculty member from the Department of Geological
              Sciences at CSUSB. 
















