Title       : CLT: A Model Regional Urban Center for the Advancement of Teaching and Learning
               of 5th through 12th Grade Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0119645

Award Number: 0119645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Mason                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina Hillman nhillman@temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Penny L. Hammrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Krulik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Zitarelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 7181      CENTERS FOR LEARNING & TEACHIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Submitted under the guidelines for "Developmental Centers for Learning and
              Teaching," this twelve-month project would do the developmental planning to
              establish a center for SMET education for grades 5-12 in greater Philadelphia. 
              The project would be based at Temple University.   The region served would be
              southeastern Pennsylvania and southern New Jersey.  Other players in the
              collaboration include Millersville and Cheney Universities in PA, Delaware
              State, and several community colleges in PA and NJ.   Also included are
              Philadelphia (PA), Salem County, Gloucester County, and Cherry Hill (NJ) school
              districts.  The primary mission of the proposed center will be to examine the
              unique needs of teaching mathematics and science to urban and urban-fringe
              students.  There are three major goals:

1) Enhance the content and
              pedagogical skills of current and future mathematics and science teachers and
              to increase both the numbers of, and quality of, these teachers by designing
              programs to attract, train and mentor pre-service, novice, experienced
              in-service and apprentice teachers.   This will include the development of a
              model middle school Certification Program.

2) Reshape the institutional
              infrastructure of faculty and graduate students who instruct math and science
              pre-service and in-service teachers and the infrastructure of the school
              districts to support these teachers. This includes attracting, training and
              retaining doctoral students who will be future SMET professors.

3)Design and
              support research in relevant aspects of mathematics and science education, with
              a strong emphasis on determining the role of, and value of, technology in
              education.  

