Title       : Order, Spacing, and Clustering in Visual Exploration of Large Scale Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0119276

Award Number: 0119276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew O. Ward matt@cs.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elke A. Rundensteiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research project is to develop visualization, interaction, and
              data management technologies to address the problems of high dimensionality and
              data type heterogeneity in large-scale visual data mining. The basic approach
              is to apply multiresolution clustering strategies across the dimensions of a
              data set as well as within individual dimensions containing nominal or
              categorical values, and exploit the ordering and positioning of data axes and
              data points to emphasize relationships within the data. For visualization, the
              tasks involve the development of methods for determining ordering and variable
              spacing within and between data and dimensions as well as clustering of
              dimensions into multi-resolution abstractions, and integrating them into
              several existing multivariate display techniques. For interaction, tools for
              intuitive navigation and exploration within the multiresolution spaces are
              developed. This includes interactive reclustering tools to allow users to guide
              the process of splitting and grouping clusters of data objects and dimensions.
              For data management the tasks involve the development of high-dimensional
              indexing and multi-resolution data view management for high-dimensional data
              access, and caching and prefetching strategies to support real-time visual
              exploration. The ease of use as well as performance of the display and
              interactive tools over large data sets is assessed. The results of this
              research will provide data analysts in domains such as bioinformatics, earth
              and space sciences, and e-commerce the ability to interactively explore the
              increasingly large and complex data sets being generated. 
