Title       : Follow-up Study of the Impact of PETE: Accountability, Understanding and
               Continuous Improvement.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0119046

Award Number: 0119046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arturo Pacheco apacheco@utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Brady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The El Paso Partnership for Excellence in Teacher Education (PETE), a project
              funded through the NSF Collaboratives for Excellence in Teacher Preparation
              (CETP) program, has established a partnership of regional educational
              institutions including the University of Texas at El Paso and El Paso Community
              College to reform science and mathematics teacher preparation. This follow-on
              project includes evaluation activities and research studies designed to
              document and assess the impact of PETE at the university, at the community
              college, in K-12 classrooms, and on new and future teachers. Evaluation
              research studies are designed to assess the impact of the project in five
              areas: institutionalization and sustainability, the relationship between
              teacher preparation and the context of school reform; new teacher knowledge and
              its relationship to student outcomes; the development of content knowledge and
              pedagogy in reformed courses; and the viability of a model of teacher
              development and assessment. Teacher induction activities designed and
              implemented by former CETP/PETE scholars under the direction of science and
              mathematics faculty members are providing support for novice teachers. Former
              CETP/PETE scholars pursuing graduate degrees in science and mathematics
              education engage in peer mentoring of new teachers and/or mentoring of future
              teachers and participate with faculty and evaluators in classroom research
              activities designed to support the data collection and analyses of the proposed
              evaluation research studies. The evaluation studies are linked to the CETP Core
              Summative Evaluation Study, an NSF-funded project at the University of
              Minnesota, through the alignment of CETP Core evaluation Questions with
              evaluation research questions specific to the PETE context. To strengthen the
              collegiality among former CETP/PETE Scholars pursuing graduate degrees, new
              teachers, and faculty members, new teacher induction activities will be
              designed and implemented by former scholars under the direction of science and
              mathematics faculty members. The project is assessing the impact of PETE and
              activities designed to increase the likelihood of new teachers remaining in the
              profession.

