Title       : BE/CNH: Human And Natural Systems Associated With Mediterranean Watersheds: An
               Interdisciplinary Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0119992

Award Number: 0119992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adina M. Merenlender adina@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Romm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent H. Resh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sally K. Fairfax  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Kondolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1691      BE: DYN COUPLED NATURAL-HUMAN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1579,1689,1691,5209,9169,9186,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mediterranean systems offer an abundance of water over short, unpredictable time
              periods, usually between November and April in California.  Time periods with
              scarce water can be long-lasting, making it difficult to manage water and land
              use and to supply consistent goods and services to large population centers. 
              The primary goal of this developmental project is to develop a theoretical
              framework that will allow for an integration of human and biophysical
              Mediterranean watershed dynamics.  This requires a greater understanding of the
              inherent biocomplexity of Mediterranean watersheds and the dynamic
              relationships among these environmental systems and human actions,
              institutions, and policies.  A multidisciplinary team of researchers drawn from
              both the natural and social sciences will explore the consistency between
              hydrologic, biotic, and socioeconomic models that are used to explain and to
              regulate watershed ecosystem behavior and the realities of watershed behavior
              in Mediterranean environments.  Prevailing scientific models of watersheds and
              regulatory systems developed to manage natural resources in watersheds commonly
              have evolved without a thorough understanding of Mediterranean watershed
              dynamics.  The investigators hypothesize that these scientific models are
              better suited to relatively homogenous environments with fairly predictable
              rainfall and tight relations between stream flow and proximate land uses than
              they are to Mediterranean watersheds with their episodic hydrology and frequent
              disturbance.  The validity of this hypothesis will be tested as a basis for
              potentially more useful formulations of Mediterranean problems.  In doing so,
              the investigators will explore the influence of physical, biological, social,
              and institutional processes on the function and health of Mediterranean
              ecosystems at various spatial scales ranging stream reaches and individual
              watersheds to entire river systems.  They will conduct a series of facilitated
              workshops and field days to help critically assess the suitability of existing
              models for Mediterranean conditions.  These workshops and field days will help
              to identify shared variables among disciplines and their use in developing
              interdisciplinary models; design a comparative research framework to test new
              models and hypotheses; provide an operational watershed forum and academic
              advancement for the broader community; and enhance support for comparative
              interdisciplinary research.

Human population growth in Mediterranean-climate
              regions has placed considerable pressure on scarce freshwater resources,
              resulting in widespread impairment of river and stream systems.  A great deal
              of capital is being invested in restoring Mediterranean watersheds with a very
              shallow conceptual awareness of where, how, and what is being restored.  This
              has led to many restoration project failures in California and elsewhere.  By
              integrating theories, perspectives, and methods from the physical, biological,
              and social sciences, this project will provide a sounder basis for the
              restoration of Mediterranean watersheds, and it will help address existing laws
              and institutional structures that are not well-equipped to deal with this kind
              of dynamic system.  This project is an award emanating from the FY 2001 special
              competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of
              Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

