Title       : BE/CNH: Responding to the Challenges of Human-Natural System Complexity:
               Assuring the Quality of Models, Improving the Presentation of Findings, and
               Designing New Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0119875

Award Number: 0119875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99637              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Norgaard norgaard@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Harte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project brings faculty from the social and natural sciences at the
              University of California at Berkeley into a comparative analysis of how the use
              and presentation of models of coupled human and natural systems can be
              improved.  With no single model representing the full complexity in a
              manageable way, both scientific and public understanding must come through
              "piecing together" findings from separate models that emphasize different parts
              of complex systems.  This process of "piecing together" is currently not
              working very well.  There are, for example, communication barriers between
              scientists of different disciplines as well as between scientists and the
              public.  In some cases, different models provide conflicting insights, or
              information with conflicting policy implications, for which there is no
              scientific resolution.  In such cases, different political and economic
              interests find it advantageous to emphasize selective information from
              particular models.  This project will explore whether the process of
              communicating information from disparate models might be improved, for example,
              through the establishment of scientific and public standards.  The
              possibilities for using new institutions such as "science juries" also will be
              considered, as well as how the training of scientists could be modified to
              reduce the problem.  This project facilitates the development of new approaches
              and their application; the comparison of case studies; serious, open discussion
              in a workshop that will include philosophers of science and graduate students;
              and the drafting of a textbook for graduate students who are preparing to work
              at the interface of science and policy.

People are now aware that the
              overall level and especially some types of human activity are having profound,
              and largely irreversible, effects on the global environment.  Scientists who
              study these effects, however, are having difficulty grappling with the
              complexity of the couplings between human and natural systems.  These
              difficulties that are internal to science become amplified as scientists try to
              communicate what they know to the public, and different public's listen
              selectively according to their economic and political interests.  Communication
              problems make it very difficult to transform what scientists do know into
              effective policy.  This project explores ways that these difficulties can be
              reduced through standards for the presentation of scientific information about
              complex systems, the training of scientists, and the development of new
              institutions for connecting scientific information to the public.  This project
              is an award emanating from the FY2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in
              the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
              Systems.

