Title       : National Center for Learning about Teaching Mathematics and Science in Rural and
               Urban Settings (The Rural-Urban Center)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0119735

Award Number: 0119735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Mason                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194241             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank K. Cartledge fcartledge@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Good  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory D. Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elnora S. Harcombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Dressman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 7181      CENTERS FOR LEARNING & TEACHIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Submitted under the guidelines for Developmental Centers for Learning and
              Teaching, this one-year project is a collaboration among Appalachian State
              University, Louisiana State University, Rice University and the University of
              Houston, Downtown.  The universities will partner with school systems, museums,
              observatories and industries to provide a support network that will enhance the
              preparation and continuing professional development of teachers, while
              involving mathematicians, scientists and their students in mutually beneficial
              collaborative activities with teachers, their school systems and their
              students.  All the institutions already have working relationships with school
              systems that serve at-risk students.  Support by a foundation grant in their
              professional development of mathematics and science teachers first brought the
              four institutions together.  As research aims, the proposed Center will explore
              two recurring themes:  the importance of context (geographic, social, economic,
              etc.) and of informal enrichment of formal methods of instruction in learning
              mathematics and science.  Working with science museums, observatories, school
              districts and industrial partners, they will develop plans to integrate and
              expand their science and mathematics education activities to address critical
              national needs in the following ways:

* increase the quality and number of
              teachers of mathematics and science being prepared at the four partner
              universities through scholarships and increased opportunities for meaningful
              field-based experiences;

* strengthen and extend  mathematics and science
              programs for in-service teachers, especially in the development of support
              teachers -- those who will take leading roles in interactions with novice
              teachers and university students;

* increase the quality and number of
              doctorates of mathematics and science education being prepared at LSU through
              scholarships and through internships with the other partner universities;
              develop fertile environments for research in mathematics and science education
              in the partner universities, schools, museums, and observatories; and support
              doctoral dissertation studies within this research environment.

