Title       : SGER: Real-time Depth-Image Meshing and Warping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0119053

Award Number: 0119053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68123              (Estimated)
Investigator: Renato B. Pajarola pajarola@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0119053
Pajarola, Renato
U of Cal Irvine

In recent years a new rendering
              paradigm based on the reuse of two-dimensional imagery to generate 3D
              renderings has evolved, called Image Based Rendering (IBR). Based on a set of
              input images, so called reference views, IBR methods can generate new images
              from arbitrary view points. One of the main advantages of IBR techniques is
              that the rendering cost is independent of the scene complexity and bound by the
              image resolution. The use of IBR techniques thus allows in certain situations
              to achieve real-time display performance for other-wise non-interactive
              rendering of complex geometric scenes. The main target applications are
              interactive rendering of highly complex scenes (virtual reality systems), and
              rendering on time-budgets (simulations and computer-game like
              environments).

This grant will improve and explore new techniques for
              interactive rendering applications on the basis of the depth-image warping
              approach. Our goal is not to restrict computation of reference views to a
              preprocessing step, but to explore and develop algorithms and data structures
              that allow the generation and reuse of depth-image reference views dynamically
              in an interactive visualization environment. Depth-image warping is a powerful
              approach, and using multiple reference views to limit visibility artifacts it
              is possible to create new renderings for a wide range of views. However, the
              user's movements in a virtual environment are unpredictable, and thus reference
              views have to be generated dynamically to optimize their use. Therefore, from
              acquiring image based representations for the reference views to rendering from
              image data everything has to be done dynamically in an interactive
              visualization framework.

