Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Development of Instrumentation for Measurement of
               Biosphere-Atmosphere Fluxes of Carbon and Nitrogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0119995

Award Number: 0119995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1927000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Lamb blamb@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Halvor H. Westberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1692      BE: COUPLED BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1524,1689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Novel instrumentation will be developed to measure the fluxes of trace gases
              between the atmosphere and the biosphere. The measurement systems, based on
              disjunct eddy flux methods, will be applicable to both tower based and airborne
              platforms. A complete airborne flux system will be maintained at Purdue
              University and made available to the biosphere/atmosphere science community.
              The technology will also be made available for duplication for different
              applications. The Disjunct Eddy Sampler (DES) will be coupled with an
              Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) system capable of quantifying stable carbon
              isotope ratios. These measurements provide a means to partition the net
              ecosystem exchange of carbon dioxide into its gross components, photosynthetic
              uptake by vegetation and respiratory emissions by plants and soils. The DES
              system will also be employed to quantify fluxes of volatile organic compounds
              (VOCs) by combining it with a proton transfer reaction mass spectrometer
              (PTR-MS). Emphasis in this application will be in determining landscape scale
              fluxes. The third application area will be to couple the DES with nitrogen
              detectors for determination of deposition rates of atmospheric nitrogen
              containing species. 

The development of this instrumentation will provide
              undergraduate and graduate research training opportunities. All team members
              are participants in the NSF IGERT program at the University of Michigan
              Biological Station and intend to involve IGERT students in this
              project.

Scientifically, the broader impact of this work will be in the area
              of biosphere-atmosphere exchange which is an integral part of all
              biogeochemical cycles. The determination of accurate transfer rates for
              inorganic and organic species between terrestrial and atmospheric reservoirs is
              a critically important need to enable reliable prediction of the future state
              of global climate and the oxidative capacity of the atmosphere.
