Title       : Increasing Diversity in the Geosciences: A Bridging Program from Middle School
               to College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0119962

Award Number: 0119962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Cook                              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899844             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom Kovacs tom.kovacs@hamptonu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dianne Q. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Russell III  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. McCormick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 1697      OPPORT FOR ENHANCING DIVERSITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Increasing diversity in the Geosciences: A Bridging Program from
              Middle School to College

Increasing diversity in the geosciences requires a
              multi-faceted program that offers enrichment opportunities for students
              throughout their educational process.  The approach used in this project
              develops a pathway from middle school to college that expands the pipeline of
              diverse students entering advanced education and careers in the geosciences. 
              Hampton University, a Historically Black College and University (HBCU), will
              provide minority role models, mentors, and research opportunities.  Unique to
              Hampton University is the collaboration between the Center for Atmospheric
              Sciences (CAS) and the Interdisciplinary Science Center (ISC).  These work to
              increase the pipeline of underrepresented students enabling them to access
              careers in science.  The active partnership between CAS and the ISC provides a
              connection between the scientists of CAS and the science educators of the ISC,
              which extends to the K-14 education community and informal science
              education.

The activities in this project target three primary areas of
              activity that will provide opportunities and participation of underrepresented
              groups in the geosciences and bridge those activities from middle school
              through college and into careers.  These areas include Informal K-14 Education
              Outreach, Formal K-14 Education Outreach, and University Education and
              Outreach.

