Title       : Solar/Wind Powered Instrumentation Module Development for Polar Environmental
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0119793

Award Number: 0119793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony D. Hansen TonyHansen@MageeSci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Magee Scientific Company
	      1829 Francisco Street
	      Berkeley, CA  94703    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1689,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for the development and testing of a self-contained,
               transportable module that will provide a sheltered, temperature-controlled
              interior environment for standard, rack-mounted equipment.  Electric power will
              be provided by solar panels and a wind generator, backed up by batteries of
              several days' capacity.  The module will offer both AC and DC power for
              internal and external use, and will include datalogging and communications
              capability for practical application in a polar environment. 
At the South
              Pole Station, McMurdo Station, and almost all other inhabited camps in
              Antarctica, exhaust is released from aircraft, helicopters, ground vehicles,
              diesel generators and other sources, all of which have a potential impact on
              the environment.  The collection of  real-time pollution data at downwind
              locations can be used to assess the amount of pollution and the effectiveness
              of efforts to improve air quality.  At the current time, optimal placement of
              the measuring instruments is severely limited by the availability of power and
              shelter, a limitation that the module is intended to overcome.  Although
              designed to facilitate measurements at the South Pole, the module will be of
              use in a variety of other situations where remotely located equipment is to be
              used for long-term monitoring of environmental phenomena. The module will have
              zero emissions, thereby not affecting the environment that it is designed to
              study: and it could be placed at any location as called for by the research
              need.

