Title       : Billie & Miles: Planning Grant Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0119634

Award Number: 0119634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: MaryBeth E. Hughes mbhughes@wttw.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Saunders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward G. Atkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Window To The World Comm
	      5400 N St Louis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606254623    773/509-5589

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              WTTW, the public television station in Chicago, is developing a science
              education project targeted at children aged 6 to 10.  The major components of
              the project will be a 13-part animated television series, an interactive
              webpage and multiple outreach components for individuals and families.  The
              television series features a pair of animal astronauts -- an eager dog named
              Billie and a reluctant flea named Miles -- as they travel through space in
              search of science adventure.  The two work together to explore problems, solve
              mysteries and survive adventures while aboard their doghouse-shaped spaceship
              and on the worlds they discover throughout the universe.  In each episode,
              using an inquiry-based method of problem solving, Billie and Miles embark on a
              new adventure and explore a single science concept in depth, approaching it
              from many different ways appropriate to their respective personalities. 
              

Science content for the series is being developed by Ian Saunders,
              previously Head Science Writer for Bill Nye the Science Guy;  Dr. Edward
              Atkins, President of Science Productions for TV who has developed science
              programming for Children's Television Workshop and WNET; and Dr. Jose Rios,
              Assistant Professor for Science Education at the University of Washington,
              Tacoma.  The series will be produced by WTTW in partnership with Nelvana Ltd.,
              the animation company for The Magic School Bus.  Formative evaluation during
              the planning phase will be conducted by Dr. Barbara Flagg of Multimedia
              Research.

The major activities during the planning stage include:

1) 
              Convening the core advisors to develop the science content bible, finalize
              age-appropriate content goals, suggest ideas and strategies for presenting the
              science, and organizing principles consistent with the National Science
              Education Standards and the AAAS Benchmarks.  

2)  The group also will
              examine a range of creative issues that bear directly on the effective delivery
              of science content.  

3)  Development and formative testing for a short
              animation prototype that will illustrate one of the series' science concepts. 
              This segment will be tested to assess the appeal of its style and its efficacy
              in communicating science.  

4)  Continuation of work with Nelvana to develop
              character sketches and background, create storylines and write a pilot script.
              

5)  Validate and expand on the current outreach concept.


