Title       : BE/CNH: Human Ecodynamics in the Hawaiian Ecosystem, 1200 to 200 Years Before
               the Present
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0119819

Award Number: 0119819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1399940            (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick V. Kirch kirch@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Graves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Vitousek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver A. Chadwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shripad D. Tuljapurkar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The project will study the complex, dynamic interactions between an isolated
              human population and its natural environment over the course of 1,000 years,
              focusing on two sample landscapes in the Hawaiian Islands (specifically, Maui
              and Hawaii Islands).  Four main research themes motivate this research: (1)
              determining how processes of agricultural development were linked to
              geomorphological and biogeochemical mosaics and gradients; (2) assessing the
              dynamic links between human population growth and agricultural development and
              intensification; (3) tracking emerging sociocultural complexity in relation to
              demographic growth and agricultural change; and (4) understanding how a growing
              human population, with an intensive agricultural economic base, affected the
              natural resource base.  The project is multidisciplinary, and will involve
              collaborative fieldwork by a team of scientists representing the disciplines of
              archaeology, soil science, ecology, demography, and paleobotany.  Fieldwork
              will build upon prior intensive archaeological, ecological, and pedological
              research by team members, but will emphasize new, integrative work on
              biogeochemical variation across the study landscapes, and on acquiring
              additional paleo-demographic and paleobotanical data necessary to address the
              research themes noted above.  The varied data sets will be integrated using a
              geographic information systems approach, and hierarchical modeling will be used
              to test hypotheses regarding human-environment interactions over time.

The
              project focuses on the Hawaiian Islands because this archipelago offers unique
              opportunities to constrain the analysis of human-environment interactions
              (e.g., short time scale, isolation, pronounced biogeochemical gradients).  The
              issues to be addressed, however, are global.  The cultural and natural
              evolutionary processes to be studied--such as unprecedented population growth,
              widespread deforestation, soil degradation through nutrient depletion,
              population migrations into marginal lands, and increased political and economic
              centralization and control--are all taking place today on a global scale.  By
              studying these processes on a controlled time scale of approximately 1,000
              years, this research will produce dynamic models of the causal links between
              such key factors, models which can help us to understand the irreversible
              environmental and cultural changes driven by the coupling of human and natural
              systems.  Such models should be of considerable relevance to on-going attempts
              to develop sustainable human ecosystems.  The results of this project will
              therefore be of wide interest to a range of disciplines, including ecology,
              demography, anthropology, economics, and biogeography.  This project is an
              award emanating from the FY2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
              Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

