Title       : A Neural Network Based Automated Identification System For Biological Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0119578

Award Number: 0119578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $796818             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Ovtsharenko   (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman I. Platnick  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kimberly N. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

0119578
Platnick

This award provides support for the development
              of a completely automated system capable of providing species-level
              identifications of organisms based on digital images of specimens.  The
              technology uses an artificial neural network and can use, as input, images
              transmitted over the internet.  At present, obtaining species-level
              identifications of specimens can be a difficult undertaking.  The number of
              trained systematizes for most groups of organisms is low; the success rate of
              non-specialists trying to achieve accurate identifications is often lower. 
              Such a system has the potential to radically increase the use of biodiversity
              information in conservation as well as science.  This project is aimed at
              developing software technology capable of species identification using spiders
              as test subjects.  The approach is based on digital images of taxonomically
              relevant structures of the organism taken through a camera-equipped dissecting
              microscope.  The images are subjected to wavelet transformation, a procedure
              that extracts shape information from the image while removing less useful,
              high-resolution information.  By this procedure, the image is reduced to a set
              of wavelet coefficients that can be supplied to a computing algorithm known as
              an artificial neural network.  Such networks are capable of learning to
              classify objects.  The goal is creation of a system with a 95% accuracy in
              identification.

In the first phase of the project, three datasets will be
              used: images of two families of Australasian spiders (Trochanteriidae and
              Prodidomidae), and third set of images defined geographically rather than
              taxonomically.  This geographic set includes specimens from three consecutive
              years of collecting at selected sites in Tennessee, and is typical of
              ecological inventory data.  In the second phase, a web interface that allows
              submission of images for identification over the internet will be
              developed.

At present, a severely limiting factor on our understanding of
              community structure, diversity, and how diversity relates to ecosystem function
              and resulting human services is the lack of experts capable of identifying
              biological specimens to species.  Thus, the potential impact of automated
              identification is enormous.  A system that can identify any species in a
              particular family, or from a particular area, without requiring the user to
              have more than the most basic knowledge of the organism to be identified, has
              the potential to drastically improve the efficiency and scope of biological
              inventories, and subsequent monitoring efforts.

