Title       : BE/CNH: Predicting the Dynamics of Human-Dominated Landscapes: Metapopulation
               Models for Ecosystems with Sharp Edges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0119908

Award Number: 0119908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Swihart rswihart@fnr.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Craig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhilan J. Feng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5209,9169,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Landscapes increasingly are altered by human activity worldwide, and predicting
              the response of native organisms to human-dominated landscapes requires an
              understanding of how ecological and socio-economic processes are influenced by
              land use, habitat fragmentation, and the sharp boundaries formed between native
              and human-altered areas.  The purpose of the project is to build an
              international, interdisciplinary research team devoted to constructing models
              that link social and ecological systems in human-dominated landscapes.  The
              research team will extend the practical value of metapopulation models by
              incorporating the hierarchical nature of ecological and human systems. 
              Specifically, research will focus on metapopulation processes operating at
              multiple spatial scales, heterogeneity of patch and matrix types, and temporal
              dynamics of landscapes.

Humans dramatically alter the physical and
              biological characteristics of ecological landscapes, often with adverse
              consequences for native species.  Predicting the impacts of human activities on
              native fauna and flora will enable more informed decisions to be made regarding
              land-use planning and conservation efforts.  Traditionally, ecological models
              designed to predict the responses of organisms to disturbance have been
              incomplete because they have ignored the socio-economic processes that lead to
              landscape change.  This project will focus on explicitly linking the dynamics
              of ecological systems with the social and economic systems that determine the
              type and magnitude of change in human-dominated landscapes.  As a result of
              this research, models will be formulated that can lead to an enhanced ability
              to predict species responses and prescribe appropriate strategies to minimize
              negative consequences of human activity.  This project is an award emanating
              from the FY2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment
              focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.



