Title       : A Follow-up Summative Evaluation of the New York City Collaborative for
               Excellence in Teacher Preparation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0119078

Award Number: 0119078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $597780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bert Flugman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research and evaluation project is examining the effects of training
              prospective teachers to deliver math and science instruction in conformity with
              newly established content and pedagogical standards. The specific context in
              which this initiative is being investigated is the New York City Collaborative
              for Excellence in Teacher Education (NYCETP), a consortium of five campuses of
              the City University of New York (CUNY) and New York University (NYU). Since
              1995 (with a grant from NSF), these six colleges have embarked on a
              collaborative journey of curricular reform in which 30 math and science content
              and math and science methods courses have been CETP reformed, in keeping with
              nationally recognized standards (e.g., NCTM & NRC). The current project is a
              three-year longitudinal study examining how prospective teachers exposed to
              CETP reformed courses in three NYCETP colleges change and develop in comparison
              to teacher trainees exposed to non-reformed (traditional) courses. This study
              is being coordinated with, and will contribute to, an ongoing national
              NSF-sponsored study of the funded Collaboratives supported through the CETP
              initiative. This NSF study, the CETP Core Evaluation, is being conducted by the
              University of Minnesota. In the current project a CETP treatment sample of 175
              undergraduate teacher education students in three urban colleges preparing for
              K-6 teaching are being tracked longitudinally for three years, the last two
              years of college and the first year of employment. These students, who will
              have been exposed to 2 to 8 CETP reformed courses, are being compared to 90
              students at the same colleges who have been waived out of CETP reformed courses
              because they are transfer students or because they already have obtained a
              baccalaureate. Extensive background, course work, and academic achievement data
              is being collected on all teacher education students as part of New York State
              Certification Requirements. These data are being added to CETP-specific data
              (much of it using the University of Minnesota instruments) to form a
              comprehensive database for the entire teacher education population under study.
              Specifically, additional outcome data include: knowledge, attitudes, and
              self-reported teaching strategies as measured by the University of Minnesota
              Core Student Survey and Teacher Survey; performance on the math and science
              content sections of the New York State Teacher Certification Exam; and actual
              teacher performance as measured by the University of Minnesota Core Classroom
              Observation Protocol. In addition, data is being collected regarding the degree
              to which the school context is supportive of CETP teaching goals. Specific
              research questions posed in this study include: How does the CETP treatment
              group compare to the non-treatment group on the outcome measures above? Are
              teacher education students at different levels of academic ability affected
              differentially as a function of their CETP/non-CETP participation? To what
              extent does the treatment group's performance in the classroom change over time
              (from student teaching to employment) as a function of CETP involvement
              compared to the non-treatment group? The significance of this study is in its
              potential to provide evidence to support math/science curricular reform in
              teacher education programs nationwide, its ability to shed light on how new
              models of teacher training can narrow the performance gap among students with
              different levels of prior academic attainment, how new approaches to teacher
              training (CETP) can stand up to the pressures of urban school environments that
              have differential supports for new teachers, and its modeling of the utility of
              developing and using a comprehensive teacher education tracking system.
