Title       : Project SLUCE: Spatial Land-Use Change and Ecological Effects at the Rural-Urban
               Interface: Agent-Based Modeling and Evaluation of Alternative Policies and
               Interventions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0119804

Award Number: 0119804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1289691            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel G. Brown danbrown@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott E. Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joan Nassauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,9169,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The complex interaction among current landscape conditions, cultural values and
              norms, policy prescriptions, and market forces dramatically limits the
              usefulness of linear models as tools for understanding the complex interactions
              among human and natural systems in many different settings, especially the
              transition zones between urban and rural areas.  The development of policies
              and other solutions for minimizing negative ecological effects and introducing
              possible positive ecological effects of land-use change requires tools for
              anticipating and evaluating the complex interactions between humans and
              ecological systems.  To have some predictive power, these tools should
              characterize the nature of land-use decision making at the levels of individual
              households, firms, and local governments, and they should permit evaluation of
              the ecological effects of various decisions.  Such tools should recognize
              economic, political, and psychological motivations for land-use and management
              decisions on the urban fringe as well as utilities for sale of undeveloped
              land.  This project focuses a multidisciplinary team on developing, evaluating,
              and applying agent-based models of land-use and land-cover change processes and
              on assessing their interactions with ecosystem structure and function.  The
              primary objectives of the project are (1) to develop agent-based models of
              land-use decision making at the urban fringe, (2) to compile time-series
              spatial land-use and land-cover data in southeastern Michigan from roughly 1950
              to the present, (3) to develop and apply spatial data, indicators, and models
              of ecological structure and function as associated with land-use change, and
              (4) to evaluate policy and design options for maintaining ecosystem viability
              as land-use patterns change.  Complementing the research activities of this
              multidisciplinary team will be a suite of educational activities, including the
              formal incorporation of the integrated land-use, decision-making, and ecosystem
              models into both "content" classes (such as environmental economics, ecology,
              sociology, and policy development) and "methods" classes (such as complex
              systems modeling, GIS, spatial analysis, and remote sensing).

The models and
              tools resulting from this project will have direct utility for understanding
              both human and natural landscape dynamics within urban systems, and they will
              assist in projecting patterns of ecological change at the urban-rural fringe. 
              Because the project focuses on enhanced understandings of individual decision
              making that drives land-use decisions, it will enhance capabilities to
              formulate and test alternative policies and interventions that could reduce
              environmental costs and enhance environmental benefits.  Furthermore, the
              project's deliberate focus on the model development and application process and
              should result in innovative approaches for integrating agent-based models of
              the land-use change process with empirical observations of land purchaser,
              seller, developer, and agency attitudes as well as with land-use, land-cover,
              and ecosystem change.  The project also will have a direct impact on the
              graduate and undergraduate education through their incorporation in a broad
              range of courses at the University of Michigan, and it will have broader
              educational and application impacts through its dissemination to the broader
              research, education, and practitioner communities.  This project is an award
              emanating from the FY 2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
              Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

