Title       : BE/CNH: Agent-Based Modeling of Bering Sea Biocomplexity: Long-Term Ecological
               Effects of Human Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0119743

Award Number: 0119743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert D.G. Maschner maschner@isu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Box  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce P. Finney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine L. Reedy-Maschner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      309 Fine Arts Bldg., Box 8046
	      Pocatello, ID  832098046    208/282-2592

NSF Program : 1691      BE: DYN COUPLED NATURAL-HUMAN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5209,9150,9169,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The southern Bering Sea and central North Pacific region is considered to be one
              of the world's most important fisheries.  Yet recent catastrophic declines in
              many species including salmon, Steller sea lion, sea otter, and some pelagic
              birds show that this ecosystem is neither healthy nor sustainable given modern
              harvesting rates.  Explanations for declines in many species, particularly in
              relation to several species of salmon, have been monocausal and political
              without detailed investigations of the relationships between predators (humans
              and sea mammals) and their prey in this region.  Using biological and
              ecological data, paleoclimatic reconstructions, archaeological data on
              subsistence and harvesting rates, historic and modern catch and escapement
              records, ethnographic reports and traditional ecological knowledge, this
              project will use Swarm agent-based modeling routines to investigate the
              dynamics of human-salmon-ecosystem interactions in the southern Bering Sea
              region of Alaska.  The multidisciplinary investigative team will develop
              methods to directly test a number of relationships associated with direct and
              indirect impacts of changes in one or more sets of human and/or natural systems
              on the others.  This project will begin with a series of monocausal simulations
              based on natural predator-prey interactions, cultural harvesting strategies,
              and long-term changes in the Bering Sea ecosystem.  The investigators will
              follow these simulations with multivariate tests in order to investigate
              interactions between various possible agents.  This multivariate testing of
              simulations should help identify important interaction effects among different
              agents, even when individual agents have been shown no substantial influence on
              salmon fisheries.

This project will assess the independent and
              interdependent roles of both human and non-human agents in the modeling
              process.  Humans have lived in the Bering Sea region for at least 10,000 years,
              and there has never been a time in recent history where humans did not play an
              important role in the regional ecosystem.  This project also will add to
              knowledge regarding the interplay of agents across multiple temporal and
              spatial scales.  Data will be included from such diverse scales as seasonal
              catch records of an individual boat, 4,000-year nutrient cycles from lake
              cores, and a 6,000-year archaeological record of faunal remains.  The project
              also will use of local and indigenous knowledge and will involve local
              residents in the evaluation of the models and results.  The project also should
              have significant practical implications as it assesses the structure and
              dynamics of salmon productivity and success in the complex Bering Sea
              ecosystem.  This project is an award emanating from the FY 2001 special
              competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of
              Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

