Title       : SGER: Characterizing Sampling Error for Optimization Under Uncertainty - A
               Fractal Geometry Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0119430

Award Number: 0119430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Urmila M. Diwekar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Uday S. Rao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ranga Pitchumani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9102,9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) are to
              develop innovative and powerful approaches for solving problems of decision
              making under uncertainty applied to large scale design, manufacturing,
              planning, and management related problems.  However, efficient estimation of
              performance in the presence of uncertainty is a critical first step.  The
              problem of decision making under uncertainty is posed as a stochastic
              optimization problem, which fundamentally involves constrained optimization of
              one or more probabilistic output functions constructed from multiple
              deterministic simulations for input parameter sets obtained by sampling
              uncertain input parameter distributions.  The power and usefulness of the
              approach has been demonstrated by the Principal Investigators, but the
              computational burden of this approach can be extreme and depends on the sample
              size used for characterizing the parametric uncertainties.  Sampling accuracy
              plays an important role in enhancing the efficiency of these optimization
              algorithms.  The proposed approach is aimed at filling an important void in
              assessing the width of the sampling error-bandwidth in specialized Monte Carlo
              approaches.  It draws on concepts from fractal geometry to derive error
              estimates.

Robust decision making amidst a cloud of parameter uncertainties
              is of fundamental importance in many applications.  These uncertainties can
              arise from operational, environmental, and market parameters (e.g., ambient
              temperature, customer demand), erroneous model representations (model
              simplifications and assumptions),and model parameters and data (e.g. reaction
              constants, physical properties, errors in measurements), to name a few.
              Furthermore, a decision maker has to deal with discrete decisions, like whether
              to choose a particular option or not, and also with decisions on a continuous
              space such as the choice of the operating temperature in a plant. 

