Title       : BE/CNH: Global Change, Globalization, and the Vulnerability of Mountain Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0119865

Award Number: 0119865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa J. Graumlich lisa@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1691      BE: DYN COUPLED NATURAL-HUMAN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,9150,9169,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mountain regions provide a unique and important setting within which to examine
              the interplay of global climate change and globalization.  This project seeks
              to strengthen an international, interdisciplinary research network whose goal
              is to advance understandings of the dynamics of coupled natural and human
              systems by characterizing the sources of vulnerability of mountain systems to
              the combined effects of global warming and global economic restructuring.  The
              strategy underlying the project is to develop research ties among scientists
              from multiple disciplines studying two mountain regions where the individual
              impacts of climate change and globalization are already strongly manifest and
              well documented.  These regions are: the Greater Yellowstone Region in Montana,
              Wyoming, and Idaho in the United States and the Mount Kilimanjaro Region  in
              Kenya and Tanzania.  U.S. and African scientists from the natural and social
              sciences will meet at workshops held in Montana and Kenya to address a range of
              emerging questions, such as how biophysical heterogeneity and diversity of
              institutional arrangements and economic strategies in mountain systems may
              enhance, reduce, or change in kind and scale the vulnerability of these regions
              to climate change.  Participants from mountain regions in Asia, Europe, and
              South America also will be invited to participate in these workshops as a first
              step in expanding the research network globally.

This project will lay the
              groundwork to develop a global research strategy to address the vulnerability
              of mountain systems to the interacting influences of global change and
              globalization.  Scientifically, mountain regions provide an ideal setting to
              develop comparative case studies of differential impacts of global change and
              globalization given that mountain regions are distributed all over the globe,
              from the Equator almost to the poles and from oceanic to highly continental
              climates and are experiencing globalization at widely varying rates.  Mountain
              regions also are critically important in assessing the impacts of global change
              given that they occupy about one-fifth of the Earth's surface and provide goods
              and services to about half of humanity.  This project is an award emanating
              from the FY 2001 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment
              focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

