Title       : International Symposium on Fast Glacier Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2001       
File        : a0119714

Award Number: 0119714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Echelmeyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-0119714
Echelmeyer

The Principal Investigator is requesting
              funds from the Antarctic Glaciology and Arctic Natural Sciences Programs to
              support the participation of several foreign scientists and U.S. graduate
              students at an International Symposium on Fast Glacier Flow.  In 1986, a
              Chapman Conference on Fast Glacier Flow was held to bring together scientists
              who were actively involved in the study of surging and fast tidewater glaciers,
              and ice stream flow. The meeting illuminated several outstanding problems which
              contributed to numerous inter-disciplinary studies in the Antarctic and
              Arctic.

Since 1986, there have been many important new developments in our
              understanding of the properties and processes involved in fast glacier flow and
              of its consequences in the global climate and ocean systems.  For example, the
              West Antarctic Ice Sheet initiative has brought the roles of highly deformable
              subglacial till and marginal shear-zone ice dynamics to the forefront as
              important processes in fast glacier motion.  This research has led to new
              approaches in the study of surging glaciers in the Arctic.  Detailed studies of
              outlet glaciers in Greenland and tidewater glaciers in Alaska have been
              important in determining the roles of fast glacier flow and iceberg calving in
              ice sheet mass balance, as well as their roles in ice sheet disintegration and
              their effects on ocean circulation through Heinrich-type events.  New remote
              sensing techniques have been used to illuminate features of ice stream flow and
              surge-type glaciers in both Antarctica and the Arctic, including the
              identification of a large ice stream in northeast Greenland and possible rapid
              drawdown of the Pine Island/Thwaites drainage basins in Antarctica. 
              

Because of these exciting new developments, the Principal Investigator will
              host an International Symposium on Fast Glacier Flow in 2002 sponsored by the
              International Glaciological Society in Yakutat, Alaska.  Yakutat is located
              among the largest and most active tidewater and surging glaciers in the North
              America.  The meeting will be organized through the Geophysical Institute,
              University of Alaska - Fairbanks.  This proposal seeks funds to partially
              defray the cost of organizing and carrying out this symposium.

Bringing
              together Antarctic and Arctic scientists working on these different aspects of
              rapid ice motion should promote vigorous discussion and an exchange of ideas on
              the current state of knowledge.  The symposium will focus on the most pressing
              unanswered questions of fast glacier flow, leading to discussions of future
              directions for international, inter-disciplinary research.  Peer-reviewed
              papers resulting from oral and poster presentations at the symposium will be
              published in the Annals of Glaciology.

