Title       : Diversity in Mathematics Education: Building Infrastructure for Learning and
               Teaching Mathematics with Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2001 
File        : a0119732

Award Number: 0119732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John S. Bradley                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11068725           (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Secada wgsecada@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rogers P. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Megan Franke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7181      CENTERS FOR LEARNING & TEACHIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Diversity in Mathematics Education Center for Learning and Teaching
              (DiME-CLT) is building an integrated program to develop and enhance the
              instructional workforce from kindergarten through graduate school.  The program
              consists of three interrelated components:  a doctoral/postdoctoral component;
              a teacher education component for teachers and instructional leaders; and a
              comprehensive research agenda.  These components are integrated by a strong
              focus on the ideas of algebra and issues related to learners with diverse
              cultural, language and cognitive backgrounds. 

The Center is a consortium
              led by mathematics and education faculty of three research universities, two
              school-system partners, and a  group of teacher professional development
              providers -- the University of Wisconsin--Madison, the University of
              California, Berkeley, the University of California, Los Angeles, the Madison
              Metropolitan School District, the Berkeley Unified School District, and the
              California Subject Matter Project.  The University of Wisconsin is the grantee
              institution.

Two cohorts of 15 students are being recruited into the
              doctoral programs at the three institutions (five per institution).  Four new
              courses are being developed to become a common core for these programs. 
              Master's programs and existing in-service work with the Madison and Berkeley
              schools and the California Subject Matter Project are preparing a diverse group
              of mathematics teachers to assume leadership roles in their schools, districts
              and states.

The centerpiece of the DiME-CLT is the community of scholars,
              including the faculty, doctoral and masters students, participating teachers,
              and undergraduates, who engage in the collective analysis of cases of
              mathematical learning and teaching using Web-based software.  Cases are
              developed and placed on the common Web site and participants analyze the cases
              in multiple ways using different sets of theoretical lenses.  This
              cross-institutional, cross-disciplinary collaboration is being studied as part
              of the Center's evaluation; the results of that study are being published so
              that other institutions can launch their own efforts at preparing people to
              teach mathematics to an increasingly diverse student population.


