Title       : CLT: Appalachian Collaborative Center for Learning, Assessment and Instruction
               in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0119679

Award Number: 0119679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica M. Neagoy                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9995830            (Estimated)
Investigator: Vena M. Long   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 7181      CENTERS FOR LEARNING & TEACHIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Submitted under the guidelines for Centers for Learning and Teaching, the
              Appalachian Collaborative Center for Learning, Assessment and Instruction in
              Mathematics (ACCLAIM) is a five-year project designed to build a mathematics
              infrastructure in the Appalachian regions of Kentucky, Ohio, Tennessee and West
              Virginia.  ACCLAIM is a collaborative partnership among the University of
              Kentucky (UK), Ohio University (OU), the University of Tennessee (UT), and
              Marshall (MU) with the Appalachian Rural Systemic Initiative (ARSI).   The
              mathematics infrastructure in Appalachia will be enhanced through:
(a)
              advanced degree programs in mathematics and mathematics education, 
(b)
              job-embedded teacher preparation and professional development programs, and
              
(c) education research in a rural context. 

The two goals are to: 
(a)
              build mathematics capacity and expertise in the Appalachian regions of
              Kentucky, Ohio, Tennessee and West Virginia through advanced degree programs in
              mathematics education and through research that connects mathematics and rural
              education; and 
(b) improve the quality of mathematics teaching at the middle
              and high school levels in the Appalachian region through the development of
              collaborative networks and innovative delivery systems.  

To meet these
              goals, ACCLAIM will create and implement four interconnected initiatives:
              

1.  Capacity Building:  Doctoral cohorts of 20 students every two years,
              masters/specialists cohorts of 30 students every year.
2.  Professional
              Development:  Professional Development Teams in middle and high schools.
3. 
              Teacher Education:  Appalachian Association of Mathematics Teacher Educators --
              (AAMTE) fall and spring conferences and a listserv, needs assessment of teacher
              education  programs, and undergraduate courses online and telelink.
4. 
              Research:  Research agenda focused on mathematics education in rural contexts: 
              a) stimulate research, b) oversee and coordinate data collection and analysis,
              c) publish or disseminate best practices, d) serve as a clearinghouse for
              research findings, publish a newsletter -- "The Rural Mathematics Educator."

