Title       : OEDG: Mentoring Through Research: Catalyst for Success in the Geosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0119936

Award Number: 0119936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Cook                              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $967210             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. Marsaglia   (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Yule  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki A. Pedone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald W. Simila  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308309    /   -

NSF Program : 1697      OPPORT FOR ENHANCING DIVERSITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Mentoring through Research: Catalyst for Success in the
              Geosciences

The Department of Geological Sciences at California State
              University Northridge (CSUN) will develop a program to attract and retain
              underrepresented minorities in its geosciences curriculum.  The three-year
              Catalyst Program centers on peer-mentored research groups composed of graduate
              (CSUN MS candidates), undergraduate (from CSUN and local community colleges),
              and high-school students from under-represented groups. The multi-tiered
              approach connects students with mentors both horizontally (peer) and vertically
              (near-peer and advisor). The three-year scope of the project allows mentoring
              relationships developed during the first year to continue into subsequent years
              and for continuing students to step into roles of increasing responsibility and
              experience. Mentor-protege connections are initiated in a classroom setting
              through a course designed to teach mentoring and research concepts, and to
              familiarize students with each other, the research projects, and the faculty
              advisors. Students then join one of four focused research groups centered on
              exciting and engaging research projects of local to global significance.
              

The selected research projects have significant topical overlap (e.g.,
              seismology, structure/active tectonics, sedimentation and tectonics, and
              sedimentology and low temperature geochemistry), providing common grounds for
              student interaction through coursework and facilitating student transfer from
              group to group if research interests change.  The Catalyst Program provides
              mentoring and research training for the 30 or more students who will
              participate in the program to ensure success in academe and industry. It also
              enhances the mentoring skills and research productivity of the faculty mentors
              and strengthens the research capacity of the department, increasing the
              likelihood of continued funding from a variety of sources.
              










































