Title       : BE/CNH: Coupled Human/Ecosystems Over Long Periods: Mesa Verde Region
               Prehispanic Ecodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0119981

Award Number: 0119981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $920821             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Kohler tako@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Varien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth E. Kolm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to understand the long-term interaction of humans, their
              culture(s) and their environment in southwestern Colorado, USA, from A.D.
              600-1300.  The research employs agent-based simulation to examine various
              models for how farmers locate themselves and use resources on this landscape. 
              Further, the simulation will examine the exchange of agricultural goods among
              households, and whether exchange causes households to aggregate into villages
              in certain times and places, and disperse into smaller settlements during other
              times.  Finally, the simulation will examine why this area is depopulated in
              the late A.D. 1200s.  Households in this model act in a virtual environment
              where the elevation, soil type, temperature, vegetation, potential agricultural
              production, and precipitation vary over an 1800-sq-km study area.  The
              simulation is possible because high-resolution archaeological and environmental
              records are available for the study area during this period, including an
              inventory of thousands of archaeological sites, tree-ring records, and
              estimates of available surface water and ground water.  Estimates of
              agricultural production change annually according to climatic inputs
              reconstructed from tree-ring records, and possibly in response to landscape
              degradation due to farming as well.  Over longer periods, the same factors
              affect the availability of surface water and ground water, and changes in the
              location and availability of water will also be incorporated into the
              simulation.  Population size and the location of settlement on the landscape
              vary according to the experiences of the households during the period under
              investigation, and population flows from and to other areas.  The simulation
              will employ cultural algorithms (variants of genetic algorithms) through which
              households may optimize their landscape and resource use with respect to other
              households with whom they exchange corn and compete for agricultural land. 
              These algorithms will also be used to simulate selection of farming strategies,
              including those that use surface water for irrigation.  In this way, the
              simulation will be used to determine how exchange of agricultural goods,
              competition for land, and changing farming strategies affected household
              movement and formation of villages.  The behavior of households in all variants
              of the simulation will be compared against a database for archaeological sites
              in the study area that specifies their location, size, function, and period of
              occupation, allowing an assessment of how well each variant fits the
              archaeological record. 

This work contributes to understanding changing
              land-use strategies in small-scale farming societies experiencing significant
              climate change and population growth.  It also contributes to understanding the
              evolution of economic systems and population aggregation in such societies.  In
              particular, the study will clarify the factors that resulted in village
              formation and the depopulation in one of the most famous archaeological areas
              in the world: the Mesa Verde region.  In addition, the research will develop
              tools to make the future examination of such systems more effective.  The
              groundwater model will help to predict what might happen to groundwater
              supplies in this area as climate changes in the future.  Finally, by clarifying
              the relationships between climate, culture, and behavior this research will be
              useful in unraveling the complexities of coupled human and natural systems in
              other areas.  This project is an award emanating from the FY2001 special
              competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of
              Coupled Natural and Human Systems.
