Title       : OEDG: Connecting with the River: Geoscience Research and Education for Hartford,
               Connecticut
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0119968

Award Number: 0119968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Cook                              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333173             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne O'Connell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet F. Morrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Osborn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      300 Summit Street
	      Hartford, CT  061063100    860/297-2000

NSF Program : 1697      OPPORT FOR ENHANCING DIVERSITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Connecting with the River: Geoscience Research and Education for
              Hartford, CT

The students in the Hartford public school system come from
              ethnic backgrounds
not widely represented in the geosciences (51% Hispanic,
              42% African-American and
3% Asian). This two-year collaborative program seeks
              to enhance geoscience
and technological literacy among these urban youth by
              drawing upon the rich educational value of the Connecticut River. This river,
              the longest in New England, and an American Heritage River, flows through
              Hartford CT and provides an excellent earth science laboratory. Connecting
              these students with the river provides an ideal opportunity for them to learn
              about earth science process, to develop a toolbox of research skills and to
              understand the relevance of earth science to their lives. 

This diverse
              group of high school students will be engaged in the design and implementation
              of an environmental monitoring initiative that will document the physical
              processes and biological health of the river. Students at the Greater Hartford
              Academy of Math and Science (GHAMS), a magnet high school, and other area
              students will conduct this research as part of their regular school curriculum
              and during weekends, and in an intensive summer program. Many community
              organizations will be involved with the collection and presentation of the
              data. Data will be distributed among fellow student scientists and displayed on
              a student created website and the project will be promoted at various public
              buildings and museums and in print media.



















