Title       : Modifying the Boundary Conditions of Lubricant Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0119626

Award Number: 0119626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302256             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Granick sgranick@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0119626
Granick	
This work will provide a critical experimental assessment of
              the"stick" boundary condition of continuum hydrodynamics.  The stick assumption
              is presently one of the cornerstones of calculation regarding fluid flow in
              tribology yet recent theories and experiments raise the exciting possibility
              that surfaces can be engineering to produce the boundary condition of partial
              slip. The approach will consist of testing the classical Reynolds Equation of
              continuum hydrodynamics for cases where systematic prior experiments do not yet
              exist:  partially-wetted surfaces (finite contact angle of the fluid on the
              surface) and variable surface roughness (the roughness will be topographical,
              chemical, and lubrication additives).  For measurement, a modified surface
              forces apparatus will be operated at spacings large enough (10-200 nm) that
              intervening Newtonian fluids are believed to behave as a continuum. 
              Nanometer-level oscillatory modulations of film spacing will be performed such
              that the amplitude and frequency of modulation are varied independently,
              allowing the mean velocity to vary over a wide range without large change of
              the film thickness. 
First, we will put to direct test recent theoretical
              predictions and molecular dynamics simulations that predict breakdown of stick
              boundary conditions when low-viscosity fluids fail to wet completely a smooth
              solid boundary.   Secondly, we will extend this work to" patchy" surfaces -
              surfaces that are chemically and geometrically rough - to test theoretical
              predictions that" stick" boundary conditions of fluid flow stem from the
              presence of roughness.  Third, we will extend this work to "hairy" surfaces -
              surfaces that bear surface-attached polymer chains.  This is the situation that
              prevails in oil lubrication owing to the presence of polymer additives.  It is
              the situation that prevails in biolubrication owing to the presence of
              surface-attached biomacromolecules.  
The engineering impact will be to point
              the way to new ways by which energy dissipation can be controlled during
              lubricant flow. The main applications will pertain not so much to the high-load
              conditions characteristic of heavy machines, as to the low-load conditions
              characteristic of emerging nanotechnologies and micromachines.
***
