Title       : Center for Assessment and Evaluation of Student Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2002  
File        : a0119790

Award Number: 0119790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10993834           (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Schneider sschnei@wested.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan L. Herman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Tinker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline Barber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Shavelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WestEd
	      730 Harrison Street
	      San Francisco, CA  94107    415/565-3070

NSF Program : 7181      CENTERS FOR LEARNING & TEACHIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Center for Assessment and Evaluation of Student Learning (CAESL) addresses
              the national need for increasing the assessment capacity within the K-12
              science education system.  Increasing "assessment capacity" means enhancing the
              expertise, designs, structures and supports that enable local districts and
              schools to use assessment as a critical tool for enhancing science learning. 
              The primary focus of the Center will be classroom assessment practices. 
              However, because of the enormous pressure that standardized and/or
              state-mandated assessments place on students and teachers, the project also
              seeks to better align large-scale assessments with ongoing formative classroom
              assessments that inform teaching and improve learning.

The Center is a
              collaboration among:  the Concord Consortium; the Center for Research on
              Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing (CRESST)/University of California,
              Los Angeles; Stanford University; Lawrence Hall of Science; the Graduate School
              of Education at the University of California, Berkeley; and WestEd, who will
              act as the coordinator.  There are several major school district partners that
              will collaborate with the Center and serve as testbeds for Center activities
              and resources.  The project also works with San Jose State University, a major
              teacher preparation institution, to co-develop and integrate a variety of
              assessment resources into its preservice and graduate programs. 

The
              Center's graduate programs are aimed to make significant practical, conceptual
              and methodological contributions to the assessment of science learning and
              achievement.  The Graduate Schools of Education at UC-Berkeley, UCLA and
              Stanford will develop a cooperative approach to the masters and doctoral
              programs to be called the Learning and Assessment Program (LAP) for 43
              students.  The LAP includes a series of core courses on science, learning,
              cognition and assessment; testing and assessment; and curriculum, teaching and
              assessment. Students can "telecommute" to take courses at institutions other
              than their own, and all students will participate in a practicum on assessment
              development.

The professional development component will be led by the
              Lawrence Hall of Science, the Concord Consortium, and WestEd.  Participating
              districts will be part of three-year cohorts and assemble teams of teachers and
              district administrators who will participate in 15 days of professional
              development each year over three years, along with follow-up sessions at school
              sites.  The professional development focuses on testing and using formative
              classroom assessments.  Experiences and products developed as part of this
              component will be disseminated widely to other schools or districts through the
              extensive networks of the Lawrence Hall and WestEd.  

The applied research
              component examines (1) the formative and summative assessment strategies that
              most effectively increase student learning and understanding; and (2) how
              educational technology can enhance assessment practices.

Finally, the
              project targets public understanding of assessment and the Lawrence Hall of
              Science and CRESST/UCLA will mount a public outreach effort that translates the
              work of the Center for school administrators, parents and community
              members.





