Title       : Virginia Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation of Teachers Follow On
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0119904

Award Number: 0119904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reuben W. Farley rwfarley@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. McLeod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Bass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julia H. Cothron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Haver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through a grant from the NSF Collaboratives for Excellence in Teacher
              Preparation (CETP), the Virginia Collaborative for Excellence in the
              Preparation of Teachers has accomplished a complete redesign of the mathematics
              and science preparation programs for future K-8 teachers. The participating
              institutions (Virginia Commonwealth University, Longwood College, Mary
              Washington College, Norfolk State University, and regional community colleges)
              increased the credit hours required of future elementary school teachers from
              an average of 9-12 credits to an average of more than 24 and developed entirely
              new programs for future middle school teachers requiring substantial course
              work in the subjects to be taught by these teachers. In making the program
              modifications, the faculty completely redesigned the content and nature of
              instruction provided in the courses taken by future teachers. In addition, the
              institutions strengthened the in-school experiences provided to future teachers
              by preparing a cadre of outstanding current teachers to serve as Clinical
              Faculty in the teacher preparation programs, providing enhanced practicum,
              class visitation and student teaching experiences for the future teachers.
              Finally, a Teaching Apprentice Program was put in place at each institution to
              aid in the recruitment and retention of prospective teachers. A follow-on
              project at Virginia Commonwealth University is conducting an assessment of the
              classroom effectiveness of teachers prepared under the new programs. The
              summative evaluation is focusing on the extent to which project goals were met;
              the impact of the project on faculty, preservice students and participating
              institutions; and the effectiveness of the VCEPT teacher graduates. The project
              is also providing mentoring to effectively transition a group of new teachers
              into their profession, by assigning a Clinical Faculty Member to mentor new
              graduates. Virginia Commonwealth University continues as the lead institution
              for the follow-on proposal.
