Title       : BE/CNH: Simulating Complexity in a Dynamic Landscape: Land-Use and Land-Cover
               Change in Nang Rong, Thailand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0119572

Award Number: 0119572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1309705            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Rindfuss ron_rindfuss@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Entwisle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the role of individual, collective, and institutional human
              behavior is fundamental to an understanding of land-use and land-cover change. 
              Human dimensions have been difficult to model, however, because of the need to
              incorporate the stochastic behavior of social units at multiple levels of
              social organization, the need to make human actions spatially explicit, and the
              need to be more explicit about what humans are doing and why, particularly at
              specific locations for specific time periods.  This project examines the
              consequences of land-use and land-cover change in the Nang Rong district of
              northeast Thailand.  The overall goal of this project is to develop a better
              understanding of human behavior in the transformation of the Earth's surface. 
              Nang Rong serves as an appropriate laboratory for this purpose.  The data
              available for Nang Rong are unique in their coverage of social, biophysical,
              and spatial domains and include three panels of individual, household, and
              village-level data, which were collected in 1984, 1994, and 2000.  A time
              series of remotely sensed data that includes aerial photography (beginning in
              1954) and satellite data (beginning in 1972) also has been collected for the
              district along with a digitized base-map and a collection of derived GIS
              thematic coverages.  Verification data has been obtained during multiple field
              visits, and qualitative interviews will be conducted as part of the project. 
              The project's first aim is to develop, calibrate, and validate a cellular
              automaton (CA) model representing land use and land cover change over the past
              half century in Nang Rong.  CA models provide a formal framework for
              investigating the behavior of complex, extended systems.  The CA model to be
              developed in this project focuses on the spatial and temporal dynamics of
              deforestation, agricultural extensification, and plant succession.  Rules for
              the CA modeling will be derived from formal theories of growth and change, and
              models will incorporate the results of empirical analyses.  The second aim of
              the project is to use the CA model in dynamic simulations to explore land-use
              and land-cover change as both cause and consequence of patterns of village
              settlement in a frontier environment; road development and increases in
              vehicular traffic; migration and household formation as the frontier closes;
              land tenure; monsoonal variability; agricultural intensification; cooperative
              use of the hydrological layer; major shifts in world markets; electrification;
              the rise in television ownership; and the spread of consumerism.  Results of
              the simulations will be used to examine the spatial distribution as well as
              composition of land-use and land-cover change, and they will be used to
              evaluate trajectories for a sample of pixels and other spatial units.  The
              project's third aim is to package the simulations into a multimedia GIS
              database.  This database, together with other materials explaining the
              situation, will be adapted to and tested for use at the secondary and college
              levels and then made publicly available via the Internet.

Through the
              conduct of this project, the challengers of understanding the role of human
              behavior in land-use and land-cover change will be met through the development,
              elaboration, and evaluation of the cellular automaton (CA) modeling described
              above for the Nang Rong district.  The temporal depth, areal extent, and grain
              size of the social surveys, remote images, and GIS data afford a unique
              capability to examine complex systems operating within a complexity theory
              context.  The coupling of the simulation power of CA modeling, with its ability
              to allow for nonlinearities and feedbacks, and a rich set of empirically
              derived relationships will provide valuable new insights into the complex
              interactions among natural and human systems.  The project also will facilitate
              collaborations between U.S. scientists and scientists at Mahidol University in
              Thailand.  This project is an award emanating from the FY 2001 special
              competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of
              Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

