Title       : Molecular Characterization of Visual Pigments in Aquatic Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0119102

Award Number: 0119102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis R. Robinson probinso@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The scientific exploration of vision and particularly color vision has its
              historical roots as far back as the eighteenth century, when scientists such as
              Dalton and Young attempted to explain color vision and color blindness.  Color
              vision allows an animal to make distinctions based on chromatic information
              rather than luminosity.  Color vision helps an animal identify important
              objects in their environment The study color vision in aquatic mammals provides
              an unique opportunity to examine the adaptation of the mammalian visual system
              to the unique properties of an aquatic visual envirom-nent.  We have recently
              demonstrated that the bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus) lacks the common
              cone-based dichromatic form of color vision typical of most terrestrial
              mammals.  This is an exciting finding, and it is the beginning of a
              comprehensive molecular study of the visual pigments of aquatic mammals for two
              different mammalian orders and one suborder (whales, seals and manatees) have
              independently adapted to life in an aquatic environment.  This research project
              will determine if all aquatic mammals: Cetacea, Pinnipedia and Sirenia have a
              visual system similar to that of the dolphin and express only two spectrally
              distinct classes of visual pigments: one rhodopsin and one cone pigment and
              hence lack typical mammalian dichromatic color vision.  This comparative study
              of color vision in aquatic mammals will examine the adaptive processes that
              occurred as these distinct orders and suborder of mammals with different
              terrestrial ancestors moved from a land to an aquatic environment.
This
              research project will allow my laboratory to continue to successfully train
              both women and minority science students.  Of the ten minority and women
              undergraduates who have worked in my laboratory, two are enrolled in MD/Ph.D.
              programs, five are currently in graduate school and two are in medical
              school.

