Title       : Quantum Phase Transitions and Effects of Dissipation in Low-Dimensional
               Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0119027

Award Number: 0119027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aharon Kapitulnik aharonk@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm R. Beasley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will support the continuation of a project to
              study the dynamics of Quantum Phase Transitions (QPT) and in particular the
              effects of dissipation. During the past three years this program has been a
              major source for new experimental data and re-analyses of data in other
              systems, that point to the occurrence of phase separation and the existence of
              "metallic" phases in two-dimensional Superconductor-Insulator-Transition (SIT)
              films. Through new choices of model-system materials the current project will
              try to complete the true phase diagram of two-dimensional SIT in the presence
              of dissipation. In particular it will emphasize the electronic microstructure
              of the SIT system near the transition, the issue of phase separation, and the
              possible sources of dissipation. Obtaining more insight into the SIT with
              dissipation problem will shed light on other outstanding problems such as
              high-Tc superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance and strongly correlated
              magnets.  Through graduate students thesis work, undergraduate students
              involvement, and a new course on quantum coherence and dissipation to be
              designed by the PI, the project will continue to have a strong educational
              component.
%%%
Many physical systems, although very different in nature, can
              be described by similar physical principles. Thus, finding appropriate model
              systems for outstanding physics problems, and in particular problems that
              relate to both, basic science and applications is of fundamental importance. 
              The problem of Superconductor-Insulator-Transition (SIT) in two dimensional
              films has been shown to exhibit physics relevant to the understanding of
              high-Tc superconductors (important for superconductive electronics and low-loss
              conductors for power handling,) as well as to two-dimensional electron gas
              systems (important for electronic-device applications in the quantum limit.) 
              The present program extends our study of SIT systems to include more materials
              (i.e. extending parameter space of the model system) and design new probes to
              study the system at the microscopic scale. The program will continue to have a
              strong educational component to it through graduate students thesis work,
              undergraduate students involvement, and a new course on quantum coherence and
              dissipation to be designed by the PI.
***


