Title       : In Situ X-ray Probes of Surface-Mediated Pollutant Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0119672

Award Number: 0119672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99667              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erwin D. Poliakoff epoliak@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Dellinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1689,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to show how an X-ray spectroscopy apparatus can be used to
              probe detailed microscopic aspects of pollutant formation that occur at
              interfaces in combustion sources.  Many pollutants are introduced into the
              environment as a result of combustion processes, and there is a growing
              realization that important pathways related to the production of the pollutants
              involve heterogeneous processes, i.e., surface reactions, for which, there is
              no clear mechanistic picture of the reaction pathways or kinetics.  This
              project carries to develop instrumentation that generates essential information
              regarding how pollutants with significant health effects are formed, and
              thereby provide the knowledge required for reducing their production.  An
              end-station for synchrotron-based x-ray spectroscopy experiments will be
              developed for monitoring microscopic aspects of combustion processes.  The
              end-station will be a vacuum system with a temperature-regulated sample holder
              that can be dosed with reactants of interest.  The system will be designed so
              that fluorescence yield XAFS(s-ray absorption fine structure) spectroscopy can
              be performed in a variety of ways.  Different types of x-ray spectra will be
              generated.  Extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy will
              be used for determining structural information, and x-ray absorption near edge
              structure (XANES) spectroscopy will be used for chemical fingerprinting
              applications.  Specifically, this end-station will be optimized for probing how
              chlorine-containing aromatic species (e.g., chlorophenols) are adsorbed on
              metal oxide surfaces, and how they react to form polychlorinated
              dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibensofurans (PCDD/Fs).  EXAFS spectra will be used to
              determine how aromatic compounds (such as 2-chlorophenol) are adsorbed on
              oxidized metal surfaces.  Also, EXAFS spectra will be used to determine
              structural information on reaction intermediates after the reaction has been
              allowed to progress.  It will also be possible to generate kinetic data on
              combustion processes by probing a more limited spectral range, the XANES
              region.
%%%
The key point unifying these ideas is that by combining
              techniques from environmental science and x-ray spectroscopy, wholly new types
              of data can generated to elucidate chemical pathways that generate pollutants
              in combustion processes.  Students trained in areas of instrumentation
              development and applications to environmental sciences, which are also
              priorities for U.S. industry, will be highly competitive in this job market.

