Title       : Biophotonics: Collaborative Research: Photoactivated Coupling of Nanoparticle
               Multilayers and Nerve Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0119483

Award Number: 0119483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336324             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas A. Kotov kotov@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Warren T. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Wicksted  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1606,5345,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0119483
Kotov
Recent advances in nanotechnology and bioengineering have opened
              the exciting prospect for promoting direct interaction of electronics, optics
              and biological systems. The primary obstacle to realizing this goal in the
              fields of neuroscience and medical devices such as prostheses is the inadequate
              understanding of the molecular processes involved in coupling between living
              neurons and nanomaterials, and how to optimize the coupling between man made
              materials and living systems.  In this project, the intent is to investigate
              the dynamics and mechanisms of the live/lifeless matter interaction in a model
              system consisting of a thin film composed of nanoparticles and cultured nerve
              cells. The multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional "Linked Collaborative
              Proposals " bring together several research groups with broad expertise and
              research interest to conduct experimental and theoretical studies aimed at
              characterizing the interaction that occur at the interface of nanomaterials and
              neurons and optimizing the interface for effective photon-activation of neurons
              following photonic probing of the interface of nanomaterials that are attached
              to the cells. The partners at Oklahoma State University lead by Dr. Kotov will
              carry out the materials science aspect of this project, while the investigation
              at the University of Texas Medical Branch lead by Dr. Motamedi will concentrate
              on the bioengineering and electrophysiological components of this work.
              

Specifically, the objectives of the proje ct are the following. (1)
              Preparation of biocompatible nanoparticle multilayers that can be attached to
              nerve cells. (2) Registration and characterization of the photoinduced nerve
              cell membrane currents and potentials following optical excitation of the
              interface as function of NP and biological structures. (3) Optimization of
              NP-cell coupling for different interface structure. 

