Title       : Workers' Cemetery at Hierakonpolis: Rescue of an Endangered Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a0119754

Award Number: 0119754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276646             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome C. Rose jcrose@mail.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Rose and his collaborators will conduct two intensive excavation and
              analysis seasons at Hierakonpolis, located 650 miles south of Cairo.  The site
              is clearly associated with  the birth of the ancient Egyptian state, and has
              produced spectacular finds, such as the Narmer Palette and the large ceremonial
              mace-heads of King Scorpion and Narmer, the earliest Egyptian kings.  These
              objects and the size of the site indicate its importance as a  possible capital
              of an early kingdom prior to unification. No other site can tell us as much
              about when and how Egypt was transformed from a scatter of farming villages
              into a great kingdom of the ancient world.  Hierakonpolis is the first where
              there are three widely separated and distinct class cemeteries: elites, skilled
              middle class, and laboring poor.  We focus on the cemetery of the working
              class.  The site is also unique for the level of preservation where the hot dry
              sand has preserved delicate matting, basketry, fabric and food stuffs, as well
              as human skin, fingernails, hair, internal organs, stomach contents and human
              feces.  Teams of will excavate and comprehensively analyze 200 skeletons each
              season.  Skeletal and dental analyses will be used to reconstruct differences
              in diet, disease, stress, and work loads between social classes.  We propose to
              use the skeletal and archaeological data to test the following: if the elites,
              skilled middle class, and laboring poor all derived from the same population;
              if disease, stress, and parasite loads low enough not to suppress per capita
              production of the laboring poor; if the laboring class received sufficient
              nutrition to maintained a high level of economic output; and if the laboring
              class was able to produce the surpluses necessary to support the other classes
              without exceeding normal levels of effort by looking at arthritis.

This site
              is highly threatened by agricultural development and within several years will
              be completely destroyed by bulldozing. Increased soil moisture which results
              from irrigation will also cause the deterioration of fragile materials which
              have been preserved in the dry desert environment. Thus this research must be
              conducted now.

