Title       : Shaking up the Future of Hispanic Students in Rural Southwest Arizona: A
               Collaborative Research/Teaching Effort Creating a Bridge between Students and
               the Geosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0119785

Award Number: 0119785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Cook                              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190817             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Michael Conway aw_conway@awc.cc.az.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred W. Croxen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stefan Dieters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona Western College
	      P O BOX 929
	      Yuma, AZ  853660929    928/344-7500

NSF Program : 1697      OPPORT FOR ENHANCING DIVERSITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Shaking up the future of Hispanic students in rural southwest
              Arizona

Arizona Western College (AWC), a two-year institution situated in
              rural southwestern Arizona, has a student population of about 62%
              underrepresented minorities, most of whom are first-generation, low-income
              students of Hispanic origin.  "Shaking up the future of Hispanic students in
              rural southwest Ariona" is a three-phase geoscience education program to
              indentify, recruit, and train talented underrepresented students in geoscience.
              The linchpin of the program is a local reserach-quality seismic network
              comprising three broadband seismometers.  Yuma is situated on the east
              perimeter of the seismically-active Salton Trough; a transtensional basin
              located at the southern end of the San Andreas Transform system.  Most area
              residents have felt earthquakes and students in geosciece classes show an
              interest and enthusiasm in their origin and potential societal impact.  The
              project will recruit local minority high school students by engaging them in a
              topical sciecne issue that impacts border communities in Arizona and
              California.

The AWC Seismic Observatory in geoscience education is a joint
              effort of the Arizona Western College and the University of Arizona's Southern
              Arizona Seismic Observatory (SASO).  Phase I of the three-phase program
              involves an annual 2.5 week summer seismic program where high school students
              and AWC geoscience majors explore the nature of earthquakes in the field and
              laboratory.  In Phaes II, high school students will bridge up to one AWC's
              three geoscience programs.  As part of the geoscience curriculum, students will
              work in the seismic observatory with a graduate student from SASO and
              participate in frequent regional field trips.  In Phase III, student
              participants move to geoscience programs at the University of Arizona or other
              institutions.  The relationships fostered in Phase I and II will serve as an
              academic bridge connecting AWC students to faculty in the Geoscience Department
              at the University of Arizona.
