Title       : SGER: Retroviral Strategies for Conditional Transgenesis in Brain Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0119368

Award Number: 0119368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89354              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifton W. Ragsdale cliff@drugs.bsd.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A key advantage in mouse molecular genetics is the ability to tailor transgene
              expression to particular tissues at particular times in development. Such
              ability allows for increasingly more sophisticated analysis of gene function
              and detailed understanding of developmental fates, and the molecular and
              cellular mechanisms underlying those fates. These methodologies rely on
              germ-line manipulations in mouse embryos and are not  directly applicable to 
              other models of  development, such as chick embryogenesis. Dr. Ragsdale and his
              coworkers will explore a more broadly applicable method of heritable,
              conditional transgenesis, one that could be used in a range of animal embryos.
              Avian retroviruses have a restricted host range, and even among chickens there
              are strains of birds that are susceptible to infection by only certain viral
              subgroups. The relevant viral receptors have now been cloned and can confer
              viral infectivity to heterologous cells. In addition, in a growing number of
              experimental systems, transient transgenesis can be achieved by direct tissue
              electroporation of embryos. Dr. Ragsdale will develop a transgenesis system in
              which electroporation delivers avian retroviral receptors for transient
              misexpression. The location and timing of the exogenous receptor expression is
              controlled by the time and site of the electroporation and can be further
              restricted by tissue-specific promoters.  Subsequent retroviral infection then
              provides for heritable transgene delivery only to those cells expressing the
              viral receptor at the time of the infection. Dr. Ragsdale will explore this
              system in chick neural development, but its applicability is potentially much
              broader and includes the range of embryos, from ascidians to mice, where in
              vivo electroporation can be used to introduce plasmid DNA into developing
              organs.
