Title       : BE/CNH: Coupled Natural and Human Dynamics in Coral Reef Ecosystems: The Effect
               of Marine Reserve Network Design and Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0119976

Award Number: 0119976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2497694            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Brumbaugh brumba@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              PI: Brumbaugh 		Proposal: 0119976	                      
 
The project by
              Daniel R. Brumbaugh, American Museum of Natural History, and colleagues is
              supported by the program Biocomplexity in the Environment, subprogram Dynamics
              of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (BE-CHN).  This project will integrate
              theory and data from oceanography, biology, and social sciences to address
              major questions about the design of marine reserve networks. The researchers
              plan to establish a general theoretical framework with linked circulation,
              population, habitat, and socioeconomic submodels. This structure will allow
              systematic exploration of several core questions, including: (1) what are the
              crucial cascades and feedbacks among physical, biological, and social systems
              that influence how reserve networks function? (2) What are the roles of
              different stakeholder groups, such as various fisher groups, local residents,
              tourists, etc, in this network function? and (3) how compatible are network
              systems based largely on criteria to promote local acceptability of reserves
              versus those more centrally optimized around biophysical criteria? In all
              questions, network function will be addressed through the effects on
              fisheries,
biodiversity, and social/cultural systems. In this way, The
              analyses will be able to directly address and compare a range of common network
              goals.

The project will revolve around the development of a series of
              integrated models with
increasing spatial complexity and the acquisition of
              data to parameterize them. The modeling will start with analytical models and
              will then extend to spatially explicit (e.g., grid-based) and realistic (e.g.,
              map-based) versions. Data collection will initially focus on intensive mining
              of published literature and databases for existing information, followed by
              targeted field work, including habitat mapping, surveys of species - habitat
              relationships, sampling for population genetic structure, and ethnographic
              studies of stakeholders. Models and data will eventually be incorporated into a
              dynamic GIS spatial-simulation tool- allowing users to run network design and
              management experiments via interactive simulation. This product will be made
              available to researchers, educators, and managers interested in the analysis of
              reserve network function.
The researchers, distributed among multiple
              institutions, are adopting the Bahamas as their study system. This country, an
              archipelago of hundreds of island, is currently in the political process of
              expanding their set of marine protected areas (MPAs) into an interconnected
              network of marine reserves (to include up to 40 sites). Because of this,
              several Bahamas government and conservation agencies are welcoming scientific
              contributions to their policy-making discussions. In comparison to many other
              Caribbean countries, marine resources in the Bahamas also remain relatively
              intact because of the county's large size and relatively small population. The
              country's close proximity to Florida also makes it logistically feasible for
              project researchers to conduct fieldwork while remaining in close contact with
              their home institutions and other project collaborators.

This project,
              taking advantage of special opportunities in the Bahamas, will develop new
              understanding about global phenomena- the anthropogenic degradation of reef
              ecosystems and the paradigmatic turn to marine reserves for better resource
              management. In exploring these concerns and answering the questions above, we
              also plan to support ongoing decision-making and educational activities in the
              Bahamas. This double strategy exemplifies the role of strategic (versus
              traditionally defined basic or applied) science to elucidate important
              processes while helping to solve problems. The proposed work will also have
              substantial educational spin-offs in both the US and the Bahamas. Informal
              education products, including multimedia presentations and web-base materials
              will be produced and disseminated by the museum. In addition, researchers will
              work with partner organizations in the Bahamas to develop project-related
              materials for teacher training and college courses.

