Title       : Proposal for a Workshop/Symposium Entitled Narrative that Heals to be held at
               the 4th International Congress of Arctic Social Sciences in Quebec City, Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0119042

Award Number: 0119042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anna M. Kerttula                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20596              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy Arundale ffwha@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A two-day workshop entitled "Narrative that heals" will be held at the 4th
              International Congress of Arctic Social Sciences on 16-20 May 2001 in Quebec
              City, Canada.  This workshop will convene 25 scholars, storytellers and
              practitioners, more than half of them native peoples, from the U.S., Canada and
              Greenland. The workshop will enable increased knowledge and understanding of
              how storytelling, oral history and other forms of narrative can promote
              well-being and help heal psychological and social wounds that afflict many
              northern peoples at the individual, family, community and group levels. 
              Workshop goals include greater understanding of the social and psychological
              dimensions that can contribute to more effective applications of healing
              through narrative, and explorations of new applications and future research
              needs. Workshop participants will address the healing power of narrative
              through discussions and demonstration.  By combining scholarly and experiential
              elements, the workshop will heighten understanding and awareness and increase
              opportunities for interaction, new learning and mutual respect.  At the
              conclusion of formal presentations, three discussants representing the
              perspectives of native people, practitioners, scholars and policy makers will
              summarize, respond to and comment on the presentations.  There will be
              opportunities also for session participants and audience members to participate
              in these discussions.  Results of the workshop will be disseminated via
              audiotapes that will be made available to institutions and individuals, and
              session abstracts will be placed on the International Arctic Social Sciences
              Association  website.  All or part of the proceedings will be published,
              probably grouped in a special issue of an appropriate journal.
