Title       : St. Louis Center for Learning and Teaching in Informal Settings: Developmental
               Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0119750

Award Number: 0119750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine Klein   (Principal Investigator current)
              James Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Addelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phyllis Balcerzak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Louis Science Center
	      5050 Oakland Avenue
	      Saint Louis, MO  631101404    314/289-4417

NSF Program : 7181      CENTERS FOR LEARNING & TEACHIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This development grant is a collaborative effort of three informal science
              education institutions (St. Louis Science Center, The Missouri Botanical
              Gardenand the Saint Louis Zoo), Washington University in St. Louis and St.
              Louis Public Schools.  The project will build on and learn from elements of
              informal settings and free-choice learning to enhance learning and teaching in
              formal settings.  Specific goals for the developmental period are to (1)
              strengthen the collaboration among the institutions; (2) test and refine ideas
              related to the
focus on informal science institutions as a primary vehicle for
              SMT education in an urban setting; (3) identify strengths and barriers to
              existing and proposed professional development models; and (4) evaluate the
              models.   To accomplish the goals, the collaborating institutions will conduct
              a series of focus groups,
identify and bring together other potential
              partners, commission a case study by the John M. Olin School of Business at
              Washington University for a supply warehouse to circulate hands-on science
              supplies for classroom use, and develop a model for reciprocal internships
              between schools and the informal sites.  They will continue to refine their
              research goals of identifying the most appropriate combination of informal
              science institution and formal institutional attributes which will result in
              the most effective science and mathematics learning for students and
              professional development for teachers.  The developmental project will also
              allow for the further development of graduate level courses focused on the
              effective use of informal science institution resources in formal settings.


