Title       : Mixed Signal: Systematic Characterization and Profile Design of SiGe HBTs for
               Mixed Signal Wired and Wireless Telecommunications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0119623

Award Number: 0119623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guofu Niu guofu@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Cressler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1752,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Because of its high performance, low cost, and compatibility with silicon
CMOS,
              SiGe HBT technology has recently emerged as a contender for both
mobile and
              optical networking applications. Current SiGe HBTs designs are
focused on
              improving the speed of these devices, while our recent
experiments have shown
              that the optimum device structure for wireless
applications are considerably
              different. Issues important for mobile and
optical networking, such as 1/f
              noise, phase noise (frequency domain
sideband and time domain jitter), and
              linearity, have not been researched
as a function of the device structure, or
              optimized for
these performance targets.


This proposal is aimed at
              systematically examining the impact of
bandgap engineering and scaling on all
              of the device figures-of-merit that
are of interest to both wireless and
              optical communication IC's, and use
of these results to optimize the SiGe
              profiles and geometries for next
generation SiGe HBTs. We expect the design
              tradeoffs to be much more
complicated than in first generation SiGe HBTs,
              because of aggressive
vertical and horizontal scaling to achieve high speed
              operation (as high
as 200GHz cutoff frequency and maximum oscillation
              frequency). In the
process, we will answer scientifically intriguing and
              technologically
important questions, such as why SiGe HBTs with a nonlinear
              I-V can have
excellent linearity. This is a brand new area of SiGe device
              research, and
has a high potential payoff given the exploding industry
              interest in
applying SiGe technology to wireless and optical networking
              systems. The
outcome will include a scientific understanding of important
              open
questions on SiGe HBTs, a modification of the design approach
              and
methodology, as well as data of the key device figures-of-merit as
              a
function of SiGe profile. Given the enormous amount of interest in
applying
              SiGe technology to both wireless and optical networking
applications, we will
              develop an advanced course on SiGe HBTs, so that the
outcome of the proposed
              research can be remotely accessed by graduate
students and practicing
              engineers in industry.

