Title       : ME: Cloning of Elisabethatriene Cyclase for Use in the Synthesis of Diterpenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0119011

Award Number: 0119011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell G. Kerr rkerr@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose V. Lopez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1063,1228,1491,1950,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Marine organisms have proven to be a prolific source of novel, biologically
              active natural
products. A growing number of these are entering clinical
              trials and many more are in preclinical
development. In general, the
              production of these compounds through synthesis is not feasible on
a
              commercial scale and consequently, the supply of such compounds presents an
              escalating
problem.

This project is directed at the development of
              seco-pseudopterosins and related metabolites,
anti-inflammatory agents from
              the soft coral Pseudopterogorgia elisabethae.
These compounds have been shown
              to be anti-inflammatory and analgesic agents in mouse ear
models with
              potencies superior to that of pseudopterosins which are in clinical use, and
              existing
drugs such as indomethacin.  A biotechnological production method of
              these compounds  will be developed based on the cloning of a key biosynthetic
              enzyme. In addition to addressing the supply issue of these specific
              metabolites, completion of these goals will provide useful models for the
              development of a growing number of anti-inflammatory terpenes being discovered
              from marine invertebrates. Since all of the pseudopterosin used commercially is
              obtained through collections from nature, success with this project will
              provide a sustainable source of these valuable compounds and save delicate reef
              environments from the effects of large scale collecting.

The synthesis of
              the targeted anti-inflammatory agents will be approached as follows. Firstly, 
              the first biosynthetic intermediate will be generated by sequencing the coral's
              diterpene cyclase and cloning this into E. coli. via the construction of a P.
              elisabethae cDNA library. The cyclase product will serve as a key intermediate
              in the syntheses and will be modified to the seco-pseudopterosin aglycone by
              chemical methods. This would then set the state for the ultimate glycosylation
              to complete the synthesis of the seco-pseudopterosins. ( This last step is not
              a goal of the present project.)

This research represents a collaboration
              between two labs with complementary expertise. R.
Kerr (PI, FAU) will conduct
              the natural products chemistry, enzymology and some of the molecular work
J.
              Lopez (Co-PI, HBOI) will compete the  cDNA library construction and work with
              Kerr on the cloning 
experiments.

