Title       : Enhancing Diversity in Buffalo, New York, Area Geoscience Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0119871

Award Number: 0119871
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Cook                              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1081592            (Estimated)
Investigator: John Staley jstaley@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Fountain  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gregory S. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1697      OPPORT FOR ENHANCING DIVERSITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1697,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Enhancing Diversity in Buffalo, New York, Area Geoscience
              Programs

A consortium of three State University of New York Institutions,
              led by the University at Buffalo, is developing a comprehensive program for the
              attraction of underrepresented groups to their geoscience programs and for the
              retention of these students. The program begins with the offering of new earth
              science courses at Erie Community College (ECC), and then leads either to the
              earth science education program (BSEd/MSEd) at Buffalo State College (BSC) or
              to the geology BA/BS program at the University at Buffalo (UB).  ECC's City
              Campus serves a student population that includes over 50% underrepresented
              groups. It is the most common destination of students from the Buffalo Public
              Schools, whose student body is comprised of over 70% individuals from
              underrepresented groups.

The UB program includes: a continuing research
              program in which every student participates in ongoing research in one of the
              laboratories in the department; a research development seminar in which
              preparation of proposals and presentation of results is emphasized; a weekly
              seminar which includes attending professional talks, plus attendance at
              selected professional meetings, and discussion of the talks; a summer course in
              field techniques, including soil and hydrologic methods used in the consulting
              industry;  a program of regular mentoring and tutoring for all participants;
              and participation in geology department/club activities on a regular basis. The
              program is designed to prepare the student to continue on for a Master's degree
              and potentially for a Ph.D.  At BSC the program includes participation in
              ongoing research in the department plus a summer transition program and a field
              experience in a secondary education course. Students in the program may also
              continue graduate work at UB.  The program is fully integrated with the
              extensive existing programs for students from underrepresented groups at each
              institution.

