Title       : U.S. - Italian Bilateral Workshop on "New Technologies and Cultural Heritage"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0119379

Award Number: 0119379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81828              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard P. Amadei amadei@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,5920,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a US-Italian bilateral workshop entitled "New Technologies
              and Cultural Heritage" in Venice, Italy on April 23 and 24, 2001, and is
              jointly funded by the Engineering Directorate and International Program.
              Cultural artifacts link mankind to its artistic and cultural past. It is
              important that they be preserved as closely as possible to the state in which
              they were created. Deterioration of cultural artifacts has become a major
              concern around the world. Broad issues include the preservation of ancient
              buildings, monuments, and archeological sites; construction materials; artifact
              collections; and collection materials. The workshop is expected to reach two
              major goals.

The first goal is to bring together specialists from various
              disciplines to explore how advanced technologies can contribute to the
              assessment and improvement of the objects that are part of our cultural
              heritage. The participants will consist of engineers, scientists, and
              conservators, among others. They can be divided into two main groups. One group
              consists of experts in the preservation and management of the artifacts
              themselves, including historic stone monuments and museum collections. A second
              group of experts focuses on materials or environmental research and on advanced
              technologies that could be applied for beneficial purposes in the diagnosis,
              monitoring, protection, and/or restoration of cultural objects. Traditionally,
              these two groups have not interacted much. The workshop constitutes a special
              effort to promote exchange of information and ultimately create synergy and
              collaboration between these groups.

The second goal of the workshop is to
              bring together US and Italian researchers and institutions to explore topics of
              common interest and to identify opportunities for constructive future bilateral
              research and information exchange. 

The workshop will provide a "meeting of
              the minds" and bring together participants with diverse educational and
              professional backgrounds. The workshop will be attended by 21 participants from
              the U.S. and 26 participants from Italy. 




