Title       : (ESH) The Interpretation of Climate from Leaf Forms: Application to the Miocene
               of Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9510015

Award Number: 9510015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41469              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie F. Jacobs bjacobs@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1045,1304,9222,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9510015    Jacobs    The proposed research aims to define the statistical
              relationships  between modern leaf form and climate in equatorial Africa, and
              from  them, to estimate paleoclimate for middle to late Miocene (14 to 5  Ma)
              leaf assemblages from Kenya.  To achieve these goals, herbarium  sheets of
              species from 30 living plant communities across Africa  will be videotaped and
              leaf images will be analyzed using Optimas.   Information on leaf area, length,
              breadth, perimeter, and margin  (entire or not, presence or absence of compound
              teeth, presence or  absence of drip tip) will be recorded.  Monthly climate
              data  obtained  from published sources, the U.S. Data Center, and the  Ulited
              Nations Environmental Program Global Resource Information  Database (GRID) will
              be mapped as contours on a base map of Africa  using GSMAP and related
              utilities.  Climate data for each plant  site will be read from the map and
              interpolations will be checked  by consulting local station records where
              possible.  The leaf and  climate data will be analyzed by appropriate
              statistical methods  depending upon distributions and relationships among the
              variables.   For example, multivariate methods such as correspondence analysis 
              and canonical correspondence analysis, which are intended for  nonlinear data,
              may be appropriate.  The resulting statistical  relationships will be
              calibrated.  The calibration will be tested  for accuracy by applying it to
              modern sites not included in the  analysis.  If climatic parameters of modern
              assemblages are  estimated accurately, then the technique can be used to
              reconstruct  climate for Miocene leaf assemblages.    The middle to late
              Miocene is a significant time interval because  the human family originated in
              Africa during that time.  Further,  modern atmospheric circulation patterns,
              most importantly the Asian  monsoon, are thought to have originated in the
              Miocene (Quade et  al., 1989; Prell et al., 1992).  Monsoonal circulation is,
              in part,  responsible for the distribution of  modern plant communities, 
              including savannas and grasslands.  The origin of these biomes,  perhaps
              coincident with the origin of the monsoons and the origin  of hominids, remains
              a controversial subject (Retallack, 1992;  Cerling et al., 1991; Kingston et
              al, 1994; Wheeler, 1991; Lovejoy,  1981).  Similarly, hypotheses that explain
              disjunct distributions  of modern forest species in East and West Africa
              suggest  fragmentation of middle Miocene continuous forest as a causal  factor
              (Lovett, 1993).  The paleobotanical record for this time  period offers a
              direct test for these hypotheses.  In addition, the  fossil record of most
              equatorial plant species is poor.  The study  of paleobotanical sites offers an
              opportunity to make contributions  regarding phylogenetic relationships and
              biogeographic history of  the living flora.
