Title       : Intertemporal Choice for Health and Money
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9510954

Award Number: 9510954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gretchen B. Chapman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI proposes eight studies designed to compare temporal discounting for
              health and money. In Experiment 1 the PI will test the hypothesis that previous
              research found different discount rates in the two domains because subjects
              were unfamiliar with the hypothetical medical scenarios.  In this study
              patients with one disease will be given two scenarios--one pertaining to a
              medical condition they actually have and one pertaining to an unfamiliar
              medical condition. Experiment 2 will use real monetary outcomes rather than
              hypothetical scenarios to investigate participants' financial decisions. In a
              third experiment the PI will manipulate the extent to which health can be
              traded for money.  The principle being examined here is that different discount
              rates in the two domains may be due to the fact that in some situations the
              money cannot readily be traded for health.  Experiment 4 investigates whether
              health and money have different discount rates because savoring or dreading
              impending health or financial consequences may distort traditional temporal
              discounting.  Experiment 5 examines the potential role of anticipation and
              regret in temporal discounting. In Experiment 6 the PI will test the hypothesis
              that health and money have different discount rates because health is
              considered to be less replaceable than money.  In Experiment 7 the PI will
              compare the discount rates for exercise class members and non-members.  The
              hypothesis is that class members will have a lower discount rate, particularly
              in the health domain.  An attempt will also be made to examine the relation
              between discount rates and self-reported health behaviors.  In Experiment 8 an
              attempt will be made to alter discount rates by framing a scenario either in
              terms of a loss or a gain. The primary goal of the research  is to evaluate
              various reasons why decision makers use different discount rates for health and
              money. A second goal is to examine the relationship between discount rates and
              various preventive health behaviors.  The r esearch has important implications
              for the formulation of social policy with regard to health outcomes.
