Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Exact Confidence Regions for Multi- dimensional
               Contingency Tables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9510516

Award Number: 9510516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura C. Lazzeroni laura@playfair.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510516 Lazzeroni  Abstract      Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium and linkage
              disequilibrium are important concepts in population genetics.  In practice,
              estimation of linkage disequilibrium in haplotype data is equivalent to
              estimation of the interactions in a large, sparse, multidimensional contingency
              table. Simultaneous estimation of Hardy-Weinberg and linkage disequilibrium on
              multilocus genotype data introduces the additional complications of missing
              information and symmetry constraints on marginal probabilities.  To avoid
              large-sample approximations that can be unreliable for these data, one approach
              is to use "exact" statistical methods that condition inference on observed
              marginal totals.  Unfortunately, computing exact confidence intervals and
              regions is presently infeasible because of the large number of tables
              consistent with the marginal totals of an observed table.  The principal
              investigator designs and studies methods for exact inference for
              multidimensional contingency tables. These methods employ Markov chain Monte
              Carlo algorithms to simulate the conditional distributions required to
              construct exact confidence regions for the interaction parameters of a table. 
              Topics addressed by this research include:  development of useful statistical
              models of genetic disequilibrium; design, optimization, and convergence
              properties of the algorithms; and statistical properties of the resulting
              estimates.  Genetic disequilibrium can point to the association of particular
              alleles with an increased risk of disease, reveal population substructure, or
              serve as a guide in positional cloning.  This research provides geneticists
              with tools for estimating the degree and form of genetic disequilibrium
              evidenced by a set of data, and to evaluate the precision of those estimates. 
              The methods will also be useful for estimating interactions in large, sparse,
              multidimensional contingency tables that arise in other settings.
