Title       : Synthesis, Characterization, and Electronic Properties of New Supramolecular
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9510481

Award Number: 9510481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori A. Vermeulen vermeulen@chem.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9221,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Lori A. Vermeulen, Chemistry Department, Southern Illinois   University, is
              supported under a Research Planning Grant for Women   Scientists and Engineers
              by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and   Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division for the study   of supramolecular materials. A new
              electrochemical reduction of silicon   and germanium chlorides will be
              developed as a route to the preparation   of silicon and germanium based
              polymers. This technique will permit the   preparation of polymers with well
              defined cross linking and with   controlled structural and photophysical
              properties. Additionally, layered   metal phosphonate thin films with organized
              donor/acceptor multilayers   will be prepared and studied as potential solar
              energy conversion and   storage devices.  The development of new materials for
              energy storage and conversion   systems, non-linear optical devices, and
              molecular electronic devices   demands substances in which the constituent
              atoms are well defined and   ordered in specific ways. In this project new
              techniques will be devised   for synthesizing polymers in which chains of
              silicon and/or germanium   atoms form specific three dimensional networks.
              Further, techniques of   preparing thin films composed of layers of metal and
              non-metal atoms will   be developed. Both of these new materials will have
              important energy   conversion or optical properties.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
