Title       : Macromolecular Structure Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9510694

Award Number: 9510694
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel L. Sussman jls@bnl.gov  (Principal Investigator former)
              Otto Ritter  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Enrique E. Abola  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brookhaven Nat'l Lab
	      Building 460
	      Upton, NY  11973    631/344-3320

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9510694  Sussman  The award will support the continued operation and further
              development of the Protein DataBank (PDB), a unique international database of
              three-dimensional structures of biological macromolecules at atomic resolution.
               The staff of the database are located at the Brookhaven National Laboratory. 
              The goals of the project are to provide an easily accessible, user friendly
              resource of service to an international community of researchers including
              crystallographers, theoreticians, modelers and other investigators who are
              interested in such structures.  The PDB will continue efforts to facilitate
              deposition and retrieval of entries, and will emphasize use of newer database
              methodologies for storage and access.  Use of the World Wide Web will play a
              key role in these efforts.  In addition, the database will cooperate closely
              with databases at Rutgers University and at the European Bioinformatics
              Institute, as well as with a number of secondary distributors within the U.S.
              and in other countries.     The study of structure and function of biological
              macromolecules at the atomic level is one of the most technically challenging
              and intellectually demanding areas of modern biology, and is a central aspect
              of the new biotechnology industry.  The structures of nearly 4000
              macromolecules have now been determined and deposited in the PDB.  The role of
              the PDB in making these structures available to researchers with diverse
              interests through the internet and other means of distribution is critical to
              the advancement of both basic and applied biology.     Additional support for
              the PDB is provided through separate actions by the Office of Health and Energy
              Research of the Department of Energy and by the National Library of Medicine
              and National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes
              of Health, pursuant to a Memorandum of Understanding between these agencies and
              the National Science Foundation.  ***
