Title       : Testing a Newly Developed Molecular Genetic Methodology for use in Comparative
               Biology: TAPS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9510733

Award Number: 9510733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25108              (Estimated)
Investigator: Llewellyn D. Densmore y4lds@ttacs.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9510733  Densmore  This research will evaluate a method for using cDNA fragments
              from protein coding genes as a (largely untapped) measure of genetic variation,
              and will begin to determine the scope of its application to evolutionary
              biology.  The technique, named Transcribed Amplified Polymorphic Sequences
              (TAPS), will use 12 different "anchoring" primers (oligo dT12 + 2 other deoxy
              bases) to rescue essentially the entire population of mRNAs from total poly
              A(() RNA by reverse transcription into cDNAs. The polymerase chain reaction
              (PCR) is then used to synthesize a single double-stranded cDNA fragment from
              each single-stranded cDNA by using a short randomly amplified or consensus
              sequence primer with the same anchoring primer (radiolabelled with 32p) used to
              rescue the subpopulation of mRNAs.  PCR amplification between these two primers
              produces one radiolabelled cDNA fragment per mRNA (provided there is a cDNA
              sequence complementary to the short random primer).  Multiple cDNA fragments,
              which correspond to different mRNAs that were rescued by a specific anchoring
              primer and amplified by PCR, are resolved by gel electrophoresis and detected
              by autoradiography.   Additional PCR reactions using different short primers
              with the same anchoring primer will yield additional mRNA-specific cDNA
              fragments, while additional anchoring primers allow other subpopulation of
              cDNAs to be tested.  This study will determine whether the inheritance of
              individual-, lineage-, or species-specific cDNA fragments can be demonstrated
              by the TAPS technique, and will begin to assess the utility of this method for
              quantitative analysis of genetic variation in populations.  %%%  This research
              will evaluate a method called Transcribed Amplified Polymorphic Sequences
              (TAPS) for analyzing DNA fragments from protein coding genes as a (largely
              untapped) measure of genetic variation, and will begin to determine the scope
              of its application to evolutionary biology.  The study will determine whether
              the inheritance or individual- , lineage-, or species-specific DNA fragments
              can be demonstrated by the TAPS technique, and will begin to assess the utility
              of this method for quantitative analysis of genetic variation in populations. 
              ***
