Title       : Genetically Controlled Syntheses of New Polymeric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9510031

Award Number: 9510031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $755000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Tirrell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurille J. Fournier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9162,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9510031  Tirrell  This  project  will develop methods for the  preparation  of 
              architecturally  well-defined artificial  proteins  carrying  reactive  
              olefinic,   dienyl,   acetylenic   and   pyrrolyl  functional groups.  A key
              aspect of the project is  the  use  of  artificial  genes  to direct the 
              synthesis  of  uniform  polymer  chains,  which will acquire reactive 
              functionality  either  directly  (through  the incorporation  of  unnatural 
              amino  acids),  or  indirectly  (through  post-translational  modification 
              reactions).  In either approach, the  fidelity  of  bacterial protein synthesis
              will be exploited to produce  polymeric  materials  characterized by  precise 
              control  of  chain  length,  sequence, and stereochemistry.   The  direct 
              approach  will  explore the translational  activity  of  six  artificial  amino
               acids  (and  several  variants   thereof)  related to isoleucine,
              phenylalanine, histidine or tyrosine.  There  is  increasing  evidence that the
               bacterial  protein  synthesis  machinery can utilize a braoder  range  of 
              amino  acids  than  the  twenty  that   are  normally  encoded   by  messenger
              RNA templates. The amino acid analogues chosen for  this  study  are of
              particular interest owing to two  facts:  i).  none  of  the  natural  amino
              acids  carries  olefinic,  dienyl,  acetylenic  or  pyrrolyl  groups,  and 
              ii).   such  functional  groups can be used to endow polymeric  materials  with
                interesting  and  potentially  useful  chemical   and  electrochemical
              properties.  The approach  to  be  used  for  direct incorporation involves: 
              i).  synthesis  of  an artificial gene encoding the  sequence  of  interest,
              with the natural analogue encoded in place of  the  target  unnatural amino
              acid, ii). cloning of the artificial  gene  in  an  appropriate auxotrophic
              bacterial strain,  and  iii).  induction  of target protein synthesis  in  a 
              medium  containing the unnatural amino acid (and generally  depleted  of   the 
               natural  analogue).   This  strategy   has    been  demonstrated  successfully
               with  several  unnatural   amino  acids, including selenomethionine,
              p-fluorophenylalanine, 3-  thienylalanine, trifluoroleucine,
              azetidinecarboxylic  acid,  dehydroproline,  and  thiaproline.   Complementary 
              strategy  involving  post-translational  modification  will  also   be 
              explored.   In this approach, protein biosynthesis  will  be  used  to  prepare
               appropriately designed  "base  polymers,"  which  will  be  modified  with
              reagents carrying  olefinic,  dienyl, acetylenic or pyrrolyl groups.  Polymers
              prepared by  either  route  will  be  subjected to  careful  analyses  of 
              molecular   structure,  supramolecular   organization,   and  functional
              properties.  Particular attention will  be  given  to  the  prospects for
              creating electrochemically switchable  protein  films containing pyrrolyl side
              chains.  Such  films  would  be  of  potential  practical  use  as  components 
              of  sensors, actuators and controlled delivery devices.  %%%  This  research
              aims to carry out the synthesis of amino acid  polymers with highly controlled
              structures, through the  use  of  artificial genes.  The polymers selected do
              not occur in  nature  and  will be designed to have interesting electrical  and
              other properties.  ***
