Title       : The Reconstruction of Early Complex Society in Pacific Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9510991

Award Number: 9510991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191188             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Love   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Love will conduct two
              field seasons of excavation and an additional period of analysis at the
              archaeological site of Ujuxte, located near the Pacific coast of Guatemala.
              Preliminary investigations indicate that Ujuxte began as a planned city at
              approximately 600 BC and grew to reach considerable proportions. Survey has
              shown that at its peak, it covered over 4 sq kilometers and dominated a number
              of secondary centers which contained smaller copies of its ceremonial
              architecture. Through his work, Dr. Love wishes to understand the history of
              the site and how its social, economic and political organization developed and
              changed over time. To accomplish these goals, he will first conduct an
              intensive surface survey and collect pottery and other cultural materials. On
              this basis he will select a sample of residential structures for excavation.
              Through the analysis of ceramics it will be possible to reconstruct a social
              profile, determine the extent of economic differentiation and determine if a
              hierarchical form of organization existed. Through hydration analysis of
              obsidian artifacts, a detailed chronology will be constructed.   Early complex
              societies are now recognized as fragile and subject to cycles of integration
              and decomposition. Dr. Love will investigate one such cycle in a region which
              has remains of the earliest complex societies presently known for Mesoamerica.
              The evolution of those societies has basic importance for the understanding of
              Mesoamerican culture history and can shed light on the mechanisms of the
              development of complex society. During the Middle Preclassic period, from ca.
              900-600 BC, the region's first large regional polity, centered on the site of
              La Blanca, was constituted and collapsed. Soon after that collapse the nearly
              site of Ujuxte first developed. Dr. Love's research examines the transition
              from the La Blanca polity to that dominated by Ujuxte. It will compare the two
              entities in terms of social organization, economic structures and ideological
              basis of power. The research seeks to understand the extent to which the
              structures of the Ujxute polity recreated those of La Blanca. To the extent
              that the structures are distinct, the research will then ask what conditions
              enabled Ujuxte to endure and grow where La Blanca did not.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
