Title       : Development of Minimum Life-Cycle cost Design Criteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1995    
File        : a9510243

Award Number: 9510243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. K. Wen y-wen@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9510243  Wen  Design procedures for civil  infrastructure systems under 
              environmental loadings have  gradually changed from largely 
              judgments/experience-based, semi-  probabilistic, to probabilistic.  Procedures
              based on optimization of  long-term risk and benefit,  however, have not been
              developed.  Such a procedure is specially  needed in evaluation and 
              repair/retrofit of existing  facilities whose hazard exposure  time is short
              but whose failure may  still cause serious consequences.  A large number of the
              nation's  civil infrastructure systems are  aging and many are in need of 
              replacement.  The repair/retrofit  problem will become more acute.  Rational
              life-cycle cost based  design criteria are needed in which  effects of loading
              and resistance  uncertainty, hazard exposure time,  costs of consequence of
              failure and  operation and maintenance, and  discount of cost/loss over time
              are  all taken into consideration.  The  objectives of this project are:  (l)
              development of methodology for  determination of design criteria  based on
              life-cycle and (2)  application to new and retrofitted  facilities not covered
              by regular  codes an standards.    The problem is formulated as that  of
              minimization of expected total  life-cycle cost with respect to the  design
              variables, i.e., design  loads and resistance of the  facility or corresponding
              load and  resistance factors in a LRFD  format.  The required research  tasks
              are to:  (1) formulate the  design as a constrained  minimization problem
              considering  uncertainties in the load and  resistance including random load 
              occurrence time, intensity, and  correlation, costs of failure  consequences,
              and discounting  cost/loss over time; (2) develop of  optimization algorithm
              for  solution; (3) study the effect of  load and resistance uncertainty and 
              resistance deterioration over time;  (4) model cost functions and  examine
              sensitivity of design and  (5) determine the design loads.    The research will
              impact the  development of new concepts and  metho dologies of design that have
               important implications in the next  generation codes and standards.  The
              results will also have more  immediate benefit in development of  guidelines
              for repair/retrofit.  ***
