Title       : RPG: Effect of Background Knowledge on Categorization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1995      
File        : a9510585

Award Number: 9510585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Woo-kyoung Ahn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510585  AHN    How do people learn new concepts?  Previous studies in 
              categorization fall into two camps, similarity-based and theory-  based views. 
              The similarity-based view assumes that natural  categories in the world look
              coherent to us because members in  the same categories are similar to each
              other whereas the members  in different categories are dissimilar to each
              other.  The  theory-based view rose in reaction to the similarity-based view, 
              which tended to neglect the role of existing background  knowledge.  Many
              researchers have shown that background knowledge  or context drastically
              changes similarities among object.  For  example, a person from Maine and a
              person from Florida might look  very different from each other if they are
              compared in Washington  D.C.  But if they are compared in Tokyo, they would
              look very  similar to each other because the feature, "being an American" 
              would become salient in the context of Tokyo.  One's background  knowledge also
              plays a crucial role in categorization.  For  example, students learn to
              classify a whale as a mammal because  of their background knowledge on mammals,
              although a whale is  perceptually more similar to fish.  This research will
              focus on  the structural or syntactic aspect of causal background  knowledge. 
              That is, how does the status of features in causal  structure determine various
              similarity functions and  categorization processes?  Suppose a patient displays
              typical  symptoms of Disease X except for one symptom.  The idea is that  the
              impact of this missing symptom in further diagnosis or  categorization depends
              on the causal status of the symptom in the  clinician's background knowledge. 
              The long-term goal of this  project is to develop a computational model of
              categorization   incorporating causal knowledge.  Developing a computational
              model  is very important for both theoretical and practical reasons.  On  the
              theoretical side, a computational model will allow  researchers to generate
              precise predictions to be tested t hrough  experiments.  On the practical side,
              a precisely defined  computational model can serve as a basis for tutoring
              systems  which can diagnose students' background knowledge and tailor  
              instruction for each individual.  Teachers can also be aware of  biases that
              students might display in learning new concepts  because of their initial
              background knowledge.  This kind of  computational model can also  be used for
              developing expert  systems which can spontaneously learn new  concepts and
              serve as  aids for human experts.  This Research Planning Grant (RPG) will 
              allow Ahn to collect pilot data on categorization and similarity  judgment
              tasks which manipulate causal structures, and (2) to  test existing
              computational models on these tasks.  The aim of  the RPG is to come up with a
              coherent framework for approaching  the issues discussed above, so that the
              output of this  preliminary research can be used to develop a full proposal for
               the regular funding competition.    ***
