Title       : Individual-Based Competition Theory for Territorial Foragers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9510146

Award Number: 9510146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan Roughgarden joan.roughgarden@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9510146  Roughgarden  Early competition theory is based on the Lotka-Volterra
              competition equations, which are widely viewed as inadequate. A problem today
              is to develop new models of competition specific to systems where competition
              is known to occur. This research will develop and begin to test a new model of
              competition, tailored for terrestrial foragers, such as Anolis lizards that are
              known to compete. The new model involves processes at four scales, a capture
              event scale measured in seconds, an optimal foraging scale in hours, a social
              spacing scale in days, and a population-dynamic scale in weeks. The model at
              the capture event scale is a behavioral rule that shows how optimal foraging
              may be learned in a matter of hours. The model at the optimal foraging scale
              shows how the asymptotic outcome of the behavioral rule can be predicted by
              maximizing net rate of energy intake. The model for the social spacing scale
              shows how the spacing of animal territories is ideally adjusted according to
              the spatial distribution of resources. Combining these relatively small-scale
              models culminates in a model for population dynamics and interspecific
              competition. The counterparts of classic population-dynamic parameters, such as
              r, and K of the logistic equation,  are derived in terms of measurements
              defined on individuals, leading to a so-called individual-based model of
              population dynamics. It is proposed to extend this theory beyond the
              preliminary stage outlined in the proposal, to make it more realistic in many
              respects, and to revise it depending on results of future field studies.
