Title       : The Electro-Enzymatic Reduction of Dioxygen to Water Using Laccase and a Redox
               Mediator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9510598

Award Number: 9510598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Tayhas R. Palmore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported as a Research Planning Grant in the Analytical and
              Surface  Chemistry Program, is directed towards the development of a biofuel
              cell based  on the enzymatic reduction of dioxygen to water. During the tenure
              of this 18-  month standard grant, Professor G. Tayhas R. Palmore and her
              students at the  University of California at Davis, will attempt to couple the
              redox enzyme laccase,  which catalyzes the four electron reduction of dioxygen
              to water, to the carbon  cathode of a fuel cell via use of chemical mediators,
              such as iron sulfate. The  enzymatic facilitation of dioxygen reduction is
              accomplished near its formal  potential, and should therefore result in a
              higher efficiency fuel cell than that  possible using synthetic platinum metal
              catalysts. Professor Palmore has designed  a prototype fuel cell which allows
              her to monitor the "turnover" of the enzyme and  mediator using an in-line
              diode array spectrophotometer and the overall efficiency  of the cell by
              measurement of the passage of charge across the cell using a  coulometer. The
              success of this effort will culminate in a new family of low cost,  high power,
              and environmentally safe fuel sources.    A biological fuel cell is a device
              which converts chemical energy into electrical  energy with minimal energy
              losses by the use of enzymatic catalysts. Typical fuel  cells require the use
              of corrosive solvents and precious metals which can be costly  to produce
              and/or dispose. In addition, the power output of a fuel cell is limited  by the
              energy and rate at which electrons are shuttled through the various redox 
              agents and across the anode and cathode compartments. With the use of a natural
               product, Professor Palmore has presented an elegant design for the generation
              of  higher efficiency fuel cells that are " environmentally friendly".
