Title       : MOCVD Precursors to Binary and Ternary Transition Metal Nitrides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9510712

Award Number: 9510712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Winter cwinter@sun.science.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is made by the Office of Special Projects in the Chemistry Division.
              The research will explore the range of ligand intermediates that may be formed
              in Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) of thin films of important binary and
              ternary metal nitrides with the formula MN, where M is an early transition
              metal.  CVD routes will be developed using volatile metal halides and nitrogen
              compounds.  A major goal of the work is to identify structures that serve as
              single-source precursors and to try to understand the chemistry involved in
              their transformations to binary materials.  All new compounds will be
              characterized by various analytical and spectroscopic techniques.  Among the
              systems to be studied are precursors with hydrazido ligands, monomeric titanium
              nitrido complexes, amorphous titanium-silicon-nitrogen and
              tantalum-silicon-nitrogen films as barriers in microelectronics devices, and
              CVD routes to ternary metal nitrides, which possess properties superior to
              those of the binary materials.  %%%  Thin ceramic films made by CVD processes
              are of growing technological importance.  Films of early transition metal
              nitrides of the type studied in this project possess a number of useful
              properties, including extreme hardness, excellent chemical resistance,
              desirable optical characteristics, and good electrical conductivity.  The
              research supported in this project will lead to new precursors and processes
              for CVD which will solve problems with current methods, such as high deposition
              temperatures, and will develop paths to new ternary metal nitrides for which no
              CVD routes are currently available.
