Title       : Very-High-Spin Polyradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9510096

Award Number: 9510096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $554000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej Rajca arajca1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  This award iq made jointly by the Organic Dynamic Program and the Advanced
              Materials  Program in the Chemistry Division in support of the continuing
              research of Dr. Andrzej Rajca.   Two major efforts will be supported; (1) the
              design, synthesis and characterization of very high  spin macrocyclic
              poyradical systems, and (2) computational and experimental studies on the 
              synthesis and properties of new carbon allotropes and highly condensed network
              solids based on  tetra o-phenylene structural units.  In the first research
              area, polyradicals, all of the triarylmethyl  type will be prepared from the
              corresponding triarylmethyl-methyl ethers by alkali metal  reduction to the
              carbopolyanions followed by iodine oxidation.  These elongated macrocyclic 
              polyradicals will have greater than ten spin-coupled electrons and will be
              designed to minimize  defects which interrupt spin-coupling.  In the second
              research area, solid-state and molecular  calculations using MNDO, EHT, and MM3
              methods will provide thermodynamic stabilities and  band structure-properties
              of the solids.  Experiments will evaluate the structures of the network 
              solids, including their response to doping.  Molecular and polymeric fragments
              of the solids will  be synthesized, and their solution redox chemistry
              investigated.    Understanding the behavior of macrocyclic polyradicals and
              controlling spin coupling defects  will allow the researcher to use them as
              building blocks for two and three dimensional network  polyradicals, with the
              potential to be organic ferromagnets with high Curie temperatures.   Synthesis
              and doping of highly condensed carbon networks will facilitate preparation of
              radical  ion-and dianion -based molecular solids which will lead to promising
              new materials with  conducting properties.
