Title       : Extraction from Selective Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9510984

Award Number: 9510984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Postal postal@acfcluster.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Baltin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a project in syntactic theory, the branch of linguistics  which studies
              the properties of grammatical systems, and aims to  construct a forrnal model
              of grammar which is common to and  accurate for all natural languages. The
              focus of this particular  project is on a class of constraints on syntactic
              rules, a set of  conditions which limit the contexts in which certain rules may
               apply.  On the basis of the relevant literature and their own prior  research,
              the investigators have developed a hypothesis which  relates a constraint on
              the applicability of certain "extraction"  rules, i.e. grammatical rules which
              move a constituent from one  part of a sentence structure to another, to
              patterns of  constituent structure in the locus from which the constituent is 
              to be extracted. The structures which block an extraction are  called
              "selective islands". The blockage is illustrated by pairs  of example sentences
              like:  Who was Bill sorry they hired?  *Who was Bill sorry hired them?  The
              first sentence is ordinary; the second one clearly has  something wrong with it
              (which is indicated by the asterisk  preceding it).  These principles apply
              across a wide variety of grammatical  constructions, which indicates that they
              have a role in the basic  theory of grammar. The project will explore and
              elucidate that  role. Preliminary investigations suggest that the principles to
               be studied may have an impact on some major issues in syntactic  theory. At
              the conclusion of the project, the investigators will  prepare a monograph
              describing their findings.
