Title       : Experimental Studies of Metal-Insulator Transitions and Superconductivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1997       
File        : a9510246

Award Number: 9510246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Chaikin chaikin@pupgg.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9510246  Chaikin  Superconducting  arrays  in  very  high  magnetic  field, 
              anisotropic  superconductors,  as  well  as  normal  metals  and  two  
              dimensional  heterostuctures will be studied. The ultimate goal of these
              studies is  to  test  for  the  existence of extended, localized and 
              commensurate  states  in  different controllable potentials, to image these 
              states,  and to study their dynamics. Superconducting wire networks designed to
               interact  with  a  penetrating flux lattice will be  fabricated  using 
              lithographic  techniques.  This work  will  focus  on  the  effect  of 
              anisotropy  where  striking theoretical predictions  have  been  made,  about 
              localization,  anisotropic  commensurability,  and  temperature  dependent 
              flux  lattice configurations. The pinning and  dynamics  of  Josephson  
              vortices   in  bulk  superconductors   will   be   further  investigated.  The
              exciting theoretical prediction of  magnetic  field  induced one
              dimensionalization of the electrons and the resulting  re-  establishment of
              superconductivity at high magnetic field will also be  experimentally  tested
              using high purity organic  superconductors.  In  another  experiment,  novel 
              lithographic  techniques  based  on  self  assembly  of  block  copolymers,
              will  be  used  to  fabricate  "nano"  periodic   potentials   (~   300Ao  
              spacing)   on   normal    metals,  superconductors and quantum Hall devices.
              This will allow the study of  a  new  regime where the periodic potential is
              comparable to  magnetic  lengths  and  much  shorter  than many  characteristic
               dephasing  and  scattering length.  %%%  Superconducting  arrays  in  very 
              high  magnetic  field,  anisotropic  superconductors,  as  well  as  normal 
              metals  and  two   dimensional  heterostuctures  will  be  studied.
              Specifically  this  research  will  address  the  question of how the well
              understood periodic  potentials  can be extended to quasi-periodic potentials
              where there are competing  length scales and different types of anisot ropy. 
              Superconducting wire  networks designed to interact with a penetrating flux
              lattice will  be  fabricated using lithographic techniques. This work will
              focus on  the  effect of anisotropy where striking theoretical predictions have
               been  made,   about   localization,   anisotropic   commensurability,    and 
              temperature  dependent flux lattice configurations.  The  pinning  and 
              dynamics of Josephson vortices in bulk superconductors will be further 
              investigated.  The exciting theoretical prediction of  magnetic  field  induced
              one dimensionalization of the electrons and the resulting  re-  establishment
              of superconductivity at high magnetic field will also be  experimentally 
              tested using high purity organic  superconductors.  In  another  experiment, 
              novel  lithographic  techniques  based  on  self  assembly  of  block 
              copolymers, will  be  used  to  fabricate  "nano"  periodic potentials on
              normal metals, superconductors and quantum Hall  devices.  This will allow the
              study of a new regime where the periodic  potential is comparable to magnetic
              lengths and much shorter than many  characteristic lengths.  ***
