Title       : Early Development of Conscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a9510863

Award Number: 9510863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grazyna Kochanska grazyna-kochanska@uiowa.edu   or        blagrawy@uiamvs  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this comprehensive study of conscience development in the first four years of
              life, child temperament and parent-child socialization and relationship will be
              studied as two critical sets of influences which, in a complex interplay,
              contribute to conscience formation.  Children and parents (N=110) will be
              studied at age 8-months, 20-22 months, 36-38 months, and 48-50 months.  At each
              assessment, child temperament (fearfulness and inhibitory or effortful
              control), parent-child socialization and relationship, parents' personality,
              and child conscience will be measured, using a rich combination of observations
              in many naturalistic home and laboratory contexts, parent ratings, parent and
              child self-reports, projective methods, and cognitive instruments.  Six
              questions will be addressed.  One, the child's temperamental fearfulness and
              inhibitory control will be explored as contributors to the developing
              conscience.  Two, the qualities of parent-child socialization that promote
              conscience development will be examined, particularly discipline deemphasizing
              power and the mutually positive, responsive, binding, a cooperative
              parent-child orientation.  Three, informed by provocative initial data, the
              child's temperament will be examined as a moderator of socialization.
              Specifically, multiple pathways to conscience, different for children differing
              temperament, are postulated.  Four, the development and organization of early
              conscience will be explored, including the developmentally changing relations
              among moral affect, conduct, and cognition, and the role of child temperament
              as a moderator of these relations.  Five, the role of child early compliance to
              parent, particularly its one form, committed compliance, will be examined as an
              early precursor of conscience.  Six, the effects of parents' personality on
              child conscience development will be studied.  This work will thus integrate
              the roles of the child's temperament, individuality and the relationship with
              parents in early moral development, and  le ad to a comprehensive model of
              early conscience formation.     Conscience is the internal guide and monitor of
              conduct that assures that we distinguish right from wrong, adhere to societal
              standards, restrain antisocial impulses, and engage in prosocial acts even in
              the absence of surveillance. Individual consciences are fundamental for the
              adaptive functioning of individual and societies.  If successfully instilled in
              the early years, conscience is a more powerful regulator of conduct than any
              system of external social control.  Conscience is a hallmark and ultimate goal
              of human socialization and a classic topic in human development, and yet, we
              know little about factors that contribute to its successful development or its
              disturbances.  My extremely promising data from the previously sponsored study
              strongly point to the critical role of early childhood as the time when the
              foundations of conscience are established.  They also support the view of
              conscience as multiply determined, with the child's biologically-founded
              temperament and the qualities of socialization within the family as two major
              sets of influences that jointly contribute to the early conscience formation. 
              This study will further highlight the interplay of these two fundamental sets
              of influences on adaptive maladaptive development of conscience.  It will
              elucidate not only how the child's temperamental individuality and the
              qualities of the relationship with parents contribute to conscience
              development, but, most importantly, how different parenting styles promote
              conscience in children differing in their temperaments. As such, this program
              of research is highly relevant to the 'fostering successful families' component
              of the Human Capital research agenda.  In view of the current widespread
              problems reflecting deficits of conscience, such as antisocial, cruel, or
              destructive behaviors detrimental to individuals and to the social system this
              research is particularly timely.  Ultimately, it will result in a comprehensive
              model  of early conscience formation that will inform basic developmental
              theory, social policy, and parenting and early prevention programs.
