Title       : Confluence of Space and Language in ASL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2000    
File        : a9510963

Award Number: 9510963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321038             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen D. Emmorey emmorey@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   To linguistically represent and encode the visual world  (i.e., to talk
              about what we see) requires a crucial interface  between language and spatial
              cognition. Signed languages can  provide unique insight into this interface
              because physical space  is used directly to encode linguistic and spatial
              relations.  American Sign Language (ASL) differs from spoken languages in  that
              it is expressed with the hands in space and perceived by the  visual system.
              Thus, ASL also presents an opportunity to explore  how the modality in which a
              language is conveyed affects the  nature of grammatical encoding (e.g., how
              languages express  different linguistic relations) and the nature of language 
              processing (how people interpret and produce language in real  time).
              Currently, very little is known about language processing  in ASL, and the
              proposed studies will be some of the first to  investigate how a visual
              language is perceived and understood  on-line. The studies explore the
              ramifications of using space for  expressing linguistic contrasts in
              referential and spatial  domains. Specifically, the experiments focus on the
              use of space  to express coreference relations, frames of reference, and 
              spatial information. The major goal of the research is to explore  the
              grammaticization of space in sign language and its impact on  language
              processing.   The project contains two primary lines of inquiry: 1) on-line 
              tracking of spatial anaphora and 2) the use of space to represent  space. The
              first group of experiments explore how signers  understand and maintain the
              association between referents and  their spatial loci during real time
              processing. The results of  these experiments will provide insight into the
              nature of the  processing mechanisms required for sign language and will help 
              determine what aspects of referential processing hold across  language
              modalities.  The second line of experiments investigate the consequences of 
              using space to represent space by investigating how deaf signers  create spatia
              l mental models from signed discourse, how signers  chose a spatial reference
              frame, and how signers integrate  physical signing space with a mental
              representation of space.  These experiments will illuminate how physical space
              is  manipulated linguistically to communicate locative information  and will
              clarify how such spatial structure is interpreted during  processing. Together,
              these results will elucidate the nature of  the interface between language and
              spatial cognition.
