Title       : Incarceration and the Welfare State: Patterns of Social Control in Capitalist
               Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9510936

Award Number: 9510936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49982              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sutton sutton@alishaw.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             6m  D                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       4       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     <  D   
              <  D        4 @                                                                
                                                                                             
                                    *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       8     (e     (A  K                    
                                          ? p       '~?                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 9510936 
              Sutton This project examines the interactions among the system of  prisons and 
              mental health hospitals, institutions of social control, and welfare politics
              in a sizable sample of capitalist democracies.  It will describe and test
              theories about these interactions using dynamic, diachronic models placed into
              a historical and political context.  Two basic questions underlie the analysis.
               First, are the inmate capacities of  prisons and mental hospitals related to
              each other?  Second, how are these patterns of incarceration related to
              patterns of social welfare?  Esping-Anderson s typology of social welfare
              regimes is used to develop hypotheses about the links between welfare and
              social control. Quantitative analyses will be placed in historical context
              using data drawn from secondary studies and government reports. %%%% This
              project examines the interactions among the system of  prisons and  mental
              health hospitals, institutions of social control, and welfare politics in a
              sizable sample of capitalist democracies.  It will describe and test theories
              about these interactions using dynamic,  diachronic models placed into a
              historical and political context.  Two basic questions underlie the analysis. 
              First, are the inmate capacities of  prisons and mental hospitals related to
              each other?  Second, how are these patterns of incarceration related to
              patterns of social welfare?  Esping-Anderson s typology of social welfare
              regimes is used to develop hypotheses about the links between welfare and
              social control. Quantitative analyses will be placed in historical context
              using data drawn from secondary studies and government reports. ****           
                           ;                                                                 
                Oh     +'  0                                               (       L       p 
                                                   $       H       l                         
                               N:\WW60\NORMAL.DOT                  95-10936                  
                       C. Neal Tate                        C. Neal Tate                @     
                D                          @                                   @        D    
                                 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                         
               (                                                   )                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           @                                 
                       Microsoft Word 6.0                                                    
               2                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  e =       e                   4                                            
                            l       l   l       l       l       l       l                    
                                                                h   C                        
                                                                                        *    
                        J           T       5   h                       l                    
                                                                  h               l       l  
                                                                                  l          
                  l                                                       l       l       l  
                  l                           e                                              
                                                                9510936  Sutton This project
              examines the interactions among the system of  prisons and  mental health
              hospitals, institutions of social control, and welfare politics in a sizable
              sample of capitalist democracies.  It will describe and test theories about
              these interactions using dynamic, diachronic models placed into a historical
              and political context.  Two basic questions underlie the analysis.  First, are
              the inmate capacities of  prisons and mental hospitals related to each other? 
              Second, how are these patterns of incarceration related to patterns of social
              welfare?  Esping-Anderson s typology of social welfare regimes is used to
              develop hypotheses about the links between welfare and social control.
              Quantitative analyses will be placed in historical context using data drawn
              from secondary studies and government reports. %%%% This project examines the
              interactions among the system of  prisons and  mental health hospitals,
              institutions of social control, and welfare politics in a sizable sample of
              capitalist democracies.  It will describe and test theories about the
