Title       : GIG: Infrastructure Improvement for a Research Group for the Study of the
               Algebra and Geometric of Quantum Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9510375

Award Number: 9510375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Yetter dyetter@math.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Crane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zongzhu Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yan Soibelman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lev Kapitanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510375  Yetter       A focus on mathematical problems arising from or  related
              to quantum physics has become the over-riding theme  of much of the
              mathematical research carried out in the  Kansas State University Department of
              Mathematics.  This  project addresses the infrastructure needs of the group 
              engaged in mathematical research in this area, specifically  enabling the group
              to hire a postdoctoral research assistant  whose presence will improve research
              productivity through  the injection of fresh perspectives and ideas and the 
              cementing ties between members of the group and providing  for improvements to
              the computing environment available to  the group.Research interests in the
              group range from very  classical applications of mathematics to quantum
              theory---  solution of equations of Schroedinger type (L.V.  KAPITANSKI),
              quantum scattering problems (both direct and  inverse) (A.G. Ramm and  K.
              VANINSKY), and continuum  statistical mechanics (K. Vaninsky)---through general
               quantization problems (Y. SOIBELMAN) and non-commutative  geometry (F. WU and 
              G. Nagy) to recent developments  relating algebra, topology and quantum field
              theory---  quantum groups (Z. LIN   and Y. Soibelman), topological and 
              conformal field theories (L. CRANE, Z. Lin, and  D.N.  YETTER), applications of
              gauge theory to differential  topology  (F. Miller), and sigma models (L.V. 
              Kapitanski).(The first mention of each co-PI for the project  is in
              upper-case.)
