Title       : An Attributional Analysis of Peer and Family Aggression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9510892

Award Number: 9510892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314787             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra Graham shgraham@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard Weiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An important instigator of aggression is the thought that others are responsible
              for aversive events that impact on the self.  This cognitive appraisal produces
              anger, which, in turn, gives rise to antisocial responses. In this program of
              research,  a series of interrelated investigations will elucidate these
              cognitive and affective determinants of aggression, suggesting  methods to
              foster changes in overt hostility.  The proposal incorporates laboratory and
              field methodologies; examines a range of aggressive populations, including
              abusive caregivers and incarcarated youths; and considers a variety of
              aggression-related phenomena.  One series of investigations examines whether
              thoughts that others are responsible are particularly salient among aggressive
              school-aged boys.  A second set of studies investigates how inferences of
              responsibility are influenced by group membership and ingroup versus outgroup
              status.  A third set of studies then examines the impression management skills
              of aggressive youths, particularly their understanding, use, and acceptance of
              accounts (such as confession and legitimate excuses) that might mitigate
              perceptions of responsibility and reduce anger.  These basic processes and
              mechanisms are then incorporated into the study of abusive caretakers and
              incarcarated adolescents.  Among the former population, we examine their
              propensity to hold young children responsible for negative actions (i.e., see
              them as undertaken with negative intentions), the intensity of anger as a
              result of this inference, and the manner in which stressors in the environment
              affects these judgments and emotions.  Finally, an intervention that
              incorporates principles about inferring responsibility in others, a full
              understanding and use of accounts, and the long term consequences of inferring
              outgroup responsibility is devised, with incarcarated adolescents as targets of
              this 40-lesson program.  The intervention also incorporates principles of
              self-responsibility for achievement-related outcomes.   Thus, principles from
              laboratory research are used in an attempt to improve both the social and
              academic behavior of delinquent adolescents.    Aggressive behavior undermines
              the goals of family cohesion, student education, and neighborhood attachment. 
              In this program of research, we examine some of the thoughts and emotions that
              give rise to aggressive behaviors.  The research includes a variety of
              aggressive populations (aggressive children in school, incarcarated youths, and
              abusive caregivers); takes place in the laboratory as well as in natural
              settings (such as the school); and concludes with an intervention program
              attempting to reduce subsequent aggression among incarcarated adolescents.  The
              basic idea guiding the research is that aggression is in part instigated by the
              tendency to hold others responsible for negative events that impact on oneself.
               This, in turn, gives rise to anger and antisocial responses.  Furthermore,
              inferences of responsibility and negative affects are particularly expressed
              toward outgroup members, and are in part fostered by shortcomings in the
              understanding, use, and acceptance of legitimate excuses and confessions.  In
              laboratory research, the salience of the propensity to hold others responsible
              for negative events is examined, and the impact of ingroup-outgroup
              distinctions as well as the function of communicating confessions and
              legitimate excuses are studied.  These determinants of aggression also are
              considered in abusive caretakers, where the possible exacerbating effects of
              environmental stressors on aggressive thinking and emotions are investigated.
              Then, an intervention that incorporates principles about inferring
              responsibility in others, a full understanding and use of accounts such as
              confession and legitimate excuses, and the long term consequences of inferring
              outgroup responsibility is devised.  Incarcarated adolescent offenders are the
              targets of this 40-lesson program.  The intervention also incorporates
              principles of self-responsiblity for  achievement-related success and failure. 
              Thus, understanding gained from laboratory research is used in an attempt to
              improve both the academic and social behaviors in a population of delinquent
              adolescents.
