Title       : GOALI/FSI/Postdoctoral Industrial Fellowship: Damage Evolution During
               Manufacturing of Advanced Materials -- Experiments and Modelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1995   
File        : a9510572

Award Number: 9510572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Lewandowski jjl3@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1504,9146,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9510572  Lewandowski   In this GOALI project, one postdoctoral researcher works
              at the site of an industrial partner to collaborate on fundamental research
              related to advanced materials processing.  The composite material chosen for
              this study is discontinuously reinforced aluminum alloy.  The processing step
              for focus is secondary operations and the damage accrued as a result of
              particle size and distribution, matrix microstructure and the stress state.  In
              order to assess a sufficiently broad range of processing conditions and
              reinforcement sizes, discontinuously reinforced aluminum (DRA) with average
              particle sizes of 5um, 15um and 50um will be produced and extruded to extrusion
              ratios of 1:2 - 1:20 to study the effects of particle size and processing
              parameters on the evolution of damage during manufacturing of a component as
              well as to relate these to the final properties of the component.  The level of
              microstructural damage will be evaluated through measurements of elastic
              modulus and poisson ratio evolution, as well as by quantitative evaluation of
              cracked particles and other damage on polished sections.  In parallel with the
              experimental program where work is carried out at the industrial site, a simple
              model using Monte Carlo simulation approach will be developed at the university
              to predict the probability of significantly large defects arising in the final
              components via coalescence of the micro damage.  This study will be essential
              in understanding of the evolution of microstructures and property changes which
              accompany various processing conditions and thereby aid in the manufacturing of
              reliable DRA components.   Advanced composites using continuous fiber
              reinforced materials are currently used in niche applications such as military
              aircrafts and sporting goods.  While continuous fibers mandate specialized
              processing, discontinuous fibers offers the opportunity to fit into
              conventional processing with minimum capital implications.  Successful
              completion of this research has the po tential to expand the composite use into
              automotive and other high volume applications.  Further, by supporting a
              researcher from academe to live and breathe in the industry setting, a greater
              collaboration between research and practice may be realized.
