Title       : Dissertation Research: Diachronic Change in the Levantine Natufian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9510242

Award Number: 9510242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11718              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence G. Straus lstraus@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Straus    Under the direction of Dr. Lawrence Straus, Mr. Thomas Berger  will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will study a  large series of
              materials excavated from archaeological sites in  Israel, Jordan and Syria. All
              date to the Natufian period which  immediately precedes the emergence of
              settled agricultural  societies in the Near East. In addition to architecture,
              site  ecology and chronological placement, he will focus on the stone  tools
              and chipping waste which was recovered in abundance at all  localities. He will
              attempt to locate the sources of the stone  raw material and to reconstruct the
              processes used to manufacture  finished tools. He will also examine how these
              changed through  time. On this basis he will gain insight into the social and 
              economic organization of the Natufians and determine how the  moved over and
              utilized their landscape.     The Neolithic Revolution, marked by the
              domestication of plants  and animals, constitutes one of the major turning
              points in human  prehistory. It set the base for complex societies and the 
              emergence of social hierarchies. Archaeologists have come to  realize that one
              must intensively examine the period which  immediate precedes the Neolithic
              Revolution to gain insight into  its cause and this is the goal of Mr. Berger's
              research. The  project will produce data of interest to many archaeologists and
               assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
