Title       : CRUI: The Impact of Land-Use Legacies on Forest Soil-Plant- Atmosphere
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9510206

Award Number: 9510206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $742122             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. Sipe   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Bowden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. McClaugherty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1091,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project is for Collaborative Research at Undergraduate Institutions,
              involving interactions between soil, plants and atmospheric gases, and their
              dependence on the history of land use by humans.  An important question in
              ecology is how the history of land use has a long-term impact on a local
              ecosystem.  While studies often address interactions of physiology with an
              organism, or of an organism with its community, we know little about the
              interactions across the whole range of levels from cellular chemistry to
              ecosystem for a single defined locale.  This collaboration brings together
              investigators from three different small colleges, representing atmospheric and
              soil chemistry, plant productivity, and plant ecophysiology.  Using the NSF
              Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) site at Harvard Forest, they address key
              issues of local spatial heterogeneity in chemical resources and fluxes,
              nutrient cycling, microclimatology, plant growth, and population patterns and
              species diversity.  Incorporation of the historical aspects of human land usage
              in the past century adds a dimension of social science.  Novel questions about
              the role of local heterogeneity and the unique approach to interactions between
              hierarchical levels raise important issues for ecosystem models.  Results will
              provide perspective on many issues related to global change of ecosystems, and
              human effects on global change.  This project also promises to immerse
              undergraduates from all three colleges intensively in an unusual breadth of
              multidisciplinary field and laboratory research.
