Title       : GOALI/FSI/Graduate Student Traineeship Site: Re-engineering Manufacturing
               Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9510521

Award Number: 9510521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49726              (Estimated)
Investigator: Celestine A. Ntuen ntuen@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1504,9147,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9510521  Ntuen   This internship project is focused on graduate students
              apprenticeship in industry to improve graduate students skills in analyzing
              problems, formulate solution methodology, and identifying critical research
              problems which if solved can reengineer a company's processes. This projects
              builds on an existing program with the sponsor company. The existing
              relationship is an undergraduate apprenticeship program which the PI
              institution has with the company. This project will make it possible to expand
              the apprenticeship program to graduate students.  Under the graduate
              apprenticeship, students will conduct research on specific topics jointly
              determined by the PI and the industrial partner to foster innovation and
              creative approaches to the implementation of the company's production goals.
              The program will expose the graduate students to the philosophies of
              management, research, product development, operations, manufacturing, and
              marketing.  Specific aspects of the apprenticeship experience will involve the
              students to (1) work with company engineers to analyze the current operating
              and manufacturing strategies and identify major areas for re-engineering
              initiative, (2) develop guidelines for re-engineering processes, operations,
              maintenance, distribution, and logistics, and (3)  develop a domain specific
              in-house simulation model for real time performance analysis of the company's
              operations at various phases of manufacturing.    A core element of the project
              is the creation of an environment in an actually industrial setting where
              graduate students can be challenged with real manufacturing problems. This
              experience can be used by the students to enhance their graduate school
              experiences. This experience can translate to the generation of industry
              motivated graduate theses research. On the other hand, the industrial partner
              will benefit from the fresh insights of students whose main objectives are to
              enhance their problem solving skills and experiences in a real industrial
              setting. F urthermore, the algorithms developed as part of the collaboration
              can prove very valuable to the industrial partner.
