Title       : Second Mississippi State Conference on Differential Equation Equasions &
               Computational Simulations; April 7-8, 1995; Mississippi State, MI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9510552

Award Number: 9510552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ratnasingham Shivaji shivaji@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bharat K. Soni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9148,9162,9263,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleagues organize the second  Mississippi State
              Conference on Differential Equations and  Computational Simulations.  Nine
              invited lectures will be  delivered  by Professors K. J. Brown from Heriot-Watt
              University, Scotland,  (Title: Nonlinear boundary value problems involving an
              indefinite  weight function); Luis Caffarelli from Princeton University, 
              (Title: Volume and rotation in Lagrangian coordinates); David  Caughey from
              Cornell University, (Title: Iterative convergence  and  accuracy of numerical
              solutions of the Euler equations); Jerome  Eisenfeld from University of Texas,
              (Title: Structural  identification of compartmental models); Jack Hale from
              Georgia  Tech, (Title: Convergence of Invariant Manifolds); Peter D. Lax  from
              NYU-Courant (Title: Positive schemes for solving  multi-dimensional hyperbolic
              systems of conversation laws);  Robert  MacCormack from Stanford University,
              (Title: Solution of the  Navier-Stokes' equations on block grids for
              aerodynamic  configurations; John Mallet-Paret from Brown University, (Title: 
              Dynamics of lattice differential equations) and Helen Yee from  NASA Ames
              Research Center, (Title: On the fundamental of dynamics  of numerics for CFD). 
              In addition, about 75 contributed papers  are  expected.  The Journal of
              Applied Mathematics and Computation, is  devoting a special issue to the
              publication of the proceedings of  this conference.       This
              multidisciplinary conference brings together  mathematicians, scientists and
              engineers from both academia and  industry for the purpose of exchanging
              research developments in  the theory and application of differential equations
              and computer  simulations.  Central themes include materials-related phenomena 
              and computational fluid dynamics, with an emphasis on numerical  methods
              applicable to practical problems arising in engineering.
