Title       : SBIR Phase II: Novel Polymeric Photorefractive Materials for Optical Image
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9510017

Award Number: 9510017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lian Li lian@moleculartech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Molecular Tech Inc
	      270 Littleton Rd, Suite 29
	      Westford, MA  01886    978/392-1304

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9510017  Li       This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              will develop practical polymeric photorefractive materials based on conjugated
              polymers for optical image processing.  The proposed research will focus on
              design, synthesis, and processing of conjugated polymer-based photorefractive
              materials with large optical nonlinearities, high photoconductivity and large
              charge carrier mobilities.  The results obtained from  Phase I demonstrated
              that polythiophene-based conjugated polymers with nonlinear optical (NLO)
              functionalities can exhibit the photorefractive effect.  Large two beam
              coupling (TBC) gain coefficient has been measured. Based on the Phase I effort,
              the Phase II research will concentrate on the enhancement of the
              photorefractive properties of conjugated polymer-based materials.  Several
              approaches are proposed to boost up the electro-optic coefficients and the
              photoconductivity of the materials.  In addition, the intrinsically large
              charge carrier mobilities in the conjugated polymers are expected to provide an
              edge over currently existing polymeric photorefractive materials.  These
              conjugated materials will be characterized for their linear optical and NLO
              properties, photoconductivity, as well as the charge carrier mobility.  TBC and
              degenerate four wave mixing (FWM) experiments will be carried out to study the
              photorefractive properties of the materials.  These novel materials are
              expected to surpass the polymeric photorefractive materials so far reported
              both in speed and sensitivity.  To demonstrate the application of the novel
              photorefractive materials for information storage and image processing,
              holographic image recording and retrieval experiments will be performed on
              these materials.       Development of practical polymeric photorefractive
              materials would yield an inexpensive and efficient holographic recording medium
              for waveguide photorefractive technologies, with applications in the areas of
              real-time image processing, high-density optical data sto rage, holographic
              optical interconnects, associative memories, phase conjugation, optical
              incoherent to coherent converters and beam steering.  Also, such materials are
              suited for devices for industrial control and automation, based on real-time
              optical interferometry.  ***
