Title       : GOALI: "Run-to-Run Feedback Control of Semiconductor Manufacturing Processes"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1995 
File        : a9510625

Award Number: 9510625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce H. Krogh krogh@gauss.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9290,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510625  Krogh    The objective of this project is to develop methods for using
              in-  line measurements from semiconductor manufacturing processes to  adjust
              process operating points from run to run to compensate for  sources of
              systematic drift in the process variables.   Semiconductor manufacturing
              processes are typically monitored   using statistical process control (SPC)
              techniques, and  adjustments are made in operating setpoints only when out-of- 
              control conditions are detected.  This approach cannot  effectively compensate
              for systematic parameter variations such  as drifts in the process operating
              environment, material  properties, or equipment conditions.  Consequently,
              methods for  adjusting the process operating point from run to run are needed 
              to improve the quality and yield of semiconductor manufacturing  processes when
              it is too costly or physically impossible to  eliminate systematic variations. 
                This project will combine techniques developed for system  identification,
              parameter estimation, and feedback control, with  methods for statistical and
              physical modeling to perform  effective run-to-run control for key processes in
              a commercial  photovoltaic cell manufacturing facility.  Parameterized models 
              will be developed to characterized the input-output relations for  each
              process, and so-called gray-box parameter estimation, Kalman  filtering, and
              constrained optimization will be applied to update  the process setpoints for
              each process run based on post-process  measurements from previous runs.  A
              primary emphasis of this work  will be to develop methods for incorporating
              process knowledge  from physical models and empirical data into the on-line 
              computations to more effectively compensate for the process  variations.  The
              key trade-off to be explored is the complexity  of the models versus the
              efficiency and effectiveness of the on-  line parameter estimation and control
              computations.    In addition to these immediate technical objectives, this one-
               year project sponsored  under the NSF GOALI program will enable  the principal
              investigator, who is currently working in the area  of semiconductor process
              control, to gain valuable experience  working with industrial scientists and
              engineers in a commercial  semiconductor manufacturing facility.  The research
              will be  conducted at - and supported in part by - EBARA Solar, Inc.   Models
              will be obtained using process data from EBARA, and the  run-to-run feedback
              control techniques will be implemented on  actual production equipment to
              evaluate their effectiveness.   This experience will contribute significantly
              to the definition  of future theoretical and applied research directions in
              model-  based control of complex manufacturing processes.  ***
