Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Self-Consistent Estimators, Bootstrap and Censored Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9510376

Award Number: 9510376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Jian Ren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510376 Ren  Abstract      The proposed research is concerned with the
              statistical inference problems using various types of censored data, including
              right censored, doubly censored, interval censored, left truncated - right
              censored, and bivariate censored data. Estimation, tests and confidence
              intervals with incomplete date are all under consideration. One objective of
              the research is to investigate a new resampling method, called the Leveraged
              Bootstrap, so that the difficulty of extending the usual estimation and testing
              procedures for complete data to incomplete data in certain situations or
              certain complicated models can be avoided. So far, the procedures developed for
              incomplete data are constructed on an ad hoc basis. The leveraged bootstrap
              does not rely on these ad hoc extensions. The research will focus on the
              investigation of the consistency of the leveraged bootstrap in a number of
              important statistical inference problems with incomplete data, such as
              empirical likelihood inference, nonparametric likelihood confidence bands,
              linear regression models, tests of independence for two random variables, tests
              in some semiparametric change point models, mixture models and biased sampling
              problems. Another objective of the research is to investigate the consistency
              of the m out of n bootstrap, i.e., resampling fewer than n observations, in the
              hypothesis testing problems using various censored data. It is known that the
              usual nonparametric bootstrap (the n out of n bootstrap) fails when one tries
              to estimate the distribution of test statistics under a semiparametric
              (restricted nonparametric) hypothesis and ignores the restrictions imposed by
              the hypothesis. Since the distributions of test statistics for censored data
              are often unknown and very complicated due to the unknown distributions of the
              censoring variables, it is of great interest to investigate possible remedies
              of the usual bootstrap in order to provide the critical values for the tests.
              Examples show that in certain situations,  there are no obvious general
              remedies except the m out of n bootstrap.    This research is primarily
              motivated by statistical inference problems using incomplete data which are
              frequently encountered in medical and reliability studies. In particular,
              doubly censored data and interval censored data occur in breast cancer research
              and AIDS research, respectively. The usual estimation and testing procedures
              for complete data are not directly applicable to such complicated incomplete
              data, and statistical analysis is lacking. The objective of this research is to
              investigate some general methods which will directly facilitate research in
              other fields, such as medicine.
