Title       : Structure and Properties of Novel Forms of Carbon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1997        
File        : a9510093

Award Number: 9510093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mildred S. Dresselhaus millie@mgm.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene F. Dresselhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 9510093 Dresselhaus  The main efforts of this project are directed toward
              fundamental studies of the structure and properties of a newly reported carbon
              phase and two novel nanoscale carbon materials.  Carbolite, one of the newly
              discovered carbon phases, appears to have exceptional promise as a host
              material for intercalation, and may provide unique insights into understanding
              the carbon phase diagram.  Study of the structure and properties of carbolite
              as a host material for intercalation is proposed using electron microscopy,
              Raman spectroscopy and optical techniques.  A main focus of the proposed
              research is the study of the structure and properties of potassium, sodium, and
              iodine intercalated carbolite; the possibility of new intercalates will also be
              pursued.  Another novel material proposed for study is lithium intercalated
              into pyrolyzed poly(paraphenylene) (PPP) which has recently been shown to
              permit unusually high lithium uptakes.  A third novel carbon system is
              iodine-doped activated carbon fibers.  Activated carbon fibers have a very high
              density of nanometer size pores with a narrow distribution of pore sizes.  By
              filling these pores with dopants, such as iodine which does not intercalate
              into graphite, basic interactions between dopants and carbon surfaces can be
              studied.  Transport, susceptibility, Raman spectroscopy and modeling studies
              are proposed. %%%  Recent developments indicate the possibility for major
              advances in three, mostly unexplored areas of carbon science.  Carbolite, one
              of the newly discovered (1994) carbon phases, appears to have exceptional
              promise as a host material for intercalation, from both a scientific and
              practical point of view.  Because of the significance of these new materials
              for electronic and photonic applications, it is important to study the
              scientific basis of intercalation, and to understand fundamental features of
              structure/property relationships.  An important feature of the program is the
              training of students in a fundamentally and tech nologically significant area
              of materials research. ***
