Title       : Ylide-Fluoroolefin Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9510367

Award Number: 9510367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $413000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Burton donald-burton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                    The focus of this research is the
              development of new methodology for the synthesis of  organofluorine compounds. 
              The insertion of difluoromethylene in fluorinated organometallic  compounds
              gives a new technological method for the synthesis of fluorocarbon derivatives,
              whic  have demonstrated value as commercial surgactants.  The routes to
              fluorinated polyenes and  aromatics.  Polymerization of diiodofluoropolyenes
              will give fluorcarbon polymers with  potentially useful conduction properties. 
              The aromatic derivatives prepared via the synthon  chemistry will provide
              precursors for the synthesis of high temperature aromatic polymers with  a
              Teflon-like surface.  The new fluorine containing heterocycles will give new
              building blocks  for the incorporation of fluorine into biologically important
              compounds, and the new porphyrins  will be useful oxidation catalysts for the
              conversion of petroleum feed stocks to industrially  important organic
              chemicals with minimal environmental impact.    With this award, the Synthetic
              Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. Donald J.  Burton of the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Iowa.  Professor Burton will focus
               his work on the development of new synthetic methodology for the preparation
              of organofluorine  compounds.  These methods will provide useful routes to
              molecules of both academic and  industrial importance spanning the spectrum
              from materials to biologically important systems.
