Title       : Proteases and Pattern Formation in Xenopus Embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9510380

Award Number: 9510380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald H. Thomsen gthomsen@ccmail.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9510380  Thomsen    These studies will address the biochemical and
              embryological  function of a set of proteases that regulate, by an unknown 
              mechanisms, the activity of growth factors in the transforming  growth factor
              beta (TGF-beta) superfamily. The proteases under  investigation are BMP-1 and
              closely related factors which belong to  a group of metalloendoproteases, the
              astacins (named after the  first isolate of the group, a crayfish digestive
              protease). Genetic  studies in Drosophila suggest that an astacin related
              protease  called tolloid affects the activity of decapentaplegic (dpp), a 
              ligand in the TGF-beta family. Members of the TGF-beta family have  a wide
              variety of developmental functions in embryos of vertebrates  and
              invertebrates. In the development of the amphibian Xenopus,  TGF-beta related
              factors (e.g. activin, Vg-1 and bone morphogenetic   or BMPs) induce mesodermal
              tissues and influence body pattern  formation. There is also evidence that the
              activity of these growth  factors can be regulated at the level of protein
              processing.  Proteases such as tolloid and a BMP-1 might proteolytically
              process  and thus activate TGF-beta related proproteins, or indirectly  affect
              the activity of TGF-beta ligands by proteolytically  inactivating a ligand
              inhibitor. In Xenopus embryos, BMP-2 and BMP-  4 induce ventral mesoderm (e.g.
              erythroid blood) and antagonize the  development of dorsal mesodermal tissues.
              Ectopic expression of  BMP-1 in Xenopus embryos similarly antagonizes the
              development of  dorsal mesoderm, perhaps by activating BMP ligands which then
              exert  a ventralizing affect. This grant will focus on the physical and 
              biological characterization of Xenopus BMP-1 and perhaps other  related
              astacins. The studies will a) describe the primary cDNA  structure and the
              expression patterns of Xenopus BMP-1 and  potentially other astacins, b)
              determine the embryological  activities of BMP-1 and other astacin related
              factors by ectopic  expression of wild-type (functional) and mutat ed dominant
              negative  (functionally competitive) versions of the proteins in embryos, and 
              c) attempt to understand the interaction of astacins and the TGF-  beta related
              BMPs at the biochemical level, by measuring protease  activity and testing for
              the formation of protein complexes. The  studies are anticipated to reveal how
              astacins regulate TGF-beta  ligand activities and whether this is a mechanism
              to regulate  mesoderm induction and embryonic pattern formation in vertebrates.
               ***
