Title       : Convective Rolls and Cells in Lake-effect Snowstorms: Structures, Mechanisms and
               Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1997  
File        : a9510098

Award Number: 9510098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377273             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Kristovich dkristo@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510098  Kristovich        Mesoscale flows within convective boundary layers
              must be understood in  order to fully determine the link between synoptic-scale
              circulations and surface  characteristics. Observational evidence suggests that
              theoretical criteria are often  unsuccessful in predicting the predominant
              mesoscale convective organization in the  boundary layer.  In particular,
              boundary layer flow structure knows as  rolls  are  often observed when
              cellular convection is predicted.          The proposed study seeks to employ
              both numerical and observational  techniques to: (1) determine factors which
              control the development of boundary  layer rolls in lake-effect snowstorms; and
              (2) determine how the mesoscale  organization of convection influences mass
              overturning rates, precipitation rates, and  boundary layer depth.  The first
              goal will be accomplished by careful documentation  of the three-dimensional
              structure of mesoscale convection near the eastern shore of  Lake Michigan and
              how it varies with upwind atmospheric conditions and evolution  of boundary
              layer winds, temperature, and moisture (ice, liquid, and vapor) profiles 
              across the lake.  Numerical simulations will be carried out over the range of 
              observed conditions to give a more complete data set for determining the
              influence  of wind shear, latent heat release, and other factors, on the
              organization of boundary  layer convection.  The influence of mesoscale
              convective organizations on mass  overturning rates, precipitation rates, and
              boundary layer depth will be accomplished  by carefully documenting how these
              features change near the downwind shore in  both observations and simulations
              of rapidly changing mesoscale convective  structure.    This work is based on
              observations taken during the University of Chicago Lake  Snow Project. 
              Numerical aspects of this work will be carried out with the Advanced  Regional
              Prediction System model developed at the Center for Analysis and  Prediction of
              Storms at the University of Oklahoma .  This research will be a  collaborative
              effort between the Illinois State Water Survey and the South Dakota  School of
              Mines and Technology.  ***
