Title       : Dissertation Research: Cypress Bayou Archaeological Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9510509

Award Number: 9510509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tristram R. Kidder kidder@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Kidder    Under the direction of Dr. Tristram Kidder, Mr. Douglas Wells  will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct  archaeological
              survey and excavation in the Tensas basin region  located on the border between
              Mississippi and Louisiana. He will  focus on a prehistoric cultural period
              termed "Coles Creek" which  spans the period between ca 650 and 1200 AD. During
              this period  agriculture began to replace hunting and gathering as a primary 
              source of subsistence and habitation centers characterized by  raised mounded
              structures became widespread. Mr. Wells will focus  on a ca. 7.2 mile segment
              of nearly unfilled bayou and  accompanying natural levees known as "Cypress
              Bayou." He will  conduct a surface survey and set out four transects which will
               run the entire length of the survey area. Representative surface  materials
              will be collected. On this basis, excavations will be  conducted at 2-4 sites.
              A road grader will be used to strip  overburden from entire sites and then
              excavation of in situ  material will proceed by standard archaeological
              techniques. This  work will provide insight into the smaller typical sites in
              the  region. In the final stage of the fieldwork, Mr. Wells will  conduct
              excavations at the Shackleford Lake site, a medium-sized  mound center located
              within the Cypress Bayou project area. This  site exhibits the best preserved
              cultural features in the  immediate area and thus is most likely to yield the
              best  information on intrasite structure, activities, subsistence and 
              chronology. The site will be mapped, surface collected and shovel  tested. On
              the basis of this information, selected areas will be  excavated.    The
              Southern region of the United States has provided a focus for  archaeological
              research for almost a century. The large mounded  sites which mark the final
              phase of the areas prehistory indicate  a complex level of social organization
              with a high degree of  centralized authority. Large areas were incorporated
              into single  social units and  the construction of large earth filled mounds 
              attests to coordination of large numbers of individuals.  Archaeologists wish
              to understand the process which led to this  development and the Coles Creek
              culture is important because it  stands as a direct predecessor to this climax
              "Mississippian"  achievement. Mr. Wells has proposed several hypotheses about
              this  developmental sequence and believes that elite control of a  highly
              complex mortuary ritual may have allowed the concentration  of power into
              relatively few hands. This research should allow  him to test this conclusion. 
                This research is important for several reasons. It will provide  data of
              interest to many archaeologists and shed new light on the  prehistory of the
              United States. It will increase understanding  of how social complexity
              develops and contribute to the training  of a promising young scientist.
