Title       : Transition Metal Silicon Chemistry and Development of Novel Pi Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1998   
File        : a9510169

Award Number: 9510169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420717             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Don Tilley tilley@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. T. Don Tilley, Chemistry Department, University of California  -   Berkeley,
              is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic   Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division for the study of metal   complexes with
              ligated reactive silicon intermediates. In order to   manipulate the nature of
              the metal-silicon double bond, a series on new   silylene complexes will be
              prepared with a variety of sigma and pi   donating groups attached to silicon.
              The stability and chemical   reactivity of these compounds will be examined to
              establish the chemical   properties and mechanisms of reactions that occur at
              the silicon-carbon   multiple bond. Special emphasis will be paid to -silyl and
              -silylene   migrations and to the development of catalytic properties of the  
              complexes.  Metal coordination will be utilized to stabilize pi-systems  
              containing heavy group 14 elements.   An entire field of chemistry -
              organometallic chemistry - is concerned   with the behavior of compounds with
              metal-carbon bonds. This is an area    of tremendous importance to catalysis
              and chemical synthesis, as   practiced both in laboratory and industrial
              settings. Silicon lies just   below carbon in the periodic chart. Thus, there
              are both similarities and   differences in the chemistries of the two elements
              and the nature of the   metal-silicon interaction is of intrinsic importance.
              In this project a   variety of compounds containing metal-silicon multiple
              bonds will be   prepared and their chemistry systematized. This will provide
              the   background for the development of catalysts, reagents, chemical  
              transformations, and new materials using metal-silicon compounds.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
