Title       : Improvement of a Research Program in Flavor Chemistry by the Addition of Chiral
               Gas Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9510378

Award Number: 9510378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51460              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary G. Chisholm   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9222,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Career Advancement Award for Women in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              Program  is in support of an ongoing research program in the flavor chemistry
              of wines. During the tenure  of this one year standard grant, Professor Mary G.
              Chisholm will spend nine months at the Lord  Zuckerman Research Centre in
              Reading, UK to gain exposure to new technology in food science  to support her
              research program. Upon her return she will train undergraduate students at the 
              Penn. State Erie-Behrend College in multidimensional gas chromatography (MDGC)
              to isolate  flavor bodies in wines. Chirality is known to play a major role in
              taste and odor perception,  although few methods exist to date to quantitate
              this effect. Prof. Chisholm will investigate use  of chiral gas chromatography
              using modified cyclodextrin columns to study the role of  enantiomeric
              components in determining the flavor and aroma in wines and other foods. 
              Results  from this work should allow a more objective means of correlating the
              chemical composition of  foods to their sensory evaluation.    In the past, the
              evaluation of color in food, clothing, paints, etc. was solely a subjective
              visual  evaluation fraught with variability and misinterpretation. Today, a
              modern system of  spectroscopic, computational, and sensory evaluations are
              made for quantitative color  comparison. A comparable system does not yet exist
              in flavor testing. Flavor perception involves  a combination of taste, odor,
              and texture and the interplay of these factors is not well-  understood. To
              date, flavor evaluation in foods and beverages is still a very subjective test.
              Out  of the hundreds of compounds that may exist in a food ingredient, only a
              few may contribute  to the observed flavor. In many cases the "aroma-active"
              component may have the same  chemical formula, but may differ only in the
              spatial orientation of chemical functional groups.  A combination of analytical
              testing, sensory evaluation, statistical and computational  methodology may be
              needed to id entify the flavor contributing species in food. Prof. Chisholm 
              and her undergraduate students at PA St. Erie-Behrend will use a combination of
              CHARM  analysis (sensory evaluation of volatile food components from a gas
              chromatograph) and MDGC  (controlled concentration and high resolution
              separation of gaseous analyte) to better define those  factors contributing to
              flavor in various wines. In addition, Prof. Chisholm will spend a nine  month
              sabbatical in one of the top Food Science institutions in Europe studying the
              application  of these techniques to wines.
