Title       : Late Quaternary Dynamics of the Labrador/Foxe Sectors of the Laurentide Ice
               Sheet, Eastern Caradian Artic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9510063

Award Number: 9510063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gifford H. Miller gmiller@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Tad Pfeffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9510063   Miller    Our concepts concerning the stability of the Laurentide Ice
              Sheet (LIS) and its role in the global climate systems have been revised
              dramatically in the past five years, as high-resolution records have been
              compiled from the sea floor, ice cores, and from deposits around the margin of
              the former ice sheet.  Collectively, these records document rapid
              reorganization of oceanic and atmospheric circulation on time scales of a few
              years to a few decades, and rapid fluctuations of the ice margin that resulted
              in massive transfers of ice into oceans on time scales of decades to centuries.
               The rapid delivery of large volumes of ice from the land to the ocean may have
              altered thermohaline circulation with subsequent reduction in high-latitude
              precipitation, effectively coupling the three systems.  The INSTAAR research
              effort of the last decade has focused on the glacial history at the mouth of
              Hudson Strait, the most direct connection of the ice sheet to the ocean.  We
              have provided field evidence for rapid advance and retreat of the ice margin in
              Hudson Strait (sustained advances in excess of 100 km/century), and for ice
              movement independent of topography, with major advances sourced in
              Labrador/Ungava rather than Hudson Bay.  A consequence of these advances was a
              major flux of icebergs into the Labrador Sea and subsequently the North
              Atlantic, providing the first direct glacial geologic evidence of a mechanism
              to produce Heinrich layers observed in the North Atlantic.  In this proposal
              funding is requested to test three questions: 1) Are observed rapid icestream
              advances triggered by inherent instabilities at the bed of the LIS, or are they
              climatically driven? 2) Did an ice stream in Cumberland Sound contribute
              substantial sediment/meltwater/icebergs to the Labrador Sea.  If so, were
              fluctuations in phase with the Hudson Strait advances? and 3) Are the
              reconstructions interpreted from the field evidence compatible with
              glaciological theory?  We proposed to address these questions  by field
              observations of the glacial geology at the mouth of Cumberland Sound and by
              applying a 3-D glaciological model to the Labrador/Baffin region using our
              field-based boundary conditions.  The Cumberland Sound region should preserve
              evidence that will clarify the timing and magnitude of a Foxe Basin ice stream,
              and to the north, provide an independent record of local glacier activity. 
              Comparing the timing of advances for these ice masses with that in Hudson
              Strait will indicate whether forcing is primarily climate or ice sheet
              instability.  Modeling our field-base glacier reconstructions will test whether
              they are compatible with ice physics and provide additional insights into ice
              sheet dynamics.
