Title       : (ESH) The Most Severe Glaciations in Earth History: By Presaged Greenhouse
               Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1995     
File        : a9510339

Award Number: 9510339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95979              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Hoffman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Kaufman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9510339    Hoffman    The most extreme glaciations in Earth history occurred
              near the end of the  Proterozoic eon, when ice margins extended at sea level to
              within 10 degrees of  the equator.  The glaciogenic sediments in many regions
              are intimately  intercalated with typical warm-water carbonates, implying very
              abrupt climatic  oscillations.  Carbonates preceding the glacial deposits are
              extraordinarily   enriched in  13 C (13C>+6% PDB), signifying extreme rates of
              proportional organic  carbon burial, whereas those directly following the
              glacial deposits are high  depleted (  13C<-4% PDB).  This implicates a
              drawdown of atmospheric CO2 as the  cause of glaciation and a corollary
              increase in pO2 as enabling the initial  radiation of metazoans.  In contrast
              to the state of continental emergence that  presaged Cenozoic and late
              Paleozoic glacial epochs, stratigraphic and radiogenic  isotope evidence
              suggest that Neoproterozoic glaciations occurred in response to  continental
              inundation.  Accordingly, the Neoproterozoic glaciations may have had  more in
              common with the short-lived Ashgill (late Ordovician) glacial event.   These
              ancient occurrences illustrate the importance of considering the entire 
              geological record, which reveals events and processes not predicted by current 
              models nor expressed in the 1.4%  of Earth history represented by the Cenozoic.
                  Funding is requested to investigate two outstanding questions central to 
              Neoproterozoic global change:  (1) Do the glacial deposits represent globally 
              synchronous events of diachronous products or rapid continental drift?  (2) Do 
              the observed shifts in   13Ccarbonate reflect purely secular variations in
              ocean  surface waters or in part the spatial effects of differing water masses?
               The  proposed study will be piggy-backed on ongoing field projects by the P.I.
              and by  Anthony R. Prave (City University of New York) on the sequence
              stratigraphy,  structural geology and regional tectonics of the Damara orogen
              in Namibia,  considered a keysto ne for the Neoproterozoic tectonic
              reorganization of  Gondwanaland.  The ongoing projects have identified volcanic
              horizons potentially  suitable for U-Pb zircon chronology within or bracketing
              three separate  glaciogenic formations.  Single-grain U-Pb zircon analyses will
              be done by  thermal ionization mass spectrometry at the Massachusetts Institute
              of Technology  under the direction of Samuel A. Bowring, whose recent
              chronostratigraphic work  has dramatically refined the early Cambrian time
              scale.  The ongoing projects  have already gone far towards establishing the
              sequence stratigraphic framework  and regional facies variations for carbonates
              above and below the glacial  deposits in northern Namibia.  Sampling and
              interpretation of carbon isotopic  variations will be grounded on this work and
              on follow-up diagentic studies.  The  isotopic and diagenetic studies will be
              undertaken by Alan J. Kaufman at Harvard  University, who has published
              extensively on Neoproterozoic isotopic  chemostratigraphy , including
              reconnaissance studies in Namibia.    Funding is requested to support the U-Pb
              and C isotopic analyses, and salary and  travel to the field for Kaufman.  The
              cost of field operations in Namibia and  support for other personnel will be
              borne elsewhere.
