Title       : Electronic and Magnetic Mechanisms in Low-Dimensional and Novel Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9510427

Award Number: 9510427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Brooks brooks@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9510427  Brooks    The  proposed activity is the investigation of the role of 
              electronic  anisotropy   in  molecular  crystalline  materials.   This 
              anisotropy  influences metallic, superconducting, magnetic, and insulating 
              states  in these materials.  The main objectives of the proposed work are:  to 
              compare  experimentally and computationally the effects of  electronic 
              anisotropy;  to manipulate the degree of anisotropy by physical  means  to 
              produce  new  electronic states; to understand  more  clearly  how 
              superconductivity  arises  in  low-dimensional  systems;  to   explore  quantum
               limit effects in anisotropic materials; to extend traditional  Fermi surface
              studies into new regimes of pulsed magnetic fields above  30  T; and to
              consider speculative new methods of physical measurement  in intense magnetic
              fields and very high pressures in these materials.  %%%  The  area of molecular
              crystals is an emerging one in the science  and  technology  of  electronic
              (electrically conducting) materials.   They  link  the realms of
              semiconductors, metals, and biological structures.  Unlike traditional solids
              such as silicon or copper which are composed  of  atoms  arranged in simple
              three-dimensional ordered  arrays,  with  little  or  no distinction between
              directions, molecular crystals  are  composed  of  large  (usually organic)
              molecules  arranged  in  either  chains  or  layers.   Hence, the electronic 
              properties  of  molecular  crystals  can be very different (anisotropic) in the
              three  directions  within  the  solid.   This  anisotropy affects their 
              superconducting,  magnetic, and semiconducting properties.  The purpose of the 
              proposed  research is to investigate experimentally and computationally the
              role  of  anisotropy in crystalline molecular solids, including the  use  of 
              electronic,  magnetic,  pressure, and optical probes  to  measure  and 
              manipulate  their  physical  properties..   An  understanding  of  the 
              mechanisms by which anisotropy influences these properties  wi ll  lead  to 
              the  design  and synthesis of new materials in this  class  having 
              particularly desirable physical properties.  ***
