Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Archetypal Analysis of Complex Spatio-Temporal Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9510284

Award Number: 9510284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily F. Stone stone@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510284  Stone    This work is supported by a Research Planning Grant for Women
              Scientists   and Engineers Award.  A major area of current interest in the
              field of   dynamiaal systems is the understanding, prediction, and modeling of 
               complex spatio-temporal dynamics.  With the advent of high-speed, large  
              capacity computers, more complex methods from statistics have become  
              practical in the analysis of data from dynamical systems.  One of the goals  
              of this project is to compare and contrast two methods, Karhunen-Loeve   (KL)
              decomposition and Archetypes, in their application to several   experimental
              dynamical systems, both physical and numerical.  Another   goal is to propose a
              method that builds on Archetypal analysis for data with   translating coherent
              structures, by finding archetypes that move with the   traveling structure, in
              an objective manner.  The shape of the structure itself   is extracted (or
              possibly shapes, if the structure itself is varying as well as   translating)
              as well as information on how the structure is moving across the   spatial
              domain.  A third goal is to determine the feasibility of using   archetypes as
              a basis upon which to perform a Galerkin projection of the   governing
              equations (when they exist), for modeling purposes.      The National Science
              Foundation's mandate to ensure the vitality of the   Nation's scientific
              enterprise includes concern for the quality, composition,   distribution and
              effectiveness of the human resource base in science and   engineering.  Within
              this context, the Foundation is committed to enhancing   the current rate of
              participation of women in science and engineering   careers, in general, and as
              active participants in all of its programs.    Research Planning Grant awards
              are made: (1) to help increase the number   of new women investigators
              participating in NSF's research programs; and,   (2) to facilitate preliminary
              studies and other activities related to the   development of competitive
              research projects and proposals by  women who   have not previously had
              independent Federal research funding.  Research   Planning Grants are one-time
              awards that may be used for preliminary work   to determine the feasibility of
              a proposed line of inquiry, and/or for other   activities that will facilitate
              proposal development.
