Title       : Vortex Dynamics in Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1996  
File        : a9510464

Award Number: 9510464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Lobb lobb@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9510464  Lobb  Vortices  in  type-II  superconductors move in  response  to 
              external forces, causing a measurable electric field in the  superconductor. 
              In spite  of  significant  research on  conventional  superconductors  the
              advent  of  high-  temperature superconductors  has  shown  that  vortex motion
               is not very well understood. The initial evidence for this  was provided by
              measurements of the Hall effect in the  vortex state, which showed  motion 
              opposite  to the  direction predicted  by  conventional theory.  Subsequent 
              measurements have shown anomalies  in  the  Nernst effect,  as well as
              surprising  non-linear effects. The proposed  work will  extend  our  earlier 
              work  in this  field,  studying  Hall  and longitudinal  conductivity, the
              dynamics  of strongly-driven  vortices, vortex  motion  in  ultra-thin 
              superconducting  films,  vortex  motion induced  by  temperature gradients, a
              modified Giaever flux transformer  experiment,  and  the  effect of
              order-parameter symmetry  on  vortexdynamics.                                  
                                .  %%%  When  a  magnetic field is applied to type-II 
              superconductors such  as high-temperature superconductors,  it penetrates the 
              material  in  the form  of  vortices  containing a quantum  of magnetic flux. 
              Motion  of these  vortices creates an electric filed in the superconductor, 
              which leads,  for example, to non-zero resistivity when  current is  present.
              Since  most  applications of  superconductors rely on zero resistivity,
              understanding  of  vortex motion is important. The  research  proposed here  is
               aimed  toward understanding vortex motion resulting  from  a  number of
              different driving forces. The resistance and Hall  resistance of 
              superconductors  will  be  measured, with  emphasis  on  nonlinear effects as
              the current is varied, to  understand the effect of pinning, vortex-vortex 
              interactions,  quantum  states  in  vortex  core,                  and 
              possible  effects of order-parameter symmetry. The motion of  vo rtices in 
              response  to  temperature gradients will also  be  measured,  which provides an
              alternative area for  testing theories of vortex motion, as well  as  providing
              a  unique probe for studying the internal structure of  vortices.              
                      .  ***
