Title       : Resonance Light Scattering and the Study of Synthetic and Biological
               Light-Harvesting Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1995      
File        : a9510127

Award Number: 9510127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Pasternack rpaster1@cc.swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Collings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1091,9178,OSIE,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is an award through the Collaborative Research in Undergraduate  
              Institutions Program for support of a research center under the   leadership of
              Robert F. Pasternack of Swarthmore College for the study of   synthetic and
              biological light-harvesting systems, with emphasis on the   technique of
              resonance light scattering.  Supported through the Special   Projects Office of
              the Division of Chemistry, the center is a   collaboration of faculty and
              students from Swarthmore, Haverford, and   Goucher Colleges.  The
              interdisciplinary research seeks to determine the   molecular parameters that
              are necessary for resonance light scattering   from aggregrated chromophores
              and to formulate a general theoretical   description of the process.  Further,
              the research will develop   techniques of dynamic resonance light scattering to
              study the dimensions   of chromophore aggregrates and the mechanisms of
              aggregation and of   time-resolved resonance light scattering to probe
              photochemical processes   involving energy and electron transfer.  A central
              facility, to be   located at Swarthmore, will house a versatile laser light
              scattering   apparatus capable of both static and dynamic light scattering  
              experiments, angle-dependent scans, and polarization-dependent   measurements. 
               Center research into the interactions of light with synthetic and   biological
              systems contributes to the new NSF initiative in optical   sciences and
              engineering.  In addition to generating new knowledge on   light-harvesting
              systems, the center provides undergraduate students from   three colleges with
              an interdisciplinary, collaborative research   experience.  The center is a
              premier example of the integration of   research and education.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
