Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Methods for Smoothing Bivariate, Irregularly Spaced Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9510435

Award Number: 9510435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Kafadar kk@math.cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9222,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510435 Kafadar  Abstract      The research under this project will develop
              methods for smoothing bivariate, irregularly spaced data such as environmental,
              geological, or health-related data with geographically-defined coordinates.
              Because such data often arise from non-Gaussian distributions with potentially
              non-stationary noise (e.g., highly skewed values in barometric pressure data,
              exotic values due to earthquakes in  geophysical data, discontinuities due to
              faults in geological data),  linear smoothers, or smoothers derived assuming
              stationary white noise, may not perform as well as more robust, nonlinear
              smoothers in capturing the underlying trend.  This research will attempt to
              identidy (1) those situations where nonlinear versus linear smoothers should
              yield good performance; (2) how smoothed values at the border should be defined
              (often a source of significant bias in estimating the trend); and (3) how the
              resulting smoothed trend can be displayed.    In 1974, the National Cancer
              Institute published the Atlas of Cancer Mortality for U.S. Counties: 1950-1969.
               It consisted of U.S. maps, one for each of 35 sites of cancer, where counties
              were shaded according to the level of the mortality rate for the cancer site
              being depicted.  These maps illustrated, for example, high rates of lung cancer
              around the Gulf of Mexico and high rates of bladder cancer around Delaware and
              New Jersey; subsequently, environmental causes for these high rates were
              identified.  Further atlases of cancer mortality were published, and an atlas
              of mortality from causes other than cancer is forthcoming from National Center
              for Health Statistics.  Because some counties have very small populations,
              reported mortality rates are very uncertain; regions of elevated risks may be
              difficult to detect. The objective of this research is to develop methods which
              will highlight geographical patterns in data such as cancer mortality in U.S.
              counties. Geographical movement of populations often is responsible for
              spreading the risk  around.  Thus it is important to identify not just isolated
              counties of elevated risk but broad regions which may indicate environmental
              causes for concern.  Conversely, regions of low risk may serve as models for
              measures of disease prevention and control.  These methods can be applied to
              other sorts of data to answer similar questions, such as which regions indicate
              significant seismic activity, or in which places the ozone layer is depleting
              most rapidly.
