Title       : CRUI: Chararacterization of Catalytic Antibodies from Germinal-Center B Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9510212

Award Number: 9510212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $849676             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Hansen dehansen@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David I. Ratner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia B. O'Hara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Goldsby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1091,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project is for Collaborative Research at Undergraduate Institutions,
              involving organic chemistry with biochemistry and cell biology.  The immune
              system contains a class of  B-cells  which produce antibodies as part of the
              immune response.  There are clusters of these cells in areas called germinal
              centers, which are sites of high mutation rates for these cells, and so add to
              the diversity of antibodies that can be produced.  Some antibodies have
              catalytic activity, breaking down proteins by hydrolysis, for example.  It is
              an attractive goal to try to induce formation of novel antibodies that will
              have highly efficient catalytic activity toward particular specific proteins,
              allowing production of powerful biochemical probes and tools.  This project
              utilizes novel immune challenges by particular organic compounds and their
              transition-state analogs, and "capture" of the B-cell repertoire to assay for
              efficient catalytic antibodies.  The antibodies obtained will be characterized
              for properties including binding site variation, affinity, catalytic activity,
              and molecular sequence of their variable regions.  Results of this work will be
              important to biochemistry, to the chemistry of catalysis, and potentially to
              broad biomedical applications.  This project provides a novel multidisciplinary
              experience involving undergraduates in exciting research with potentially
              exciting applications.
