Title       : GIG: Problems in Low-Dimensional Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9510505

Award Number: 9510505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darren Long long@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daryl Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin G. Scharlemann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510505  Long       This award is directed towards the infrastructure needs  of
              the geometric topology group in the areas of graduate  student support and in
              the hiring of postdoctoral students  in the field. The group has a wide range
              of interests within  and contiguous to the area of geometric topology. The 
              following indicates the current directions of the  researchers: Cooper, Long
              and Scharlemann focus on 3-  manifolds. One of Cooper's projects is to utilize
              the  relationship between finite foliations and geometrically  finite surfaces
              in hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Another is to  continue developing the properties of
              the A-polynomial for  knots which arise from representation theory. A third 
              involves the theory of buildings applied to representations  of the braid
              group.  Long's specific projects concern the  study of finite foliations and
              the resulting dynamical  systems as well as the application of these ideas to 
              hyperbolic 3-manifolds. He also is working on problems in  algebraic geometry
              and the use of the degree conjecture to  prove Property P, and the finite
              dimensional linear  representations of the braid groups.  Scharlemann's main 
              interest is the stabilization problem for Heegaard  splittings.  Success would
              have important implications for  the general classification problem for
              3-manifolds.  There  are connections to knot theory as well, via the notion of 
              "tunnel number" for a knot.One of the most basic  observations about the world
              around us, apparent almost from  our birth, is that it is 3-dimensional.  So it
              is of  interest to understand objects with precisely this property:  anyone
              living in one would see his or her world as 3-  dimensional.  Such objects are
              called "3-manifolds", and the  project aims to increase our understanding of
              them.   3-  manifolds support interesting phenomena.  One of these  phenomena
              is "knotting", in which a simple object like a  garden-hose (or a string of
              DNA) can be maneuvered so that  its positioning in space is quite complex. 
              More generally ,  objects like chemical molecules, usually though of 
              abstractly as "graphs" (much like tinker toy models), can be  put in a
              3-manifold in extraordinarily complex ways if one  thinks of the "sticks" as
              made of rubber which can be  knotted and interweaved.  Tools which are being
              developed to  understand 3-manifolds help us understand knotting and, 
              conversely, understanding knotting (a second principal aim  of the project)
              helps us understand 3-manifolds.  For  example, the "Heegaard splittings"
              mentioned above refer to  a technique in which all the complexity of a general
              3-  manifold is absorbed into a thick graph.  Then information  about the graph
              gives information about the 3-manifolds.  A  more disciplined type of knotting,
              called braiding, occurs,  for example, in the trajectories of fluid or plasma
              flow in  a Tokomak-type torus.  Since this knotting is more  disciplined, more
              tools are available for understanding and  classifying such knotting.  Hence
              the intereqt in braid  theory and its connections to dynamical systems.
