Title       : Ultrafast Spectroscopic Studies of Semiconducting Polymer Blends: The Route to
               High Efficiency Photoluminescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9510387

Award Number: 9510387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Heeger ajh@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Heeger  9510387  The  discovery of polymer light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with
              relatively  high  quantum  efficiency has opened an important  new  direction 
              for  research  and  has expanded the possible applications  for  conducting 
              polymers in the area of active light sources. With a goal of achieving  high 
              quantum  efficiency electroluminescence in  polymer  LEDs,  this  research 
              program  addresses  the basic  physics  of  pi-electrons  in  conjugated 
              polymers. The experimental methods focus  on  the  use  of  ultrafast 
              time-resolved spectroscopy (resolution less  than  a  pico-  second),  
              including   sub   pico-second  time-resolved   photoinduced  absorption, sub
              pico-second time-resolved luminescence and  pump-probe  experiments to
              characterize the possible role of stimulated  emission.  The research will
              focus on dilute blends of semiconducting luminescent  polymers.  %%%  The 
              discovery of polymer light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with relatively  high 
              quantum  efficiency has opened an important  new  direction  for  research  and
               has expanded the possible applications  for  conducting  polymers in the area
              of active light sources. The potential importance  of  this  area  had  been
              recently highlighted in President  Clinton's  report  on  Science in the
              National Interest ("Polymers  that  Glow").  With  a  goal of achieving high
              quantum efficiency electroluminescence  in  polymer LEDs, this research program
              addresses the basic physics of  pi-electrons  in  conjugated polymers through
              studies of  photoinduced  luminescence    and   photo-induced   charge/energy  
              transfer.    The  experimental  methods  focus  on the use  of  ultrafast 
              time-resolved  spectroscopy resolution (less than a pico-second).  ***
