Title       : Growth and Characterization of MOVPE III-V Semiconductors Doped With Rare Earths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9510139

Award Number: 9510139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin L. Bray   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Kuech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,OSIE,
Abstract    :
                 9510139 Bray  This collaborative, interdisciplinary research project focuses
              on the preparation and characterization of rare earth doped III-V
              semiconductors; these materials provide the potential of combining the
              convenience of electrical excitation offered by semiconductors with the
              temperature stable sharp line luminescence features of rare earth ions. The
              goal of MOVPE film growth studies is to identify the conditions necessary to
              obtain optimal concentrations of rare earth ions without dopant precipitation
              or degradation of materials quality or properties. Characterization studies
              will emphasize the relationship of the optical and electrical properties of the
              proposed systems to the growth process. Optical studies will include
              photoluminescence, electroluminescence, luminescence lifetime, luminescence
              excitation, absorption and near field scanning optical microscopy measurements.
              These studies seek to elucidate mechanisms of rare earth excitation and thermal
              quenching. High pressure studies will be conducted to study the effect of band
              structure on the luminescence properties of the proposed systems, and will also
              be used to determine the alignment of rare earth energy levels relative to the
              band edges of the proposed semiconductors. Systems found to be promising in
              electroluminescence studies will be fabricated into diode and waveguide
              structures and tested for their suitability in these applications. %%%  The
              primary goal of this program is to develop a fundamental understanding of the
              electronic and photonic properties and the epitaxial growth and processing of
              rare-earth doped semiconductor materials so that they can be exploited in the
              realization of a variety of advanced electronic and photonic devices. An
              important feature of the program is the training of graduate and undergraduate
              students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area of materials
              and processing research.  This research will contribute to improving the
              general performance of advanced devices and integr ated circuits used in
              computing, information processing, and telecommunications.  ***
