Title       : Coherent Spectroscopy of Vortex-State Electrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9510353

Award Number: 9510353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Orenstein joeo@mh1.lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9510353  Orenstein  The  optical response of high-Tc cuprate superconductors
              has been  the  subject  of  intense investigations since their discovery. It 
              appears  that a consistent picture of the responses, from microwave to infrared
               is finally emerging. However, the understanding that has been achieved  is 
              largely  confined  to zero magnetic field. The  proposed  research  seeks  to
              develop a thorough understanding of the optical response  in  the  vortex-state
               which arises in response to  magnetic  field.   The  study  focuses on the
              terahertz frequency range, which is the  crucial  one  for vortex dynamics in
              the cuprates because it corresponds to the  gap  for  quasi  particle 
              excitations in the  vortex  core.  The  key  experimental tool is terahertz
              time-domain spectroscopy, which is  the  most successful approach to measuring
              broad band response of the media  in  the spectral range between the microwave
              and infra-red domains. In  this  technique the complex response function is
              measured directly  by  resolving   the   transmission  coefficient   of  
              nearly-single-cycle  picosecond  electric  field pulses. These  pulses  are 
              generated  and  detected  optoelectronically through the use of  a  femtosecond
               mode-  locked laser.  %%%    The spectacular property of superconductors is
              the vanishing of the dc  resistance.  However,  above zero frequency, 
              superconductors  develop  measurable  resistance, whose properties are a
              distinguishing  feature  of  superconductivity in different materials. The
              resistivity of  high  temperature  cuprate superconductors in zero applied 
              magnetic  field,  from  microwave to visible frequencies, has been studied 
              intensively.  This   project  investigates  the  fundamentally  and 
              technologically  important  regime  of  under magnetic field.  The  proposal 
              seeks  to  develop   a   thorough  understanding  of  the  response  of  
              cuprate  superconductors in the "vortex state" which arises in the presence  of
               large magnetic field. The research focus es on the terahertz region  of  the
              spectrum, which is the crucial range for the cuprates, and uses  a  powerful
              new spectroscopic tool, terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. A  broad   range  
              of   high  quality  films  will  be  synthesized   and  investigated  . The
              results will test and stimulate theoretical  work,  which  is  evolving 
              rapidly  as evidence emerges  for  unconventional  origins of superconductivity
              in HTS.  ***
