Title       : Wages, Productivity, and Worker Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9510876

Award Number: 9510876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241069             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Neumark neumarkd@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Troske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith Hellerstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1041,1092,9146,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510876  Neumark    Lack of data on worker productivity plagues numerous areas
              of  empirical research related to issues of wage determination and 
              productivity: life-cycle earnings, wage discrimination, returns  to education,
              effects of marriage, job-specific human capital,  industry rents, etc.  For
              example, with data only on wages and  worker characteristics over the life
              cycle, it is difficult to  distinguish human capital models of wage growth from
              models of  long-term, incentive compatible contracts.  Typical wage 
              regressions reveal positive effects of age on wages, conditional   on a variety
              of covariates, but these positive effects neither  prove nor disprove that
              mature workers are more productive than  younger ones.  This project will be
              the first to use U.S. data to  estimate and compare plant- or firm-level
              estimates of wage and  marginal productivity differentials.  The productivity
              and wage  estimates will be analyzed in the contexts of such commonly  debated
              topics as race and sex discrimination in wages, the  causes of rising wage
              profiles over the life cycle, and the  returns to education and marriage.   
              This project takes a production function approach to plants   technologies, in
              which workers with different characteristics are  treated as substitute labor
              inputs in the plant, but with  potentially different marginal products.  The
              modeling and  estimation strategy permit a direct comparison of estimates of 
              relative wages of workers with different characteristics with  estimates of
              relative marginal productivities.  he approach is  applied to U.S. data using a
              match between long-form respondents   to the 1990 Decennial Census, uho work in
              the manufacturing  sector, and data on their employers from the Longitudinal 
              Research Database.  The employer-employee matched data set, the 
              Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database (WECD), combines  information
              with which to estimate production functions (such as   value of output, cost of
              materials, capital, and employment),  with  information on earnings and
              demographic characteristics of  the workers.  This is a unique data set. 
              Previously available  U.S. plant-level or firm-level data sets only contain
              breakdowns   of workers into production and non-production workers, and 
              previously available worker-level data sets contain little  information on the
              employers.
