Title       : GIG: Center for Statistics in Science and Technology Group Infrastructure Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1997 
File        : a9510511

Award Number: 9510511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405625             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Rocke dmrocke@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce D. Hammock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Ling Tsai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Shumway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Verosub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hans-Georg Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510511  Rocke       Center for Statistics in Science and Technology Group 
              Infrastructure Grant. The Center for Statistics in Science  and Technology
              (CSST) is anewly-formed research and training  center at U.C. Davis, whose
              purpose is to support and  facilitate interdisciplinary research and graduate
              training  involving statistics and related areas of mathematical  sciences
              together with physical, biological, and  earthsciences.  The initial faculty
              membership includes  statisticians, researchers in continuous and combinatorial
               optimization methods, and researchers from other scientific  areas (Geology
              and Toxicology) in which there are existing  collaborations.  Other
              investigators will be included in the  Center as it develops, and as its
              interdisciplinary  activities increase.        The establishment of CSST was
              prompted by the  observation that, increasingly, successful attacks on 
              scientific problems involve cooperation between  investigators with different
              specializations.  A  particularly attractive type of collaboration is between 
              mathematical scientists, and researchers in areas of  application of
              mathematical methods.  A major activity of  the Center under this project will
              be to support graduate  students in statistics and related areas of the
              mathematical  sciences to work on interdisciplinary  projects with 
              geosciences, toxicology, and other scientific areas.  This  is important
              because the ability to work in such cross-  disciplinary partnerships is an
              attribute highly valued both  in university and industrial settings, and
              because the  skills needed to contribute to such teams do not develop of 
              themselves, but need to be consciously nurtured as a part of  graduate
              education.  Other activities  of CSST under this  project will be to conduct
              seminars and symposia,  and  provide a computational facility for
              cross-disciplinary  research projects using equipment previously acquired with 
              NSF and NIH support.
