Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Bayesian Modeling and Inference for Time Series with
               Stable Innovations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9510348

Award Number: 9510348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nalini Ravishanker nalini@stat.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9222,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510348 Ravishanker  Abstract      The investigator studies Bayesian modeling
              and inference for time series with infinite variance stable innovations,
              addressing methodological problems as well as applications to real world data.
              The justification for the study of infinite variance stable processes stems
              from empirical evidence for its usefulness in several application areas such as
              astronomy, economics, engineering, finance and physics. The area of modeling
              stable processes has several open and challenging problems that are addressed.
              Available classical methods of estimation and inference do not simultaneously
              estimate the parameters defining the stable process and the parameters of the
              time series model. The investigator develops new methodology for modeling data
              generated by autoregressive fractionally integrated moving average processes
              with stable innovations that characterize long memory and short memory behavior
              in 'infinite variance' time series. Inference and prediction are implemented
              using sampling- based Bayesian techniques through Markov chain Monte Carlo
              algorithms to generate samples from the target posterior distribution. For
              stable processes, the form of the likelihood does not, in general, admit a
              closed analytical form. Hence expressions for the complete conditional
              distributions of the parameters in terms of the characteristic function of the
              stable process are combined with the Gibbs sampling algorithm or its variants
              to generate samples from the required posterior by approximating it by a
              suitable proposal density. Additionally, the role of algorithms that are useful
              in generating samples from stable processes directly is studied, incorporating
              this into the Bayesian framework. Various marginal and joint posterior
              distributions as well as summary features of these distributions are analyzed,
              as well as a characterization of predictive distributions that permit model
              choice and forecasting.        The investigator studies modeling and
              forecasting for time series data assumi ng that the data can take on more
              extreme values than would usually be the case. There is considerable empirical
              evidence for this behavior in diverse areas of application such as
              telecommunications, hydrology, physics, economics and finance and for modeling
              quantities such as gravitational fields of stars, temperature distributions in
              nuclear reactors, stresses in crystalline lattices, annual rainfall, stock
              prices etc. Currently available methods for modeling and forecasting are few
              and inefficient . The investigator develops new innovative methodology for
              modeling under the assumption that the data are generated by a popular and
              useful time series process and by incorporating prior information into the
              modeling as well.
