Title       : Muon Spin Relaxation Studies of Heavy Fermion Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9510453

Award Number: 9510453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graeme M. Luke luke@phys.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yasutomo J. Uemura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9510453  Luke  Muon  spin  relaxation  will be used to study  the  interplay 
              between various   interactions  and  phenomena  in  rare  earth  and  actinide
              compounds. Many of these  systems exhibit interesting magnetic behavior due  to
               the  combination  of the Kondo effect,  Rudman-Kittel-Kasuya  Yosida 
              interaction and the effect of crystalline fields. In  materials where  these
              interactions are present, such  phenomena as heavy fermion superconductivity  
              and  quadrupole  Kondo   effect   are   observed.  Superconductivity and
              antiferromagnatic ordering coexist  in  uraniumplatinum-three   compound.  This
               antiferromagnetism  contributes to multiple superconducting phases. This 
              research will help elucidate the microscopic nature of the  different
              superconducting states. In another compound,  cerium-copper2-silicon2,
              superconductivity and magnetism  do  not  coexist  but  compete  for  the 
              ground  state.  This  work  will investigate  the competition between the two 
              states.  The  competition between  Kondo screening and  exchange interactions
              will be studied  in cerium-copper-two-  tin-two. The relative importance of the
               crystalline  electric  fields,  Kondo screening and exchange interactions 
              will  be determined   in  uranium  doped  yttrium-palladium-  three. 
              Theoretical models based on the anomalous low  temperature linear specific heat
               in neodymium-cerium-copper-  oxygen compound will be tested by way  of  the
              measurement  of spin fluctuations in this compound.  %%%  Muon Spin Relaxation
              experiments will be conducted on a  number of rare earth  and  actinide
              compounds which exhibit  a rich interplay  between various  interactions  and 
              phenomena such  as  superconductivity  and magnetic  ordering. Five different
              studies will be conducted:  (1)  the coexistence  between  antiferromagnetic
              ordering and  the  microscopic nature  of  the  resulting multiple 
              superconducting  phases,  (2)  the competition  between  magnetic ordering  and
               superconductivity  in  a compound  where they do  not coexist, (3) the
              competition between  Kondo screening  and  exchange  interaction,  (4)  the 
              relative  importance between  crystalline  electric fields,  Kondo  screening 
              and  exchange interactions,  and (5)  fluctuation effects in materials which 
              exhibit anomalous  thermodynamic behavior. Each of the  above  study  will  be 
              conducted on the appropriate compound.  ***
