Title       : Colloidal Particle Growth in Silica Xerogels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9510607

Award Number: 9510607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Simeen Sattar sattar@levy.bard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bard College
	      
	      Annandale-On-Hudson, NY  12504    914/758-6822

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,9222,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9510607          Simeen    A new strategy is devised for making
              colloidal particles  dispersed within an inorganic or organic matrix. The
              sol-gel  process is combined with methods for making colloidal particles  by
              homogeneous precipitation from electrolyte solutions. The  feasibility of this
              approach has been demonstrated by successful  preparation of a material
              consisting of large numbers of 0.1-1  micrometer chromium hydroxide spheres
              embedded within a silica  xerogel. Homogeneous precipitation offers the
              possibility of  making a wide variety of particles and the means for exercising
               systematic control over particle morphology. The goals of the  proposed
              research are to determine whether this technique can be  extended to generate
              particles with different compositions within  gels; whether it is possible to
              create crystalline particles; and  whether the metal salt particles can be
              reduced to metal. Other  experiments will investigate the role of the gel
              matrix in  controlling particle size.   %%%  Synthesis of composite materials
              consisting of colloidal  particles dispersed within an inorganic or organic
              matrix is of  considerable interest because of applications in catalysis and 
              optics, among other areas. A new strategy for making such  composites has been
              devised that combines the sol-gel process  with methods for making colloidal
              particles by homogeneous  precipitation from electrolyte solutions. The
              feasibility of this  approach has been demonstrated by successful preparation
              of a  material consisting of large numbers of 0.1-1 micrometer chromium 
              hydroxide spheres embedded within a silica xerogel. Homogeneous  precipitation
              offers the possibility of making a wide variety of  particles and the means for
              exercising systematic control over  particle morphology. The goals of the
              research described in this  proposal are to determine whether this technique
              can be extended  to generate particles with different compositions within gels;
               whether it is possible to create crystalline  particles; and  whether the
              metal salt particles can be reduced to metal.
