Title       : Neutron Scattering Studies of Magnetic Semiconductors and their Superlattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1997  
File        : a9510241

Award Number: 9510241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacek K. Furdyna Jacek.K.Furdyna.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9510241  Furdyna    The  objective  of  the  proposed research is to
              investigate  magnetic  ordering  and  magnetic interactions in cubic manganese
              telluride  and  manganese  selenide, as well as in their multilayers  and 
              alloys,  by  means of neutron scattering techniques.  These materials, which do
              not  occur  naturally  but  can  be fabricated in  this  crystal  phase  by 
              molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), hold great fundamental interest  because  their  
              manganese   sublattices  consititute   frustrated   Heisenberg 
              antiferromagnets governed by short-range interactions.   MBE  provides  the 
              opportunity  to vary in a controlled fashion various  degrees  of  freedom
              which directly affect their magnetic behavior, such as strain,  magnetic  
              layer   separation,  dilution,  and  dimensionality,   thus  accessing  a
              variety of fundamentally new problems in magnetism.   The  research  will 
              focus strongly on investigating the  coupling  between  magnetic  layers  in 
              order to understand  the  nature  and  range  of  manganese-manganese 
              interactions  beyond  those   involving   nearest  neighbors.   New  neutron
              scattering experiments  will  be  initiated,  using ultrathin layers of these
              materials, in an effort to observe the  crossover  from three to two
              dimensions, and ultimately to investigate  magnetic  interactions in the
              two-dimensional limit  itself.   Samples  will  be prepared at Notre Dame
              University, and the neutron scattering  experiments  will  be  conducted
              primarily at the Missouri  University  Research Reactor.  %%%  The  objective 
              of  the  proposed research is to investigate  magnetic  ordering  and magnetic
              interactions in thin layers of cubic  manganese  telluride and manganese
              selenide, as well as in multilayers and alloys  thereof,  using neutron
              scattering techniques.  These materials, which  do  not  occur naturally but
              can be grown in this structural  form  by  molecular  beam epitaxy (MBE) hold
              great fundamental interest  because  the  manganese  ions  form  "frustrate d"
              antiferromagnetic  structures  governed  by  short-range interactions between
              the ions.   The  growth  technique  permits the controlled variation of factors
               that  directly  affect  the  magnetic  behavior, such as  strain,  separation 
              of  the  magnetic  layers,  dilution  of  the  magnetic  ions,  etc.,   thereby
               providing  access  to  a  range  of  fundamentally  new  problems   in 
              magnetism.   The  research will focus strongly  on  investigating  the 
              coupling between magnetic layers in order to understand the nature and  range 
              of  interactions  between  the  manganese  ions.   New  neutron  scattering 
              experiments will be initiated, using ultrathin  layers  of  these  materials,
              in an effort to observe the crossover from three  to  two  dimensional magnetic
              behavior.  Samples will be prepared at Notre  Dame  University,  and  the 
              neutron scattering  experiments  will  be  conducted primarily at the Missouri
              University Research Reactor.  ***
