Title       : Abstract Case, Morphological Case, and the Minimalist Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9510888

Award Number: 9510888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17619              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Lasnik lasnik@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zeljko Boskovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   A recent trend in generative syntax has been the development  of a
              minimalist program. This minimalism shows up in two distinct  ways. First,
              derivations and representations conform to an  'economy' criterion demanding
              that they be minimal; no extra  steps in derivations and no extra symbols in
              representations are  allowed. Second, the theory itself is developing in the
              direction  of minimality. Thus, in place of a variety of distinct earlier 
              transformations we have Affect a; conditions on transformations  and
              representations avoid redundancy by not overlapping in their  effects, etc.
              Chomsky (1993) has recently suggested carrying this  minimalist program still
              further with a proposal that a syntactic  representation consists not of the
              familiar four levels,  D-structure, S-structure, Phonetic Form, and Logical
              Form, but  rather, only the latter two - the apparently irreducible  'interface
              levels', which provide instructions for the  articulatory-perceptual and
              conceptual-intentional performance  systems. Since virtually every module of
              the theory appears to  display strong S-structure effects, the success of the
              minimalist  program depends on the reduction of all such requirements to LF 
              and PF well-formedness conditions, and/or to general economy  considerations.
              The goal of this project is to explore the  possibility of such a reduction in
              Case theory and the form that  the resulting minimalist theory of Case might
              have. The emphasis  will be on two types of Case standardly treated as polar 
              opposites: 'inherent' Case, which has thematic import, and  'exceptional' Case,
              which by definition has no thematic import.  The possibility of unifying the
              two Case types will be explored.  Data from Serbo-Croatian, a language which
              due to its rich overt  Case-marking provides more accessible data pertaining to
              Case  theory than English, will be used in the investigation of  inherent Case.
              The conclusions reached during the investigation  are expected to have
              considerable theoretical importance, si nce  Case theory plays a central role
              in the grammar and crucially  interacts with a number of other modules.
