Title       : RPG: Molecular Mechanisms of Regulation of GAP-43 Promoter by bHLH Transcription
               Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9510658

Award Number: 9510658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Susan F. Volman                     
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Chiaramello   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9510658  Chiaramello  The molecular mechanisms underlying mammalian neurogenesis
              are  still elusive.  However recently, a number of neuronal genes that  specify
              neuronal cell fate has been identified.  Some of them  encode transcription
              factors that contain a basic-helix-loop-helix  (bHLH) motif.  These neuronal
              genes are grouped in two specific  categories:  the proneural genes and the
              neurogenic genes.  The  proneural genes define a state that makes cells
              competent to become  neuronal precursors, whereas neurogenic genes form a
              functional  network that is thought to convey regulatory signals from one cell 
              to the next to allow the development of mature neuronal cells.   These genes
              are activated in a precise spatial and temporal manner  in order to orchestrate
              this complex series of events leading to  neuronal differentiation.  These
              genes encode various basic-helix-  loop-helix transcription factors that
              regulate tissue-specific  transcription of various neuronal target genes. 
              These bHLH  proteins form various dimers through the helix-loop-helix (HLH) 
              motif and bind to a specific cis acting element referred as E-box  through
              their basic domain.  They have been classified into  distinct classes, based on
              their structure and pattern of  expression.  Class B can only form heterodimers
              with a class A bHLH  protein and exhibit a restricted spatio-temporal
              expression.  The  variety of heterodimeric complexes formed between two bHLH
              proteins  provides a molecular mechanism responsible for differential 
              transcriptional regulation of target genes in different cell types  and
              developmental stages during neurogenesis.  A wealth of data  demonstrates that
              bHLH transcription factors critically contribute  to the events of
              determination, differentiation, and maintenance  during neurogenesis.  However,
              no specific neuronal target gene  have yet been identified.  This proposal
              deals with the detailed   study of the events determination, differentiation,
              and maintenance  during neurogenesis.  However, no sp ecific neuronal target
              gene  have yet been identified.  This proposal deals with the detailed  study
              of the transcriptional regulation of the mammalian neuronal  gene, GAP-43,
              which is the first neuronal gene to be modulated by  developmentally regulated
              bHLH transcription factors.  Therefore,  the elucidation of the molecular
              interactions between the neuronal  bHLH transcription factors and the GAP-43
              promoter region will lead  to a better understanding of mammalian neuronal
              differentiation and  the functional roles of bHLH proteins at orchestrating
              gene  expression at different stages of brain development.
