Title       : Control and Quantification in Modern Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1995   
File        : a9510135

Award Number: 9510135
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Principe lmafp@jhuvms.hcf.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An amazing proportion of Americans from all walks of life  believe in what
              scientists call "pseudo-science."  Very few  newspapers, for example, do not
              carry an astrology column.  Timing of significant events in certain Asian
              countries are  determined by astrologers.  Even a recent first lady  consulted
              an astrologer in order to find the most propitious  timing for state events.   
              While scorned  by many scientists, there is a long tradition  of interaction
              among the "pseudo-sciences" and the "real"  sciences.  Johannes Kepler and
              Tycho Brahe both practiced  astrology.  Robert Boyle and Isaac Newton both
              practiced  alchemy.  The research that Drs. Principe and Newman are 
              undertaking examines the relationship between what we now  call pseudo-science
              and the development of "true" science  during the scientific revolution.   In
              particular, they are  examining the influence of alchemical traditions as 
              practiced in America on the rise of modern chemistry.  They  are examining the
              laboratory notebooks of  George Starkey, a  graduate of Harvard,  who undertook
               experimental testing of  alchemical theories.  His emphasis on control and 
              quantification became a hallmark of modern chemistry.    This research is not
              aimed to undermine the standards of  contemporary science.  Rather, its aim is
              to show how  scientific method growing out of pseudosciences can lead to 
              legitimate scientific results if properly pursued.  One  might wish that
              current practitioners of astrology would  apply the same methods of control and
              quantification pursued  by Starkey and his colleagues.  In the long run, the
              true  efficacy of such belief in extra-terrestrial influences on  human lives
              could then be discerned.
