Title       : (ESH) Miocene Concentrations and 13C of Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Inferred from
               Stomatal Density and 13C of Fossil Leaves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9510078

Award Number: 9510078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191611             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Marshall jdm@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Rember  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9510078  Marshall    Stable carbon isotope ratios and stomatal characters of
              Miocene leaves will be compared to those of modern leaves from nearest living
              relatives (NLR) Herbarium specimens of the NLR's will be analyzed to calibrate
              isotopic composition and stomatal characters against the 30% increase in
              atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration and the 1.2% decrease in isotopic
              composition since the industrial revolution.  Using the calibrations, we will
              obtain from the fossil data ten to twenty independent, taxon-specific estimates
              of the isotopic composition and concentration of carbon dioxide in the Miocene
              atmosphere.  The fossil leaves are of subtropical and temperate trees deposited
              ca. 15 million years ago in anoxic lake sediments near clarkia, Idaho.  The
              dominant trees in the flora included species of  Quercus, Castanea,
              Pseudofagus, Metasequoia , and Taxodium.  These remarkably preserved fossils
              have previously yielded DNA, taxon-specific flavonoid profiles, and are
              sometimes still pigmented when first removed from the sediments.  They are, to
              our knowledge, the best preserved specimens of this age in the world. 
              Nonetheless to minimize the influence of diagenesis on isotopic composition all
              comparisons will rely on lignin extracted from the modern leaves and the
              fossils.  Stomatal density (# stomata per m2  of leaf surface) and stomatal
              size will be measured on replicate samples of all leaves; stomatal index
              (#stomata/(#stomata + epidermal cells)) will be measured where possible.  New
              collections of the nearest living relatives will also be made to quantify the
              effects of canopy position and altitude above sea level.  The middle Miocene
              was a time of rapidly falling temperatures and CO2 concentrations.  Published
              estimates of atmospheric composition rely on isotopic data from ocean
              sediments, which are uncertain because they are several steps removed from the
              atmosphere.  We propose an alternative means of reconstructing atmospheric
              composition based on land plants, which are better  coupled to the atmosphere. 
              Because individual genera can be analyzed separately, the work will provide an
              independent estimate of atmospheric composition from each genus.  If
              successful, this work may eventually lead to analyses of Miocene terrestrial
              photosynthesis, one of the major biogeochemical processes removing CO2   from
              the atmosphere, and may constrain our estimates of terrestrial ecosystem
              responses to the ongoing increase in atmospheric CO2.
