Title       : Onset and Nanoscopic Consequences of Atomic Motion Induced by Electronic
               Excitation of Wide-gap Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9510297

Award Number: 9510297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Williams williams@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9510297  Williams    The program combines femtosecond lasers with atomic force 
              microscopy (AFM) to study the energy conversion of light into  atomic
              displacements in bulk solids and surfaces.  Time and space  resolved detection
              of electronic excitation of insulator surfaces  by induced change in chemical
              interaction potentials between the  surface and the AFM tip will be
              investigated.  Synchronized short  laser pulses with the tip scan are expected
              to improve aspects of  nanomachining with features that introduce chemical
              specificity  into AFM.  In addition, high energy, six electron-volt photon 
              pulses of two hundred femtoseconds duration, are used to conduct  ultrafast
              spectroscopy and supporting studies on technologically  useful classes of
              materials that exhibit self-localization of  excitations in pure crystals. 
              Materials which have the  additional technological advantage of being the best
              new fast  scintillator crystals for high-energy electromagnetic  calorimeters
              and medical imaging will also be investigated.  %%%  This is a
              multidisciplinary proposal which spans a broad area of  research such as basic
              studies of the interaction of atoms with  light in bulk solids and surfaces,
              photochemistry,  micromachining, and medical imaging.  The program combines 
              femtosecond lasers with atomic force microscopy to study the  energy conversion
              of light into atomic discplaments in solids and  surfaces.  The program has a
              strong university-industry component  and provides opportunity for training
              students in the basic  sciences as well as applied research.  The core
              industrial  research collaboration is with AMP Incorporated.  ***
