Title       : Grammatical Logics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9510706

Award Number: 9510706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Oehrle oehrle@linc.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Moortgat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The general problem this research addresses is the nature of  multi-dimensional
              linguistic composition. Natural language  expressions display properties in a
              variety of dimensions: they  have properties linking them to the physical
              world; they are  syntactically categorized; they support pragmatic and semantic
               interpretation. The properties of basic expressions may be  assumed to be
              finitely stipulated or listed, as in a dictionary  or its mental counterpart.
              The properties of complex expressions  cannot be assumed to be encodable this
              way, but must be derivable  in a way that depends both on the correlative
              properties of their  component parts and on their mode of combination. This
              question  of linguistic composition arises with regard to each dimension; 
              moreover, it arises in a generalized form across dimensions,  since composition
              in one dimension may affect or depend on  composition in another. Although
              there are a variety of solutions  to this problem instantiated in existing
              grammatical  architectures, the question deserves to be studied more sys- 
              tematically, since the interrelation of properties of different  kinds forms
              the basis of the unbounded creative character of  natural language and its
              expressive power.       The investigation here views linguistic composition as
              a  problem of resource-sensitive grammatical inference in a system  of labeled
              deduction: the component parts of an utterance are  taken to be a structured
              set mf premises from which a coherent  global structure for the utterance is
              sought within a particular  system of deductive postulates. This point of view
              connects  directly with two recent trends in logic: the rise of interest in 
              substructural logics and the investigation of labeled deduction.  The research
              will exploit the results in these areas for  applications to the study of
              grammatical architecture and the  dynamic flow of grammatical information
              within and across  different dimensions in the course of composition.       The
              principal research goals are:  1) to gain insight into  the nature of
              multidimensional composition through the  construction and systematic study of
              appropriate models based on  logical principles; 2) to connect these insights
              to the analysis  of a broad range of linguistic phenomena; and S) to show that
              the  resulting framework offers a unifying perspective on current  grammatical
              theories.       The expected results of the research include a monograph 
              describing the range and power of the known landscape of  grammatical logics
              and a computer implementation of such a system  with robust empirical coverage
              of English.
