Title       : Dissertation Research: A Spatial Analysis of Classic Bonito Phase Chacoan Great
               House Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9510037

Award Number: 9510037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Gwinn Vivian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Vivian    Under the direction of Dr. R. Gwinn Vivian, Ms. Ruth Van Dyke  will
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will examine  site plans for 9
              Bonito-style prehistoric sites which are located  in New Mexico in the Chaco
              Canyon region. At seven of the sites,  extensive surface remains  and
              architectural ruins have already  been mapped and Ms. Van Dyke will digitize
              the site plans. This  will facilitate spatial analysis. At the remaining two
              sites Ms.  Van Dyke and assistants will use a laser transit system to  produce
              comparable data. With this information she shall search  for similarities and
              differences between sites and compare these  to central Chaco Canyon ruins.
              Within sites she will attempt to  determine social relations among occupants
              and learn whether a  hierarchical system existed. Factors such as room size, 
              arrangement and accessibility will provide a means to address  this question.  
               In the centuries immediately preceding contact with the Old  World, Southwest
              Native American societies developed complex  social systems and built sites
              with multi-story architecture  which accommodated hundreds of individuals. A
              center for such  development was Chaco Canyon in New Mexico. It is clear that a
               strong relationship existed between Chaco Canyon and over 100  outlying
              communities since a system of prehistoric roads connects  many of these sites.
              However archaeologists do not understand how  the Chaco system functioned. They
              do not know whether the Chaco  "center" is responsible for the establishment of
              the outlier or  whether essentially independent communities cooperated and that
               the periphery, in effect, created the core. It is also not known  whether
              these communities were essentially equalitarian or  hierarchial. The question
              is important because it will shed light  on the social processes which gave
              rise to this well known  society. Through architectural analysis Ms. Van Dyke
              can address  both of these issues.    This research is important for several
              reasons. It will  provide  data of interest to many archaeologists. It will
              shed new light  on the development of social complexity and will assist in the 
              training of a promising young scientist.
