Title       : The Location of Invention and Technical Change: Industrial Development in the
               U.S., 1870 - 1929
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1997   
File        : a9510974

Award Number: 9510974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth F. Sokoloff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Naomi R. Lamoreaux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to expand the knowledge of the  sources of
              technological change by examining patterns in the  location of invention in the
              U.S. manufacturing sector between  1870 and 1929, a period of integration of
              national product  markets as well as of radical change in technology and
              industrial  structure.  Location will be analyzed in two different senses.  
              The first is geographical.  Despite the frequent references to  cases such as
              machinery in nineteenth-century New England and  semi-conductors and computers
              in today's Silicon Valley, the  geographic clustering of inventive activity has
              received little  in the way of systematic investigation.  The core issues are: 
              whether such centers of invention have been common and persistent  and what
              conditions or behaviors gave rise to them if they were;  whether there were
              local externalities in invention, and if so,  whether they pertained only to a
              certain class of industries or a  certain stage in an industry's development;
              whether geographic  clustering in production has been systematically associated
              with  geographic clustering in invention; and whether firms located in 
              production clusters have been systematically associated with  geographic
              clustering in invention; and whether firms located in  production clusters have
              manifested higher rates of productivity  than those that were more isolated.   
              The second aspect of the locational question is organizational.   It is
              conventional to think of invention as an activity that  occurs within the
              bounds of firms, but at various times in  various industries firms have bought
              or licensed much of their  technology from outside suppliers, and inventors in
              turn have  chosen to extract their returns by selling off or licensing their 
              inventions.  A goal of this project is to measure the extent of  this market
              for technology and to explore how it widened and  deepened over time, how its
              mechanisms of exchange evolved, and  the nature of the institutions that
              mediated between inventors   and those interested in developing and
              commercializing new  technologies.  Another goal is to understand changes in
              the  extent to which inventive activity was located within the firms  that used
              the technology.  Finally, the interaction of the  organizational factors and
              geographical clustering of invention  will be analyzed.
