Title       : Connecting Satellite and Surface Measures of Spring's Onset
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9510342

Award Number: 9510342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Schwartz mds@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9510342  Schwartz, Mark D.  University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee 
              Title: Connecting Satellite and Surface Measures of Spring's Onset   
              Interactions between the atmosphere and biosphere are a key  component of the
              Earth's physical system.  Understanding the  interaction is a crucial part of
              efforts to improve global change  simulation models.  While atmospheric data
              generally are available  for most land areas, no such network exists to collect
              comparable  information about biosphere activity.  Recent satellite information
               can contribute to the development of global biosphere databases.   In order to
              realize this potential, these remotely sensed data must  be carefully
              calibrated with surface information.  This approach is  the most
              straightforward way of deducing the physical basis of, and  developing a
              historical context for, the satellite's observations.    This study will take
              advantage of a unique surface vegetation data  set to develop a physical
              interpretation of satellite data  measuring the first appearance of spring
              foliage, commonly called  the "green wave", across eastern North America.  The
              green wave is  particularly important because it is one of the crucial
              biospheric  variables necessary for accurate modeling of process such as water 
              balance and net primary productivity.  The project will first  develop
              empirical models to simulate surface green wave data  (needed to supplement
              actual data limitations).  Next, the  relationship between satellite
              information and surface data will be  determined for selected land cover types
              (biome).  Lastly, detailed  meteorological information from selected sites will
              produce a  preliminary physical model of the green wave.  These results will 
              permit the satellite information to broaden existing surface green  wave
              chronologies.  In turn these lay the foundation for a future  mid-latitude
              green wave model, which would assess the impact of  climate variability on this
              aspect of the biosphere.  Therefore,  this project will serve as  an example of
              how satellite  bioclimatology in concert with surface phenology can produce 
              physical interpretations of observed events, providing needed  information for
              atmosphere-biosphere simulation models and global  change monitoring.
