Title       : Neutron and Synchrotron Radiation Scattering Studies of Multilayered Structures
               Based on Europium Chalcogenides and other Magnetic Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9510434

Award Number: 9510434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomasz M. Giebultowicz tgiebult@physics.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                    9510434  Giebultowicz    The  objective of the proposed research is to use
              neutron diffraction,  neutron  reflectivity,  and  synchrotron  radiation 
              reflectivity  for  investigating   magnetic   and   structural   properties  
              of    novel  superlattices  composed of mangetic/non-magnetic semiconductors. 
              Most  research  on artificial magnetic heterostructures and multilayers  has 
              been  done  on metallic systems; experimental and theoretical  results  for 
              low  carrier  concentration  systems  have  only  recently  begun  emerging.  
              Studies  of  such  systems are of  fundamental  importance  because   the  
              interaction  mechanisms  underlying   their   magnetic  properties  differ 
              from those of metals.  Also, heterostructures  and  multilayers  composed  of
              insulating or semiconducting  compounds  are  interesting  in  that  many of
              these materials  are  antiferromagnets,  frequently having layered structures,
              thus offering opportunities  for  "engineering" the superlattices.  Systems to
              be studied will be  based  primarily  on  europium  and  manganese 
              chalcogenides,  with  samples  prepared  by molecular beam epitaxy at the
              Johannes Kepler University,  Linz, Austria.  Neutron scattering studies will be
              conducted primarily  at  the  National  Institute  of Science  and  Technology,
               and  X-ray  measurements   at   Brookhaven  National  Laboratory.   
              Complementary  measurements  of magnetic properties will be made at the
              Massachusetts  Institute of Technology.  %%%  The  objective  of the proposed
              research is to use neutron  scattering  and synchrotron X-radiation techniques
              to investigate the magnetic and  structural  properties of multilayer atomic
              "superlattices"  built  up  from  magnetic and non-magnetic semiconducting
              materials.  Studies  of  such  systems  are  of  fundamental importance 
              because  the  physical  mechanisms  by  which the atoms in one magnetic layer
              interact  (i.e.,  communicate)  with  those  in  another  magnetic  layer  
              through   an  intervening  non-magneti c  layer  are  poorly  understood  and 
              differ  significantly from the mechanisms which apply in the case of  metallic 
              multilayer  superlattices.  The materials to be investigated  will  be  based 
              primarily  on  magnetic europium and  manganese  selenides  and  tellurides and
              non-magnetic lead selenide and telluride.   This  is  a  multidisciplinary
              project, with samples being prepared at the Johannes  Kepler University, Linz,
              Austria, and experimental work carried out at  the  National  Institute  of 
              Standards  and  Technology  and  at  the  Brookhaven    National   Laboratory. 
                In   addition,   complementary  measurements  of  the  magnetic  properties 
              will  be  made   at   the  Massachusetts Institute of Technology.   ***
