Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Studies of Wave Propagation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9510492

Award Number: 9510492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17934              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl V. Hile   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9139,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9510492  Hile    This work is supported by a Research Planning Grant for Women
              Scientists   and Engineers Award.  The goal of the research is two-fold: (i) to
                understand which higher-order dispersive and nonlinear effects cause the  
              asymmetry apparent in certain one-dimensional solutions of Maxwell's  
              equations describing ultra-short optical soliton-like pulses, and to determine 
               if a corresponding extended nonlinear Schroedinger equation can be   developed
              to describe the asymmetric pulses  produced in pulse-  compression experiments;
              and (ii) to determine the physical parameters   responsible for the divergence
              or collapse of two-dimensional ultra-short   spatial solitons propagating in a
              planar waveguide.  The project will also   involve planning activities in
              collaboration with a senior mathematician   from industry to determine the
              feasibility of developing an innovative   technique for efficiently predicting
              high-frequency radar cross-section   statistics for realistic, complex targets.
                 Over the last decade, optical fiber communication systems have played a  
              vital role in revolutionizing the telecommunications industry.  Though this  
              technology has progressed very rapidly, advances continue to be made in   the
              design of these systems.  Areas of current research in the field, which   hold
              great interest and challenge for mathematicians, involve physical   phenomena
              and processes that exploit the nonlinear effects in optical   materials.  These
              physical phenomena and processes include optical   solitons, optical pulse
              compression, and optical switching.  This project will   involve goals and
              planning activities that include developing and analyzing   mathematical models
              of these nonlinear phenomena and processes in order   to improve the design of
              optical communications systems.    The National Science Foundation's mandate to
              ensure the vitality of the   Nation's scientific enterprise includes concern
              for the quality, composition,   distribution and effectiveness of the human
              resou rce base in science and   engineering.  Within this context, the
              Foundation is committed to enhancing   the current rate of participation of
              women in science and engineering   careers, in general, and as active
              participants in all of its programs.    Research Planning Grant awards are
              made: (1) to help increase the number   of new women investigators
              participating in NSF's research programs; and,   (2) to facilitate preliminary
              studies and other activities related to the   development of competitive
              research projects and proposals by women who   have not previously had
              independent Federal research funding.  Research   Planning Grants are one-time
              awards that may be used for preliminary work   to determine the feasibility of
              a proposed line of inquiry, and/or for other   activities that will facilitate
              proposal development.
