Title       : Chemical Sensors for CVD Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9510099

Award Number: 9510099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur B. Ellis ellis@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Kuech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9148,9178,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9510099       This effort is directed to the understanding and
              design of  novel photoluminescent chemical sensors based upon adsorption onto a
              compound semiconductor surface.  Previous work has established the feasibility
              of this approach.  Changes in the near-surface region of  the semiconductor due
              to reversible chemisorption form the basis of the sensor;  modulation of the
              depletion width of  the surface region of the semiconductor leads to changes in
              the photoluminescence intensity observed from these structures.  The thrust of
              this project is concerned with sensing materials and materials structures with
              high sensitivity and high detectivity.  The use of modern epitaxial  techniques
              such as metalorganic vapor-phase epitaxy (MOVPE) allows production of
              engineered materials structures tailored to enhance the response of the
              semiconductor to the specific adsorbed species.  New chemical approaches to
              sensing a wide variety of technologically important substrates, including
              silanes and group III and group V CVD precursors, are explored.  New sensing
              devices in which electron transport as well as photoluminescence is used as the
              sensor signal are developed and modeled.  Causes of long-term degradation of
              the sensor structures and means to inhibit such changes are also explored.   
              New approaches to sensor design and implementation are badly needed; in some
              cases, such as semiconductor processing, sensors may be the limiting factor in
              improving quality and advancing design implementation.  This effort applies
              semiconductor device technology to the production of small, inexpensive, robust
              sensors without mechanical components.  The specific systems under study are
              applicable to the production of compound semiconductors and solid-state
              devices.  The basic approach has a much broader applicability.  ***
