Title       : Dissertation Research: Experimental and Analytical Studies of East African
               Plio-Pleistocene Artifact Assemblages and their Bearing on the Earliest
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1995      
File        : a9510643

Award Number: 9510643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11450              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. K. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Jack Harris, Mr. Brian Ludwig will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will study stone tool assemblages from a series
              of East African sites which date to between 2.5 and 1.5 million years ago. He
              will examine materials from the Gona and Omo sites in Ethiopia, Foobi Fora in
              Kenya and Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania. Measurements will be recorded on 29
              variables based on strictly technological features found on flakes, angular
              fragments, cores and other reworked pieces. Mr. Ludwig is an experienced stone
              worker and he will also use replicative techniques to determine the processes
              by which these objects were produced. On this basis he will gain insight into
              the cognitive and manipulative abilities of the hominids who produced them and
              trace how these developed over time.   The period between 2.5 and 1.5 years ago
              marked a major advance in hominid capabilities. At 2.5 million the
              archaeological record begins with the first flaked stone tools. A million years
              later hominids were producing standardized forms. The goal of this research is
              to determine how this process developed over time. Previous archaeological
              studies of these materials have focussed on `tool types` and attempted to sort
              materials into named categories. However such an approach gives little insight
              into their makers' cognitive and manipulative abilities. Mr. Ludwig's work will
              help to alleviate this situation.  This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide information of interest to many archaeologists. It
              will shed new light on the development of human cognitive abilities and assist
              in the training of a promising young archaeologist.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
