Title       : Internationalization of Legal Practice: Human Rights, Trade, and Transformation
               of the State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1997     
File        : a9510925

Award Number: 9510925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65492              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryant G. Garth b-garth@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yves Dezalay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6589

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9510925  Garth  This project examines the connection between the
              internationalization of legal practice related to issues of trade and human
              rights, the transformation of the rule of law and role of the legal profession
              in newly developed and developing countries.  It investigates the connection
              between the legal professions and the prospects for law and democracy in
              different settings.  Its central proposition is that the role if law in
              regulating the economy and governing the state depends on the structural
              position of the legal profession in the economy and the state and the social
              capital of prestige, social connections, background, and formal and informal
              connections legal professionals can mobilize on their own behalf.  It focuses
              on three types of countries that vary according to the historical position of
              their legal professions.  It uses, principally, data from elite interviews that
              focus on the individuals and institutions that serve to import and export
              particular legal practices related to trade and human rights.   %%%%  This
              project examines the connection between the internationalization of legal
              practice related to issues of trade and human rights, the transformation of the
              rule of law and role of the legal profession in newly developed and developing
              countries.  It investigates the connection between the legal professions and
              the prospects for law and democracy in different settings.  Its central
              proposition is that the role if law in regulating the economy and governing the
              state depends on the structural position of the legal profession in the economy
              and the state and the social capital of prestige, social connections,
              background, and formal and informal connections legal professionals can
              mobilize on their own behalf.  It focuses on three types of countries that vary
              according to the historical position of their legal professions.  It uses,
              principally, data from elite interviews that focus on the individuals and
              institutions that serve to import and export particular legal p ractices
              related to trade and human rights.   ****
