Title       : Dissertation Research: Regional Settlement Patterns in Prehistoric Oruro,
               Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9510100

Award Number: 9510100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10254              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc P. Bermann bermarc+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, Mr. Timothy McAndrews will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research in the
              highland La Joya region in Bolivia. The objects of his project are threefold:
              to conduct an intensive survey of this area which is known to contain early
              Formative period mound sites; to collect surface materials which will allow the
              assessment of variability within each site; to excavate test units at selected
              sites to explore stratigraphy and surface/subsurface relationships. In
              fulfilling these objectives, the settlement pattern data thus collected will
              allow questions of settlement dynamics and sociopolitical and economic
              organization will be obtained. To accomplish these goals Mr. McAndrews will
              employ a 15% systematic random transect sampling strategy which will permit
              generalization to the broader area. At this altitude there is very little
              vegetation to obscure prehistoric remains, so survey can proceed rapidly.
              Systematic random samples of surfaces remains - mostly potsherds - will be
              taken at all sites which date from the Formative period.  Judgementally placed
              test pits will be excavated at selected sites to provide a relative chronology
              based on diagnostic artifacts from distinct occupational levels. A geographic
              information system will then be employed to visually display the data, to
              relate population distributions to ecological variables and to determine how
              this changes over time.  The Formative Period (2000 B.C. - 300 A.D.) in the
              south-central Andes is characterized by the first sedentary lifeway, the
              domestication of plants such as the potato, the earliest pottery and metal
              technologies and the emergence of complex social organization. It was during
              this period that the stage was set for the development of one of the most
              complex precolumbian civilizations in the New World which joined together
              regions as far separated as Bolivia and Equador into a single empire.
              Archaeologists wish to understand the processes which led to such complexity
              and Mr. McAndrews research should shed light on this.   This research is
              important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will increase understanding of the earliest stages in the
              development of civilization and will assist in the training of a promising
              young scientist.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
