Title       : Poly(alkylbithiazoles): A New Class of Variable-Band Gap Conjugated Polymer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9510274

Award Number: 9510274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301442             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. David Curtis mdcurtis@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9155,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9510274  Curtis  Highly conjugated polymers are promising materials for use  as
              electrodes in batteries or sensors, as the light-emitting  semiconductor in
              LEDs, and as anti-corrosion or anti-static  coatings.  This research opens the
              possibility of producing  new polymers with tunable properties.  %%%  Curtis'
              research group has recently synthesized a new class  of conjugated polymers,
              the poly(alkylbithiazole)s, PABTs.  These new polymers have alkyl side chains
              that render them  soluble in common organic solvents, and thin films may be 
              cast from these solutions.  These new polymers are  regioregular and show
              unprecedented polymorphism with  attendant polychromism.  Thermal of solvent
              annealing of  the films induces solid state phase transformations that are 
              characterized by large increases in the conjugated length  and decreases in the
              band gap.  This research seeks to  determine the structures of the polymorphic
              phases and to  determine how the molecular structure of the polymer side 
              chains influences the solid-state packing, phase-  transformation energetics,
              crystallinity, conductivity, and  photo- or electroluminescence efficiency. 
              Model oligomers  will be synthesized and their 3-dimensional structures 
              determined by X-ray diffraction.  These model studies will  aid the
              interpretation of X-ray and EXAFS data on the high  MW polymers.  The polymers
              and model oligomers will be doped  with a variety of oxidants and the
              structures and  spectroscopic properties (UV-VIS, ESR, magnetic 
              susceptibility, etc.) of the doped systems will be  determined and compared
              with the neutral precursors. This  systematic study of  structure-property
              relationships will  provide new data for optimizing polymer structure for 
              specific properties, e.g. high conductivity, high  electroluminescence
              efficiency, thermal- or photo-stability,  etc.  The PABTs have a basic nitrogen
              functional group in  the chain backbone that can be alkylated or used to form 
              metal complexes.  These reactions alter the potential along   the chain.  Such
              changes may be used to alter conductivity  or to act as exciton traps to
              increase luminescence  efficiency and alter the wavelength of the emitted
              light.  ***
