Title       : Dissertation Research: Settlement, Environment, and Political Economy in the
               Northeast Syrian Steppe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1995       
File        : a9510543

Award Number: 9510543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11340              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Hole Frank.Hole@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Frank Hole, Mr. Nicholas Kouchoukos will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct an archaeology survey in a
              roughly 2000 km square stretch of semi-arid steppe lying between the Bilikh and
              Khabur rivers in northeastern syria. This area lacks sufficient annual rainfall
              for predictable dry-farming but provides extensive grazing land for livestock.
              Preliminary archaeological survey during the summer of 1994 revealed extensive
              traces of ancient settlement at scales ranging from temporary camps to towns
              nearly 30ha in size. Analysis of pottery and other artifacts collected from the
              surfaces of these sites indicates that periods of settlement were episodic and
              often separated by more than a millennium. With National Science Foundation
              support, Mr. Kouchoukos will extend his survey. He will use satellite
              photographs to map geology and ground cover and on this basis devise a sampling
              design. He will collect information on current land use practices, land cover
              types and soil and water conditions. Once sites are discovered systematic
              collections of surface artifacts will be made and complete topographic mapping
              of sites will proceed simultaneously with surface collection. Ceramics and
              other materials will be analyzed. Site and environmental information will be
              plotted on satellite photographs and these data will permit the analysis of
              human use of this region over a long span of time.  The goal of Mr.Kouchoukos'
              research is to understand how both environmental and social factors affect
              human settlement patterns and land use. Although little is known about the
              survey region itself, a broader archaeological context has been established.
              Using this as a base, it is then possible to determine how under different
              forms of social organization and environmental conditions, groups utilize this
              marginal area and how these different uses are reflected on the ground.   This
              research is important for many reasons. It will provide data of interest to
              many archaeologists. It will increase understanding of human-environment
              interactions and will contribute to the training of a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
