Title       : The Synthesis of New Compounds Containing Metal Clusters Using Designed
               Superlattice Reactants to Control the Kinetics and Reaction Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1997   
File        : a9510562

Award Number: 9510562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343359             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Johnson davej@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9510562  Johnson    This proposal focuses upon the synthesis of new ternary 
              transition metal chalcogenides which contain discrete  clusters of transition
              metal atoms. The ternary molybdenum  chalcogenides and the alkali metal
              intercalates of the  fullerines are both examples of this class of compounds, 
              containing discrete but interacting cluster entities. Both  of these classes of
              materials have been found to have a host  of unusual properties ranging from
              catalytic activity to  superconductivity which have been rationalized as
              resulting  from the unique cluster structure found in these materials.  The
              goal is to prepare tungsten, niobium and tantalum  compounds which are
              isostructural analogs of the ternary  molybdenum chalcogenides. The preparation
              of isostructural  and isoelectronic compounds to the ternary molybdenum 
              compounds will permit the testing of these structure based  arguments and will
              hopefully extend the range of properties  found in this unique class of
              materials which is some sense  bridges the gap between discrete molecular
              compounds and  extended structures .  %%%  Chemical reactions involving solids
              at low temperatures are  very sluggish even though there is often a large
              driving  force for the reactions. Previous attempts to prepare new  ternary
              transition metal chalcogenides which contain  discrete clusters of transition
              metal atoms via reactions  between the elements have only produced mixtures of
              binary  compounds or other ternary structures. This is probably  because the
              desired compounds are thermodynamically unstable  with respect to the known
              compounds in these phase diagrams.  Consequently, the key to the success to
              their synthesis will  be avoiding the formation of stable binary compounds as 
              reaction intermediates. Towards this end, a kinetically  controlled route to
              solid-state compounds is developed based  upon the design of elemental
              superlattices as uniquely  tailorable reactants. This approach separates the
              two key  steps of a solid state reaction - interdi ffusion of the  reactants
              and nucleation of the products. Since product  formation is controlled by the
              lucleation barriers, one is  able to kinetically control the product formed.
              The  development of synthetic tools to nucleate desired  structures is a
              significant part of the proposed research.
