Title       : Decomposition of Gender Earnings Differentials in Korea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1997      
File        : a9510161

Award Number: 9510161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yana V. Rodgers yvrodg@mail.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With their tremendous economic growth, the Asian Tigers serve as  an excellent
              laboratory for examining the effects of rapid  industrialization on women's
              labor market status.  Beginning in  the 1970's, East Asia experienced rapidly
              rising real wages, with  Korean real wage growth outpacing its regional
              neighbors.   Understanding how  women's earnings in Korea performed relative 
              to men's will provide extremely useful lessons for other  developing countries
              seeking to follow the east Asian example.    The purpose of this planning grant
              research is to collect  additional data and provide a detailed assessment of
              earnings gap  determinants between men and women using two decomposition 
              procedures. The first, a level analysis, decomposes the earnings  gap in
              individual years into a portion explained by observable,  gender-specific skill
              differences, and a residual portion which  is commonly attributed to
              discrimination.  The second procedure  evaluates the contribution of changes
              over time in  gender-specific factors and in the overall wage structure to the 
              evolution of gender earnings gaps.  Using the latter technique to  examine the
              Korean experience will provide a more detailed  analysis of gender earnings gap
              determinants than earlier  developing country studies.    The planning Grant
              results will form an excellent basis for  preparing the subsequent NSF full
              research proposal. The future  proposal will examine the ability of Korea's
              labor policies to  generate reductions in gender earnings inequality. This
              research  will contribute valuable new evidence on whether the Asian  Tigers'
              labor reforms, designed to emulate the labor market  policies of industrialized
              countries, have actually helped female  workers to obtain higher relative
              earnings.  ***
