Title       : Research in Theoretical Nuclear Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1999      
File        : a9605140

Award Number: 9605140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $483369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Akif Baha Balantekin baha@nucth.physics.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal covers a broad range of topics. Future  projects include
              understanding physics opportunities  presented by recent and forthcoming solar
              neutrino  experiments, exploring the role of neutrinos in supernova  dynamics,
              investigating consequences of quantum dissipative  tunneling in nuclear
              reactions, exploring phase transitions  in nuclei with multi-fragmentation, as
              well as developing  new mathematical techniques to address the physics
              questions  arising in these studies.  Observed solar neutrino flux is 
              deficient relative to that predicted by the standard solar  model. Neutrino
              oscillations in the presence of matter and  magnetic fields were invoked to
              explain this deficiency.  We  will be studying a new aspect of the neutrino
              transport in  matter, behavior of neutrino oscillations in stochastic  media.  
                  There has been much progress in our understanding of  supernovae. Explosion
              models are improved and supernovae  were proposed as a site where heavy
              elements are created.  Neutrinos have a significant impact on these phenomena. 
              Dissipative tunneling is especially important for low-energy  fusion reactions.
               These reactions are not only of interest  to nuclear astrophysics, but they
              also provide new insights  into the reaction dynamics and nuclear structure. 
              Multi-  fragmentation is the statistical emission of fragments from  a nuclear
              system, which is undergoing expansion under the  influence of thermal pressure
              and nuclear binding. It is a  probe of dynamics of phase transitions.  The
              theoretical  research proposed will be done in intensive collaboration  with
              experimental groups in the U.S. and abroad.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
