Title       : US-Kenya Workshop: Global Analysis, Intepretation, and Modelling (GAIM),
               Mombasa, Kenya, March 3-13, 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9605171

Award Number: 9605171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dork L. Sahagian dork.sahagian@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
Program Ref : 1317,5991,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This award will support the participation of two American and four African
              scientists in a US-Kenya Workshop on Global Analysis, Interpretation, and
              Modelling (GAIM), to be held at Mombasa, Kenya, March 3-12, 1997.  The
              co-organizers are Dr. Dork Sahagian, Executive Director for the Global
              Analysis, Interpretation, and Modelling Task Force of the International
              Geosphere Biosphere Program (IGPP) with the International Council of Scientific
              Unions, and faculty member of the Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and
              Space at the University of New Hampshire; and Dr. Wandera Ogana, Dean of
              Sciences at the University of Nairobi in Kenya.  The workshop will include
              seven participants from the United States, and about twenty-five from South
              Africa and the rest of the Subsaharan Africa region.  Global and environmental
              changes confront all regions of the world, and are particularly challenging to
              developing regions which often contain both the cause and the effect of the
              environmental change.  Based on data collected on the complex global
              biogeochemical cycles of the earth's physical-climate systems, the GAIM Task
              Force will develop an integrated set of biogeochemical Earth System Models, to
              be used to predict future environmental changes and their regional and global
              impacts.   Many African researchers have been studying these issues, but little
              is known about the data they have collected. This workshop, with its focus on
              modelling and data analysis of the biogeochemical and ecological processes
              important in both global and African environmental change, will enable all
              participants to present their current research activities and interact with
              each other.  During the workshop the African participants will also be
              introduced to four research models relevant to African hydrology, climate, and
              ecosystems, and team modelling projects will be started.  During the following
              year participants will continue to work on these projects, in collaboration
              with their US colleagues, after which a follow-up workshop will be held to
              discuss their results.  This grant will support the participation of a
              prominent researcher and young investigator from the United States and four
              African researchers, three of whom are in the early to mid stages of their
              careers to participate in an international activity.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
