Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Laser and Plasma Deposition and Adhesion of
               Diamond and Diamondlike Films, Award in Indian and US Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9605181

Award Number: 9605181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82564              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagdish Narayan j_narayan@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jagannadham Kasichainula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9605181  Narayan  Description: This award is for the US-India Cooperative
              Research research  collaboration in materials science under the direction of
              Jagdish Narayan,  North Carolina State University, Raleigh and S.C. Agrawal,
              Indian  Institute of Technology, Kanpur.  The research entitled Laser and
              Plasma  Deposition and Adhesion of Diamond and Diamondlike Films will  Effect 
              and Specific Heat in Amorphous Alloys will determine the correlations  between
              the electrical and magnetic properties of metallic glasses.  While 
              considerable progress has been made in cataloging and explaining  electrical
              transport in paramagnetic glassy metals, the relative importance  of
              nonmagnetic processes and those associated with magnetism and  magnetic
              scattering processes in amorphous magnetic alloys has not been  completely
              established.  The U.S. group has been among the most active  studying electron
              transport and surface chemistry of nonmagnetic  amorphous alloys, and the
              Indian group has been a mahor factor in the  study of electron transport in
              magnetic glassy metals.  The expertise and  experimental capabilities of the
              two groups are highly complementary and  will combine well to accomplish the
              research objectives.     Scope:  In the United States the study of amorphous
              metals had, at one  time, been far more intensive than in India.  However,
              research priorities  in the United States have shifted to other areas. 
              Presently, no research  programs are funded solely for the study of amorphous
              metals.  The main  effort on this topic in India and perhaps worldwide will be
              performed by  Majumdar and his group at Kanpur.  U.S. collaboration will insure
              access  to major experimental research on amorphous metals, access to the 
              resulting technology at low cost, and the furthering of basic understanding  on
              transport in amorphous alloys.  This award is jointly funded by the  Division
              of International Programs and the Division of Chemical and   Transport Systems.
                     ***
