Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Phase Transitions in the Early Universe and
               Probes of Large Scale Distribution of Matter in the Universe, Award in US and
               Indian Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9605235

Award Number: 9605235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela V. Olinto olinto@oddjob.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Schramm  (Principal Investigator former)
              Edward W. Kolb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9605235  Schramm   Description:  This is a U.S.-India research collaboration
              entitled  Phase Transitions in the Early Universe and Probes of Large Scale 
              Distribution of Matter in the Universe.  This project will build on   a joint
              program in theoretical astrophysics developed in 1987 thru  1992 between the
              University of Chicago and the Tata Institute of  Fundamental Research (TIFR). 
              The current project is under the  direction of David Schramm, University of
              Chicago and Pijushpani  Bhattacharjee, Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA),
              Bangalore.     These nodel institutions will serve as organizational centers
              rather  than sole research venues for the participants.  The research will 
              build on the earlier effort which in the beginning had a natural  focus on the
              Supernovae, and later on the role of the quark-hadron  phase transition in the
              early universe and ultra high energy cosmic  ray interactions.  The current
              objectives will be to work out  cosmological and astrophysical implications of
              phase transitions in  the early universe, particularly the implications of
              topological  defects and electroweak baryogenesis; and to study the phase space
               distribution of dark matter in the Galaxy and the phenomenon of  gravitational
              lensing as a probe of large-scale distribution of dark  matter in the universe.
                 Scope:  This collaboration is an outgrowth of an earlier joint  program
              established among several of the most distinguished  astrophysicists in the UQ
              and India.  The output has been most  impressive including the pioneering work
              of the Indian PI.  This  award supports several short-term visits by Indian
              coPIs and  postdocs, as well as visits to India by the US group.  In addition
              to  the advances in fundamental knowledge expected from the research,  the
              exchange of ideas with Indian leaders of cosmology will be  valuable for the US
              scientific community.       ***
