Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) in Ecology & Evolutionary Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9605168

Award Number: 9605168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Klug klug@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9605168  Klug      The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site  at
              Michigan State University's W. K. Kellogg Biological  Station (KBS) offers
              undergraduate students an opportunity  to participate in interdisciplinary
              research activities in  the fields of ecology and evolutionary biology.
              Students are  exposed to concepts and techniques from a variety of  disciplines
              and levels of biological organization, from  genes to landscapes, including
              microbial ecology, animal  behavior, and plant ecological genetics. Individual
              research  projects are carried out under the supervision of faculty  advisors,
              and weekly seminars and other activities help  foster intellectual exchange
              among students, faculty, and  visiting scientists. The KBS offers a wide
              variety of  terrestrial and aquatic habitats, both natural and managed,  for
              observational and experimental research, as well as  superb laboratory
              facilities; active year-long programs  bring numerous graduate students,
              postdoctoral associates,  and senior researchers to the Station regularly, who
              can be  expected to interact with and help mentor undergraduates.      
              Students participate in their own REU Noon Seminar  series as well as other
              seminars and discussion groups at  KBS, which exposes them to other areas of
              research. Each  student develops and conducts an independent research  project
              during the summer sessions, involving all stages of  the scientific process:
              identification and refinement of a  scientific question or hypothesis;
              experimental design and  sampling techniques; field and laboratory work; data 
              analysis and presentation. Students present their research  to the KBS
              community at a REU Symposium, and are encouraged  to synthesize their results
              for publication in collaboration  with their faculty advisors.
