Title       : Heavy-Ion Reactions and Nuclear Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9605207

Award Number: 9605207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Winston Roberts                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1120000            (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Alex Brown brown@nscl.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott E. Pratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wolfgang W. Bauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pawel D. Danielewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir Zelevinsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   We propose to develop new theoretical models for the  prediction of nuclear
              structure properties.  These models  will be applied to exotic nuclei at the
              extreme limits of  stability, which are studied at the National Superconducting
               Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) and other radioactive beam  laboratories.  They
              will also be applied to the properties  of nuclei at high excitation energy,
              where the unsolved  problems of many-body quantum chaos become important. 
              These  models are needed for the prediction of astrophysically  important
              nuclear reaction rates, as well as for the  interpretation of electroweak
              interactions in nuclei.  We  also propose to develop models for nuclear
              collisions at  energies between the nuclear binding energy and the highest 
              energies experimentally available.  These collisions are of  extreme interest,
              because they hold the promise to reveal  the existence of phase transitions of
              nuclear and quark  matter.  This is relevant to understanding the history of 
              the early universe as well as the interior of stars.  Our  work is in direct
              support of experiments at the NSCL and the  Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. 
              Our work directly relates  to two of the highest three priorities identified by
              the  nuclear physics long-range plan.  Aspects of our work are  computationally
              intensive and will make use of state-of-the-  art facilities.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                            
