Title       : Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biology at the University of North Carolina
               at Chapel Hill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9605149

Award Number: 9605149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard M. Fried refried@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Marzluff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9125,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will continue its Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates site.  Academically successful students will be
              chosen from a national applicant pool to participate in research projects of
              UNC faculty.  Faculty will be investigators using molecular-biological
              approaches, but research will not be limited to a single field.  Emphasis will
              be placed on recruiting students from schools with limited research
              opportunities, students without prior independent research experience, and
              students from groups historically underrespresented in the sciences.  The
              primary focus of the training program will be encouraging and facilitating
              pursuit of research careers and, secondarily, assisting students with interests
              in other science-based careers to appreciate the nature of research.  Other
              goals include introducing students to a diversity of biological research areas
              and technology, teaching the process of independent  research and conducting
              controlled experiments, fostering self-confidence and team-working ability,
              promoting development of skills in observation, recording, and interpreting
              data, providing opportunities for oral and written communication of research
              findings, and providing career guidance and information about scientific
              professions in academia, government, and industry.  Program activities will
              include (1) 10 weeks of independent research during the summer, (2) weekly
              meetings with invited speakers from academic, government, and private research
              institutions, (3) field trips to major research pharmaceutical companies, the
              National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, the Environmental
              Protection Agency, and the UNC Institute of Marine Sciences, (4) a
              graduate-student roundtable to discuss the nature of postgraduate training and
              (5) a symposium in which all participants will present oral  reports of their
              work.  The University will defray part of the cost of sending up to 10 program
              participants a year to scientific meetings.  Program effectiveness will be
              assessed from exit surveys and long-term tracking; the Office of Educational
              Development will provide consultation in design of evaluation tools.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
