Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Segmental Orientation and Strain Induced
               Crystallization in Regular Bimodal Poly (tetramethylene oxide) (PTMO)
               Elastomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9605191

Award Number: 9605191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Mark james.mark@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Beaucage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. James
              E. Mark and Dr. Gregory Beaucage of the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Cincinnati and Dr. M.A. Sharaf, Department of Chemistry, Cairo
              University at Beni-Suef, Egypt.  The main objective of this research is to  
              study factors that influence the important mechanical properties of elastomers.
               These scientists plan to use functionally capped poly(tetramethylene oxide)
              (PTMO) oligomers to prepare regular bimodal networks of a mixture of very short
              chains with relatively long chains, through controlled end linking reactions.
              In such networks, regularity is ensured by having each junction connected to a
              constant number of both long and short chains.  Improvements in the ultimate
              properties are due to innate intramolecular effects pertaining to the limited
              extensibility of short chains.  In addition, these particular networks are
              susceptible to strain-induced crystallization with remarkable consequent
              improvements in ultimate properties from crystalline reinforcement.  The
              networks so prepared will be employed to better understand the relevant
              molecular aspects of rubber elasticity, segmental orientation, and
              strain-induced crystallization.  Scope:  The combination of data from
              scattering techniques with those of the modulus, birefringence, and infrared
              dichroism measurements provides a powerful tool for analysis of the interaction
              between the size-scale of the complex structural features of both short and the
              long chains and physical properties in general.  Also, mechanical properties
              and scattering techniques will be employed to investigate both the
              thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of strain-induced crystallization in these
              well-characterized elastomeric networks.  These studies can result in obtaining
              elastomers with optimized structure-property relationships through molecular
              design.  The collaboration brings a unique combination of interest and research
              experiences of the participants from the two countries for improving and
              optimizing the properties of the economically-important elastomeric materials. 
              This award will also enable a junior US scientist, and a US graduate student,
              to gain international research experience.  The project is well in line with
              the objectives of the Division of International Programs.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
