Title       : US-Pakistan Workshop & Symposium on Genomics and Computational Biology, Lahore,
               Pakistan, October 16-19, 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9605034

Award Number: 9605034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheikh Riazuddin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5943,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a US delegation to attend a
              U.S.-Pakistan Workshop and Symposium on Genomics and Computational Biology to
              be held in Lahore, Pakistan in October 16-19, 1997.  Leading the US delegation
              are Dr. Lawrence Grossman, of Johns Hopkins University, and Dr. Richard
              Roberts, Director of Research, New England Biolabs in Beverly, MA.  The
              Pakistani co-organizer is Dr. Sheikh Riazuddin, Director, the National Center
              of Excellence in Molecular Biology at the University of Punjab in Lahore.  The
              symposium will be attended by scientists and graduate students from Pakistan
              and several neighboring countries.  The topics will include: DNA sequencing
              efforts in C. elegans, rice, humans, H. influenza and other organisms. 
              Separate sessions will be devoted to the computational analysis of sequence
              data, the identification of genes associated with major genetic diseases and/or
              traits of economic importance.  The US participants will conduct separate
              visits to research facilities in this field in universities and government
              laboratories in the Lahore area.  The workshop  is intended  to identify
              research areas of common interest and to assess the potential for joint
              research in this emerging field.     Scope: The research projects that would be
              recommended in this meeting could be done successfully in Pakistan, since they
              do not entail expensive facilities, other than computational equipment, and
              since Pakistan could provide basic population biology information, and can also
              make intellectual contributions in the processing and interpretation of the
              data.  The topic of the workshop is important to the United States and to
              Pakistan.  The American P.I. and co-PI are eminent scientists.  The Pakistani
              scientist was responsible for establishing the National Centre of Excellence in
              Molecular Biology.  His activities have  strengthened collaborative research
              between American and Pakistani scientists, especially in areas where the
              Pakistani side complements the capability in the United States, such as by
              providing new enzymes, or by doing extensive data collections or experiments. 
              Research in computational biology should be one additional area for beneficial
              complementary cooperation.  It is planned to include at least one woman
              scientist, and one junior scientist within the US delegation.  This proposal
              meets INT objective of increasing U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that
              benefit both sides, and in enhancing junior scientists' international
              experience.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
