Title       : Summer Undergraduate Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9605128

Award Number: 9605128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30143              (Estimated)
Investigator: Truell W. Hyde Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor University
	      Post Office Box 97088
	      Waco, TX  767987088    /   -

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  Hyde  This grant continues a summer undergraduate research program  already
              in place for the past three summers at Baylor and  currently supported by both
              Baylor and the National Science  Foundation.  Seven students will be selected
              from open  applications with the program advertised at universities  around the
              nation, smaller undergraduate institutions with  little or no research
              capability and historically minority  institutions.  Complete application
              information,  departmental research information as well as the ability to 
              apply to the program "on line" is provided through a World  Wide Web page
              located at  www.baylor.edu/homepages/emp/Truell_Hyde/Scripts/URC.html.  (This
              allows students whose institutions do not customarily  encourage such summer
              programs to have access to the  required information and offers them the
              opportunity to  apply).  The recruiting process (particularly for  minorities,
              women and students from small schools) is aided  by the PI's contact with
              faculty at such small schools in  the five state area as well as by the PI's
              graduate students  (two of which are women) who provide personal contact with 
              the NSF Fellows starting with the recruitment process and  continuing through
              the summer program.  Taken together,  these allow identification and
              recruitment of outstanding  students from small, private institutions in the
              Texas,  Oklahoma, Louisiana, Arkansas and Kansas areas.  Predominantly Black
              and Hispanic campuses will be  specifically targeted as well predominantly
              minority junior  colleges.  Every college and university in the state of  Texas
              will be included in the recruitment effort since many  of them have large
              Hispanic enrollments.  The NSF Fellows  will interact during the summer with
              Baylor undergraduate  and graduate students from both the United States and 
              several foreign countries.  They will participate in twice  weekly seminars,
              social activities, an end of the summer  Undergraduate Research Symposium and
              specially designed  classes in various phy sics research fields of interest. 
              As  in the past, it is expected that at least some of the summer  research done
              by the NSF Fellows will result in peer-  reviewed publications.  Trips to
              nearby industries and  research facilities, social activities as well as joint 
              research seminars will be offered (as in the past) in  cooperation with the NSF
              Chemistry REU Summer Program to be  held in the same building.  This provides
              for a much larger  number of NSF Summer Fellows with which to interact during 
              the ten week period and aids in producing a "large" program  feel.  ***
