Title       : U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research: Ellipsometric Studies of Alkane Selective
               Adsorption
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a9605227

Award Number: 9605227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32904              (Estimated)
Investigator: Haskell Taub taubh@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5974,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9605227  Tau`    This Americas Program award  will support a  collaborative
              research project between Dr. Haskell  Taub, University of Missouri, Columbia,
              and Dr. Ulrich  Volkmann, Pontificia Universidad Catolica, Santiago,  Chile, to
              conduct ellipsometric studies of alkane  selective adsorption. A fundamental
              problem in polymer  science concerns how a polymer species adsorbs from a 
              multicomponent fluid mixture onto a solid surface.  The  goal of the research
              is to use model systems to  elucidate the mechanism of selective adsorption in 
              which one molecular species preferentially adsorbs from  solution at a solid
              interface. Recent scanning  tunneling microscopy (STM) studies have revealed 
              crystalline structures for long-alkane monolayers on  the graphite basal-plane
              surface as well as qualitative  features of the molecular packing.  They have
              not,  however, answered basic structural and dynamical  questions related to
              their selective adsorption.  The  proposed research will address these
              questions. A  microscopic understanding of this selective adsorption  could
              impact greatly on technologies related to  coatings, adhesion, and lubrication.
                 The collaboration between the two researchers will  provide a unique
              opportunity to apply complementary  experimental techniques to the studies. 
              Professor  Volkmann is one of the world's experts in the use of  ellipsometric
              techniques to investigate the structure  and growth of physisorbed films, while
              Dr. Taub brings  his expertise in the application of neutron scattering 
              techniques.  ***
