Title       : Japan JSPS Program: First Feeding and Nutrient Uptake by Paralavae of the Squid
               Todarodes Pacificus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9605828

Award Number: 9605828
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Bower   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521700   Marine Resources                        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bower  9605828    This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  John Bower at
              Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan.  Dr.  Bower will work with Dr. Yasunori
              Sakurai, Associate  Professor in the Faculty of Fisheries, on a research
              project  entitled, "First Feeding and Nutrient Uptake by Para-Larvae  of the
              Squid Todarodes Pacificus."    The larvae of many soft-bodied marine
              invertebrates are  apparently capable of absorbing dissolved organic materials 
              directly from sea water to meet nutritional requirements.  The proposed
              research will build upon existing research and  examine if hatchling squids of
              the family Ommastrephidae can  transport amino acids from sea water. 
              Hatchlings reared  through artificial fertilization will be exposed to radio- 
              labeled substrates in a sea water medium to determine if an  increase in
              radioactivity in the sea water medium occurs.  To investigate the relationship
              between influx and net flux,  the uptake of amino acids will be measured by
              determining  the rate of removal of amino acids from solution by high- 
              performance liquid chromatography.  In addition, the  stomachs of field-caught
              hatchlings will be examined to  identify early prey.  At present, rearing
              ommastrephidae  young in captivity is the only way to study early stages of 
              life.  A further goal of this research is to develop a  method to rear
              ommastrephidae hatchlings for extended  laboratory studies.  If successful
              rearing methods are  developed, specific aspects of the early life stages of
              this  commercially important family can then be ascertained.  ***
