Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Multiclass Queueing Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9605190

Award Number: 9605190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12412              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiangang "Jim" Dai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5942,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9605190  Dai    This award supports a three-year collaborative research  project
              between Dr. Jian-Gang Dai, Georgia Institute of  Technology, and Dr. Bok Sik
              Yoon, Hong-ik University, Seoul,  Korea, on multiclass queuing networks.  The
              focus of this  research is the investigation of several aspects of  multiclass
              queuing networks that arise from complex  manufacturing systems.  The scope of
              the research will range  from the development of fundamental mathematical
              models of  such networks to the computer implementation of the models  for some
              real world applications.  Specific research topics  to be investigated include
              the scheduling of wafer  fabrication lines, stability of multiclass queuing
              networks,  Brownian models under non-first in first out (non-FIFO)  policies,
              heavy traffic convergence, and computation of  stationary distribution for a
              reflected Brownian motion  (RBM).    Brownian models have been proved to be
              effective for the  approximate analysis of queuing networks. It has also been 
              proved that FIFO which most Brownian models to date employ  may be unstable in
              some networks.  Brownian models also play  important roles in both performance
              analysis and optimal or  near optimal scheduling of queuing networks. The
              Brownian  approximation will be used to analyze most queuing network  models
              that are interesting in practice.  The computer  implementation of the Brownian
              approximation scheme will be  used to predict the performances of a variety of
              queuing  networks, including those that arise in manufacturing and 
              telecommunication systems.  This research effort will  combine the expertise of
              the U. S. and Korean research  scientists in a project of mutual interest and
              benefit.  Korean participation is supported by the Korea Science and 
              Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  This project adds an  international
              cooperative dimension to research supported by  NSF Grant No. DMI-9457336.  ***
