Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Geopolymer Concrete
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1997      
File        : a9605010

Award Number: 9605010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24380              (Estimated)
Investigator: R I. Malek RQM@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,5944,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. R.I.A.
              Malek of the Materials Research Laboratory at Pennsylvania State University and
              two Egyptian researchers: Dr. Hanaa Y. Ghorab of the Chemistry Department at
              Helwan University, and Dr. Assem K. Abdelalim of the Faculty of Engineering at
              Zagazig University.  The main objective of this research is to expand upon the
              existing knowledge contributing to the fundamental understanding of the
              reaction process, microstructural evolution and microstructure-property
              relationships of the alkali-activated aluminosilicate binders (geopolymers). 
              Another objective is to explore the detailed structural characteristics of the
              ancient mortars, where Egypt provides a unique archeological site, and to
              provide sound scientific knowledge using angle spinning NMR.  Scope:  This
              research project will be useful in promoting the scientific knowledge on
              geopolymeric binders, and in providing new knowledge on old geopolymers.  It
              involves US and Egyptian scientists with complementary expertise in material
              sciences, chemistry and engineering, as well as  complementary field and
              laboratory facilities at the three participating universities.  The project
              will also involve a US graduate student who will have access to an
              international experience that should help in his/her career.  This proposal
              meets INT objective of increasing U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that
              benefit both sides, and in enhancing junior scientists' international
              experience.  This award includes partial funding by the Division of Civil and
              Mechanical Systems.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
