Title       : Undergraduate Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9605062

Award Number: 9605062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Davis davis@pepperdine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee B. Kats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Vandergon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. M. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9125,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9605062  Davis    Pepperdine University will enhance an active program of
              undergraduate research in biology by teaching students the common elements of
              the research process and increasing their appreciation for the diversity of
              biological subdisciplines.  Each summer, the program will begin with a
              research-orientation workshop during which students will be introduced to the
              uses and limitations of specific research tools and techniques and immersed in
              the research process (literature review, hypothesis formulation, and hypothesis
              testing).  Students then will pursue individual research projects under the
              direction of faculty in either plant physiological ecology, conservation
              biology of amphibians, ecophysiology of marine intertidal animals, or molecular
              biology of hemoglobin genes.  All research projects will be designed to give
              students insight into how scientists formulate research questions, design
              experiments, collect and analyze data, and communicate their results to the
              scientific community.  Students will play a pivotal role in the selection and
              design of their research projects and will participate in a retreat to formally
              present, evaluate, and refine their summer research proposals.  Over the course
              of the summer, visiting scientists will hold special research seminars in each
              research area and spend time with students, giving students an opportunity to
              discuss their own data with other scientists.  Each research group will hold
              weekly literature seminars to discuss current journal articles pertaining to
              their research interests.  The program will conclude each summer with a student
              research seminar in early August.  Follow-through will include student
              participation in local and regional research conferences.  In cases of special
              merit, students will be encouraged to present their research at national
              meetings and to prepare their results for publication in a scientific journal.
