Title       : Physics Research Experiences for Undergraduates at RochesterP-REU-R
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9605065

Award Number: 9605065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terrence W. Rettig                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla S. Auchincloss PSA@PAS.ROCHESTER.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arie Bodek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  Auchincloss  This grant will support the involvement of undergraduates 
              nationwide to undertake supervised research projects in the  Department of
              Physics and Astronomy at the University of  Rochester.  Aiming at 50%
              participation by women and  underrepresented minorities, the project
              complements other  college-wide and departmental initiatives to more fully 
              engage these groups in science.  Students may choose from the following
              experimental and  theoretical research areas: particle and nuclear physics; 
              quantum optics and laser; astrophysics and infrared  astronomy; condensed
              matter physics; and biological and  medical physics.  On-site housing is
              available for all  participants.  The central research experience takes place 
              during a 2.5-month, full-time work period each summer,  during which time each
              student works closely with a faculty  advisor to select a research project and
              pursue it.  Mini-  courses in machining and electronics are also offered, and a
               series of participant sessions is organized, including  seminars on varied
              subjects -- such as applying to graduate  school, ethical and policy issues in
              physics, and current  topics in physics research -- and tours of research 
              facilities (the Laboratory for Laser Energetics, the Mees  Observatory, the
              Laser Cooling and Trapping Lab, and  others).  The summer program ends with a
              mini-symposium at  which students present their research results.  Students 
              provide written reports of their research experience, and  faculty advisors are
              requested to comment on student work.  Each student is strongly encouraged to
              continue part-time  work with his or her research advisory during the academic 
              year, with the aim of completing a scientific publication.  ***
