Title       : Collaborative Research: An Integrated NMR Microcoil Detector for
               Microspectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9605829

Award Number: 9605829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Webb awebb@uribrl.brl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful
              methods available for determining the three dimensional structure of complex
              chemical and biochemical molecules. The information derived from NMR has proved
              essential in determining primary, secondary and tertiary structures of
              proteins, as well as investigating enzymatic mechanisms and the binding sites
              of therapeutic drugs. It is also used extensively in chemical synthesis, being
              able to determine structure and stereochemistry of the products of intermediate
              steps in a multi-stage synthesis. In spite of its great potential, the
              application of NMR techniques to the nanoliter volume samples often encountered
              in microanalytical chemical analysis and studies of biological systems at the
              cellular has been limited. However, recent advances in the design of solenoidal
              NMR microcoils by our group (Olson et al., 1995) provide a basis for applying
              NMR methods in a variety of new applications. For example, we have begun to
              investigate chemical and biological applications in NMR studies of the mass
              limited quantities encountered in combinatorial chemistry (Gordon et al.,
              1994), in biological product analysis from single cells entrapped in gel
              microdroplets (Weaver et al., 1991)  and as detectors in nanoliter volume
              microelectrophoresis systems (Fan and Harrison, 1994; Jacobson et al., 1994).  
               The major drawback in such new applications of NMR techniques is the intrinsic
              low sensitivity of NMR compared with other analytical methods. The problem is
              often compounded  by the very small mass of sample which is available. This can
              be due to:   (i) the quantity which can either be synthesized or isolated,  
              (ii) limited solubility in suitable solvents, or  (iii) degradation over the
              long data acquisition times.     Almost every commercial high resolution NMR
              spectrometer uses a small RF coil which fits around a 5 mm fused-silica tube
              giving an effective cell volume of approximately 0.5 ml. It has long been
              recognized that this radiofre quency (RF) coil can be reduced in size, but the
              advantages of this reduction have not been demonstrated until recently. Our
              group showed that by using solenoidal coils of diameters 300-400 microns,
              improvements in S/N of over 100 can be achieved over a conventional 5 mm coil
              for mass limited samples. Further improvements in the SNR can potentially be
              made by reducing the coil diameter yet further. However, fabrication of
              solenoids at such dimensions becomes highly problematic. Switching to
              lithographic fabrication techniques, however, opens up a new window of
              opportunity. The major problems are efficient interfacing of the microscopic
              planar coils with the rest of the spectrometer.    In our recent NSF SGER grant
              (NSF BIR 93-19399, "Monolithic Gallium Arsenide Receiver for NMR Microscopy")
              we successfully designed and constructed a hybrid version of the proposed RF
              coil/preamplifer system at 300 MHz for 1H-NMR application studies at 7.05 T.
              The results obtained using this hybrid prototype in NMR spectroscopy
              experiments agree well with theoretical predictions and demonstrate the
              feasibility of using active monolithic detectors for improved detection
              performance in cellular studies. In addition, we fabricated a 500 MHz
              integrated circuit NMR detector for further improvement in SNR. This design can
              be easily extended to higher frequencies. The goal of the proposed research is
              to build a family of monolithic GaAs NMR receivers that will interface with
              current (250, 300, 500 MHz) and emerging (750, 1000 MHz) NMR microscopy
              systems. We will extend this design to a broadband multistage amplifier
              configuration that will operate over a frequency range 100 - 500 MHz,
              eliminating the need for tuning and matching of the receive coil. We propose to
              design these detector systems using an integrative approach that involves
              circuit simulation (Microwave Design Software, HP), device fabrication (Center
              for Compound Semiconductor Microelectronics, UIUC), electrical characterization
              (S-parameter and noise measur ements), and NMR evaluation (at each of the
              target magnetic field strengths).
