Title       : The Ohio State University Summer Physics Institute/REU
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1999     
File        : a9605064

Award Number: 9605064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terrence W. Rettig                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154350             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Palmer palmer@ohstpy  (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Saam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  Palmer  This grant will provide initial support for the Ohio State 
              University Summer Physics Institute which is designed to  encourage students to
              pursue research careers in physics by  introducing them to and engaging in the
              research activities  of a major research university physics department.  The 
              Institute will support ten-week research internships,  including a stipend,
              subsistence, and travel.  Students will  live and work together, guided by
              their faculty mentors, in  research groups that include graduate students and
              post-  doctoral students.  They will engage in tutorials on  computational
              physics, instrumentation and electronics, and  shop safety and procedures, but
              the main focus will be the  project that the faculty mentor and the students
              jointly  develop.  Group activities are designed to promote  interactions and
              relationships among the intern students and  the Department's student and
              faculty researchers.  Each  intern will write a project prospectus early in the
              summer  and a final oral and written report at the end of the  summer.  The
              program is intended for students who are  physics majors in undergraduate
              programs and who are between  their sophomore and junior year or their junior
              and senior  year, but all undergraduates are encouraged to apply.  The  focus
              will be regional, but the Institute will be advertised  nationally.  A
              particular attempt will be made to involve  women and minorities.  The many
              small undergraduate  institutions in the region will be strongly encouraged to 
              send applicants.  The recruitment and selection committee  includes a
              representative of a local small college, as well  as faculty members nationally
              prominent in areas of outreach  to minorities and women.  ***
