Title       : Collaborative Cross-Disciplinary Research in Ecology, Endocrinology and
               Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1999     
File        : a9605157

Award Number: 9605157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Kunz kunz@bio.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9125,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9605157  Kunz    Five research teams, each consisting of two undergraduate
              students and two faculty members, will work on different collaborative
              cross-disciplinary projects.  The purpose of Boston University's REU program is
              to promote collaborative research between students and research biologists
              whose disciplines have traditionally had a single focus.  Each research project
              is directed by an organismal biologist (ecologist or ethologist) and an
              endocrinologist or molecular biologist, and each project topic stems from field
              research.  Such topics include the role of estrogen in visual processing in
              fish, the impact of ground-water contaminants on reproduction of freshwater
              organisms, the role of leptin in the feeding ecology of a temperate-zone
              hibernating bat, genetic diversity and ecosystem function along gradients in a
              tropical rain forest, and social-insect foraging ecology and the sensory
              biology of taste.  Faculty mentors have been carefully selected on the basis of
              their scholarly contributions and their experience and interest in working with
              undergraduates.  Students will be selected from Boston University and from
              four-year colleges and universities in the eastern United States that provide
              limited research opportunities.  Recruitment efforts will target minority,
              women, and physically-challenged students.  Selection will be based on
              scholarly aptitude, research potential, and previous experience of the
              applicants.  An ethics component will include weekly seminars and workshops on
              values and integrity in science, reporting and investigating allegations of
              misconduct, ethical treatment of animals, record-keeping and data management,
              and responsible authorship.
