Title       : Summer Program for Undergraduate Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1997  
File        : a9605110

Award Number: 9605110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen A. Mannella   (Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Conly L. Rieder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marlene Belfort  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lorraine Flaherty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is a request for renewal of a summer REU  program held at the
              Wadsworth Center of the New York State  Department of Health in Albany, NY. 
              The research scientists  who supervise the students in this program are also
              faculty  in the Department of Biomedical Sciences of the State  University of
              New York at Albany's School of Public Health.  The Wadsworth Center is a unique
              scientific institution with  state-of-the-art facilities, in which basic
              research  programs have developed alongside mission-oriented public  health
              laboratories.  The research interests of the  participating BMS faculty cover a
              broad range, with emphasis  in molecular genetics, cell biology and structural
              biology.  Ten undergraduate students interested in research careers  are
              recruited from institutions with limited research  opportunities for
              undergraduates, including small colleges  in the Northwest and historically
              black colleges in the  south.  Another 4-6 students participate in the program
              with  stipend support from the Wadsworth Center.  Laboratory  projects in basic
              biological research topics are chosen that  are interesting, likely to yeild
              results within the time-  frame of the program, and allow for some degree of
              student  development and independence.  Weekly group meetings are  used to
              discuss science- and career-related issues  (including the proper conduct of
              science) and to monitor  student progress.  The students give short oral 
              presentations of their work in a symposium in the last week  of the program,
              and also submit written reports before they  leave, to stress the importance of
              communication skills  within science.
