Title       : Japan STA Program: Non-Invasive Measurement of the Dynamic Nature of Human Brain
               Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9605183

Award Number: 9605183
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom O. Holroyd   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510404   Sensry Physiology & Perc                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Holroyd  9605183    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency
               of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Tom Holroyd  at the Behavior
              Control Laboratory (BCL), National Institute  of Bioscience and
              Human-Technology, Tsukuba, Japan.  Dr.  Holroyd will work with Dr. Tsunehiro
              Takeda, director of the  BCL, on a research project entitled, "Non-invasive 
              Measurement of the Dynamic Nature of Human Brain Functions."    The proposed
              research will investigate the way that  different brain areas interact during
              perceptual and  behavioral tasks by measuring the magnetic field of the  brain.
               The techniques used are completely non-invasive: the  tissues of the head are
              transparent to magnetic fields,  allowing relatively accurate mapping of the
              magnetic field  produced by electrical activity in the brain, with  millisecond
              time resolution.  The research focuses on the  reorganization of brain
              processes, and is motivated by  theoretical work on pattern formation and
              change in complex  systems.  Changes in a subject's perceptions or behavioral 
              patterns will be experimentally induced, and observations  will be made of
              corresponding reorganization of the magnetic  field.  By combining these
              observations with spatial  information from control conditions, researchers
              will be  able to determine the dynamics of different brain areas  during the
              perceptual or behavioral reorganization.  Reproducible dynamic relations among
              interacting brain areas  will provide insight into how the brain organizes and 
              reorganizes itself during typical cognitive functions.  ***
