Title       : Undergraduate Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9605118

Award Number: 9605118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harrington Wells harrington-wells@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Buchheim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Estelle Levetin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen E. Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9605118  Wells          The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)  Site
              at the University of Tulsa seeks to train students in  the philosophy,
              mechanics, and execution of scientific  research. Site activities enhance an
              already strong academic-  year program in undergraduate research participation
              by  increasing the summer opportunities for students, many from  regional
              colleges in Oklahoma and beyond. The goals of the  program are to provide
              research opportunities in ecology,  physiology, and evolutionary biology for
              students at  regional schools which lack a research focus, enhance 
              opportunities for participation in scientific research for  members of
              under-represented groups, and strengthen the  summer research opportunities for
              University of Tulsa  students. The overall program formally involves a research
               workshop, independent research projects, weekly group  meetings, invited
              speakers, and a research colloquium. The  research workshop introduces students
              to the philosophy and  mechanics of doing science, emphasizes the development
              of  skills in data a nalysis, and provides an interactive  framework for
              students to design individual projects.  Projects focus on areas of active
              research by faculty  mentors, including foraging ecology, microbial ecology, 
              animal reproduction, and algal physiology and evolution.          The current
              Site program builds upon successful  activities initiated under previous awards
              as well as a long-  standing commitment to undergraduate education and research
               opportunities by the institution. An impressive record of  publications
              coauthored by undergraduate researchers and of  presentations at regional and
              national conferences attests  to the commitment and mentoring skills of the
              faculty.
