Title       : Microscale Reflectance Spectrometry of Biological Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9605833

Award Number: 9605833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87468              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Y. Wong pwong@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ioannis N. Miaoulis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              When biological thin-film thicknesses or feature dimensions are less  than or
              equal to the order of  magnitude as the wavelengths of solar radiation, several
              optical  effects are present. Nature has  developed these complex biological
              thin-film structures to take  advantage of these microscale  radiation
              phenomena in order to control the reflectance and absorption  of solar
              radiation. There  is a need for improved understanding in this field in order
              to  determine the multiple functions of  these structures. Moreover, as global
              changes affect the solar spectrum  reaching earth, the  effectiveness of the
              thin-film functions will be altered which in turn  may affect the ecology. 
              Additionally, there are lessons to be learned from biological thin-film 
              structures which may  prove to be important in sub-micron microelectronics,
              optical coatings,  and solar absorbers.    We propose to develop a numerical
              and experimental tool, the Microscale  Reflectance Spectrometer, which can be
              used for these investigations.  Specifically, the proposed technology will
              allow the radiative  properties of biological thin-film structures to be
              measured and also  compared against numerical simulations. The phenomenological
              modeling  of light/film interaction will be improved for other biological 
              instruments as well as for the microelectronics industry. We expect  research
              that will stem from the use of this instrument to play a  critical role in the
              understanding of the functions of the biological  thin-film structures.
