Title       : Pragmatic Issues in Semantics-Based Transaction Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9314376

Award Number: 9314376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krithi Ramamritham krithi@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9146,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9314376  Ramamritham    Although powerful, the transaction model and correctness
              criterion  adopted in traditional database systems is found lacking in 
              functionality and performance when used for applications that  involve
              reactive, long-level and collaborative activities.  It has  been recognized
              that by utilizing the semantics of complex objects,  transaction models, and
              correctness requirements during management  and processing of such activities
              it is possible to achieve better  performance and functionality.  This leads to
              the notion of  semantics-based transaction processing.    Our prior work with
              the ACTA framework has helped us understand and  analyze the basic concepts
              underlying extended transactions and  relaxed correctness criteria.  Building
              upon this foundation we  plan to investigate the pragmatic considerations
              related to  semantics based transaction processing:    The lack of comparative
              performance evaluation of extended  transaction models correctness criteria
              prompts us to conduct and  empirical evaluation of their performance.    The
              need to provide programming language support for designing  extended
              transaction models and for expressing a desired  correctness criterion
              motivates us to develop flexible language  primitives that allow a designer to
              express different transaction  models and correctness criteria.    Even where
              extensions to the traditional approach are required, it  may still be feasible
              to use some of the standard transaction  concepts and implementation mechanisms
              to develop the underlying  system support.  So we plan to investigate
              synthesis-base  implementation approaches that can benefit from established 
              mechanisms and concepts.    The need for extended transactions and relaxed
              correctness criteria  emerges from the demands of applications, such as
              CAD/CAM, software  development environments, object-oriented databases, and 
              distributed operating systems.  By focusing on the practical issues  in
              providing transaction support for such application work pr oposed  here will
              produce results that will those information-intensive  application areas.
