Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of Bipolar Phospholipids for Use as Organizing
               Media in Spectrofluorometric Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1995   
File        : a9314935

Award Number: 9314935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred M. Hawkridge                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon L. Neal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9184,9197,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9314935  Neal  This three-year continuing grant in the Analytical and Surface 
              Chemistry Program to Professor Sharon Neal at the University of  California at
              Riverside supports an investigation of the synthesis and  characterization of
              unique bipolar lipids.  These phospholipids will be  incorporated into
              monolayer vesicles as specific analytical reagents  designed to sequester
              nonelectrolyte solutes in a controlled  environment, for subsequent
              characterization by fluorescence  spectroscopy.  The vesicles constructed from
              these bipolar lipids will  be studied using steady state, lifetime, and
              polarization luminescence  spectroscopy, as well as classical and dynamic light
              scattering.  With  these techniques, the location of the solute within the
              vesicle will be  elucidated.  By varying the nature of the bipolar lipid used
              to make  the vesicles, the effect of pocket size and vesicle capacity will be 
              determined.  The long term goal of this research is the development of 
              analytical methodology that is sufficiently selective to accomplish the 
              analysis of complex, biologically relevant samples through selective 
              complexation within vesicles using multiparametric, microenvironment- 
              sensitive spectroscopy.  %%%  This research aims to design new lipid molecules
              that will enable a  particular analyte to be trapped for subsequent analysis. 
              These  bipolar lipids consist of two polar ends, and a nonpolar interior.  
              These molecules spontaneously assemble into spherical assemblies,  called
              vesicles.  The chemical characteristics of the lipids are  tailored to enclose
              specific molecules within the vesicle.  This will  provide a highly selective
              analysis method for compounds of biological  or environmental significance. 
              One difficulty in trying to identify  and quantify chemical compounds in many
              real systems is that the  responses obtained from the instrument are
              susceptible to interferences  from numerous interfering compounds.  The
              research undertaken by  Professor Neal shows real promise for solving t his
              fundamental analysis  problem.  ***
