Title       : Novel Techniques for the Solution and Solid Phase Synthesis of Peptide Segments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1995   
File        : a9314038

Award Number: 9314038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Carpino cjhorton@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the development of generally  applicable, reliable
              and rapid procedures for the chemical  synthesis of longer peptides and small
              proteins (range of  incorporated amino acids 75-100 or higher). Parallel
              studies of  the segment condensations and stepwise approaches will be 
              undertaken with a view to eventual elaboration of the latter  technique to
              allow the quick synthesis of products of high  purity without the need for
              elaborate purification. Promising  new coupling techniques based on FMOC amino
              acid fluorides and  1-hydroxy-7-azobenzotriazole (HOAt) will be emphasized.
              Because  of neighboring group effects, the latter offers the opportunity  of
              coupling both urethane-protected amino acids and peptide  segments wthout
              racemization. Stable FMOC-protected amino acid  fluoride derivatives will be
              made for histidine and arginine.  When the full range of acid fluorides is
              available, model  syntheses of 29-, 41- and 76-amino acid peptides will be 
              examined as tests of the new methodolgy. The same models will  be assembled via
              HOAt-derived reagents using both stepwise and  segment coupling protocols.  %%%
               With this award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting  the research of
              Dr. Louis A. Carpino of the Department of  Chemistry at the University of
              Massachusetts Amherst. Professor  Carpino will focus his work on the
              development of generally  applicable, reliable and rapid procedures for the
              chemical  synthesis of longer peptides and small proteins. Parallel  studies of
              the segment condensation and stepwise approaches  will be undertaken with the
              view to eventual elaboration of the  latter technique to allow the rapid
              synthesis of products of  high purity without the need for tedious
              purification. Quick,  reliable methods for the chemical synthesis of higher
              peptides  are needed in connection with the increasing use of such  substances
              in the fields of medicinal chemistry, drug discovery  and material science.
