Title       : Plasma Oscillations in an Inhomogeneous Electron Gas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1994  
File        : a9314899

Award Number: 9314899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth G. Gwinn bgwinn@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9314899  Gwinn  The dynamical response of quasi-3D electron gases will be probed
               using linear and nonlinear techniques.  These types of electron  gases are of
              fundamental interest since they exhibit metallic  behavior (rs~2.5) but at much
              reduced plasma energies (~4 meV)  compared to typical metals.  The materials
              are molecular beam  epitaxially grown AlxGa1-xAs superlattice structures which
              are  specially designed to yield a 3D electron gas with widths which are  less
              than several Fermi wavelengths (hence quasi-3D).  The  electronic ground state
              of the electron gas will be probed using  low temperature capacitive profiling
              and Shubnikov-de-Haas  oscillations.  The linear studies, using standard
              Fourier transform  spectroscopic techniques, will expand the understanding of
              the  interplay between the excitation of the electron gas and the  spatial
              variation of its ground state density.  Proposed density  variations include
              internal gradients, as in the bi-metallic gas,  near surface perturbations, and
              lateral modulations induced by  optical illumination through a grating.  The
              nonlinear studies will  be carried out using an intense tunable far infrared
              free-electron  laser source.  The experiment will measure the harmonic emission
               generated by the quasi-3D electron gas for frequencies above as  well as below
              the plasma frequency.  Modeling of this emission will  yield information about
              nonlinear dynamic screening in an  inhomogeneous electron gas.  %%%  Layered
              semiconductors can be grown by molecular beam epitaxy to  provide electronic
              systems which are models for a three dimensional  gas of free electrons. 
              Because of its finite lateral dimension  such a structure is referred to as a
              quasi-free dimensional  electron gas.  Proper growth control can establish an
              inhomogeneous  distribution of electrons.  Study of the response of such 
              inhomogeneous quasi-3D electronic distributions to low level and  high
              intensity radiation is proposed.  The angular frequency of the  radiation is
              comparable to t he fundamental electronic response  frequency of the electron
              gas (plasma frequency).  The expected  measurements will likely lead to an
              improved understanding of the  dynamic surface response of free electron
              materials, and be  important for the development of tunable electronic
              materials that  take advantage of the high degree of control over the electron 
              density that can be achieved within these semiconductor structures.  ***
