Title       : U.S.-Russian Cooperation: Clearinghouse for Developing the Infrastructure of
               Science and Technology in the Former Soviet Union
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1994     
File        : a9314448

Award Number: 9314448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111436             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra M. Burns SBURNS@GWUVM.GWUVM.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9314448  Burns    The U.S. scientific community has convened numerous meetings
              to examine the crisis facing  the scientific community in the former Soviet
              Union  FSU  during this crucial period of  transition to a market economy.  One
              recommendation has been to designate the American  Association for the
              Advancement of Science  AAAS  as an appropriate organization to house  an
              international clearinghouse for information and support programs to help
              strengthen the  infrastructure for science and technology in the FSU.  This
              grant will enable the AAAS plans  to establish such a Clearinghouse to link
              professional societies, research activities, private  foundations, government
              agencies, and foreign assistance agencies supporting FSU scientists  and
              engineers.  The project will make a significant contribution to the development
              of a  sound infrastructure for science and technology in the FSU. 
              Specifically, AAAS proposes,  over the course of three years, to coordinate
              information flow with electronic  communications to facilitate widespread,
              open, and rapid communication, based on these  premises: (a) it will include
              activities of FSU universities and government offices in addition  to the FSU's
              various Academies of Sciences; (b) it will be multidisciplinary, encompassing 
              the biological, chemical, physical, and social sciences, and engineering; (c)
              it will aim to  integrate the FSU scientific community into the world
              community; (d) its function will  gradually be transferred to FSU colleagues. 
              The Clearinghouse will have six program  elements: (1) developing and
              disseminating resource base information; (2) allowing FSU  scientists and
              researchers to participate in international meetings and workshops; (3) 
              conducting an assessment of FSU libraries; (4) providing fellowships for FSU
              scientists at  U.S. scientific societies; (5) building a database on FSU
              science; and (6) continuing to assess  the needs of the FSU scientific and
              technical community.  ##
