Title       : The Effects of Animal-Sediment Interaction on Geochemical Processes Near the
               Sediment-Water Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9314132

Award Number: 9314132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Aller raller@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9314132  ALLER    The activities of marine bottom-dwelling animals dramatically
              alter  material transport and reaction distributions in surface sediments  over
              much of the modern seafloor. It is the purpose of this  research to continue to
              quantitatively examine and conceptualize  the effect of these activities on the
              rates of diagenetic  reactions, sediment-water solute exchange, and storage of
              organic  or mineral phases in sedimentary deposits.  A variety of field and 
              laboratory observations demonstrate that particle reworking and  irrigation
              activities of benthic fauna promote the remineralization  of organic matter. 
              Of the many simultaneous factors involved, two  may be particularly important:
              (1) repetitive oscillation of redox  conditions in the bioturbated zone, and
              (2) low metabolite build-  up. Both factors likely decrease eventual storage of
              organic  matter, or specific groups of organic compounds, in marine  sediments.
               Experimental diffusion cells which mimic redox and  diffusive transport
              conditions in the bioturbated zone will be used  to further investigate these
              processes and test conceptual models  of remineralization in surface sediments.
               Macrobenthic  bioturbation also enhances the importance of secndary oxidants 
              sucha s MN O2 and controls relative rates of coupled redox  reactions in
              surface sediments. These cycles couple strongly with  other elements, such as a
              variety of trace metals.  Detailed  experimental measures of Mn oxidation and
              reduction rates will be  used simultaneously with measures of particle
              reworking, net  fluxes, and solute profiles to develop a model of Mn cycling
              and  associated redox balances in bioturbated deposits.  The potential 
              semipermeability of biogenic structures to components of the  dissolved organic
              carbon pool (DOC) has major implications for  models of sedimentary DOC
              distributions, microbial activity, and  net sediment-water fluxes.  Diffusion
              cell measurements will be  performed to examine possible DOC fractionation
              across tube and  b urrow walls.  The long term goals of this research are a 
              quantitative description (model) of the types of transport and  reaction
              balances during early diagenesis and the exploration of  the corresponding
              geochemical and ecological implications.
