Title       : Nonlinear Power System Behavior Using Normal Forms: Extension of Linear System
               Analysis Via Higher Order Correction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1995      
File        : a9314453

Award Number: 9314453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139998             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. A. Fouad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9314453  Fouad       Today's heavily loaded and stressed power transmission 
              networks exhibit very complex dynamic system behavior, when  subjected to small
              or large disturbances.  Several aspects of  this complex behavior are alarming
              to the power system analyst,  since they are likely to reflect structural
              weakness in the power  network.  When subjected to small disturbances, the main
              concern  is the power system conditions which lead to the phenomenon known  as
              the interarea mode of oscillation.  When subjected to a large  disturbance, a
              stressed and heavily loaded interconnected power  network may experience a
              system split involving generators far  away from the location of the
              disturbance.        Analysis of the fundamental modes of oscillation play a 
              crucial role in power system dynamic performance.  Controls are  tuned to
              mitigate lightly damped modes.  The analysis is usually  done using a
              linearized system model.  If fundamental modes  interact due to nonlinearities,
              then it becomes important to  understand the nature of these interactions and
              to incorporate  them in the analysis and design procedure.         The
              proposers intend to study the dynamic power system  behavior under stressed
              (e.g., heavy load) operating conditions,  using normal forms of vector fields. 
              The approach to be used is  to obtain nonlinear corrections to the linear
              behavior through  normal form analysis, i.e., through incorporating higher
              order  (polynomial) terms.  The objective is to obtain a more precise 
              understanding of the local and "almost global" behavior of a  system via
              polynomial approximation, invariant manifolds (stable,  unstable and center
              manifolds), unfolding via bifurcation  parameters, sensitivity analysis and
              incorporation of random  perturbations.  This approach, which is a standard
              approach in  the theory of dynamical systems, has not been used for the 
              analysis of large electrical power networks, and we propose a  systematic study
              of normal form analysis for these systems to  assess the us e of information
              from higher order nonlinear  analysis for power systems operation.     ***
