Title       : U.S.-Japan Photoconversion/Photosynthesis Seminar: Environmental Stress and
               Photosynthesis-Physiological and Molecular Approaches/March 1994/Kona, HI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9314882

Award Number: 9314882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Boyer boyer@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5921,
Abstract    :
               WPC<               2           B         J     Z                 Courier  #| x 
                            ._  x   6 X      @   `7   X @                                   
              HP LaserJet 4                        HPLAS4.PRS     x            @             
              \      X @              2           6     V   >     Z                 Courier  
                  ? x x x ,      ._  x   6 X      @   `7   X @                               
                  HP LaserJet 4                        HPLAS4.PRS     x            @         
                  \      X @              2           *     F   Z         :              #| x
                          This award supports the participation of 13 U.S. scientists in a
              U.S. Japan Photoconversion/Photosynthesis Seminar on Environmental Stress and
              Photosynthesis:  Physiological and Molecular Approaches.  The seminar, which
              will be held June 13 18, 1994 in Kona, Hawaai, is being co organized by
              Professor John Boyer, College of Marine Studies, University of Delaware, and
              Dr. Kuni Ishihara, Professor of Crop Science, Tokyo University of Agriculture
              and Technology, Japan.  The seminar will bring together leading researchers in
              the field of photosynthetic CO2 fixation, and will treat mechanisms of CO2
              acquisition, photosynthesis in high and low temperatures, irradiances, nutrient
              and water levels, and the partitioning of carbon compounds to various plant
              parts.  The effects of elevated CO2 on long term photosynthesis and
              photosynthetic enzymes will be treated, with empahsis on likely aterations in
              agricultural and natural plant communities.  The goal of the seminar is to
              integrate new advances in photosynthesis spanning molecular to global issues
              with an emphasis on extending molcular approahces to environmental and
              agricultural problems.  Of great importance is the identification of gene
              products of known function that respond to the environment and that could have
              significant effects on photosynthetic activity and agriculture under altered
              environmental conditions.  This knowledge may enable tools of molecular biology
              to be used to manipula te the responsiveness of plants to changing climates. 
              This is the third in a series of binational meetings on this topic.  The first
              was a U.S. Australia meeting in 1986 to discuss the effects of photoinhibition
              on photosynthesis.  The second was a U.S. Japan seminar in 1988 to discuss the
              understanding of environmental effects on plants, including the effects of
              photosynthesis.  The present seminar is a logical extension of these two
              meetings and it is hoped that the U.S. and Japanese scientists will identify
              emerging ageas to which new techniques and investigations can be applied with
              emphasis on increased ability to manipulate the adaption of plants to altered
              climates.
