Title       : Towards Computer-Aided Catalyst Design: Five Effective Core Potential Studies of
               C-H Activation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1996     
File        : a9314732

Award Number: 9314732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Cundari tcundari@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports the  theoretical work of Dr. Thomas R. Cundari of the Chemistry
              Department, Memphis State  University, on CH activation.  Cundari will carry
              out five computational projects on the factors  affecting the first step in
              catalytic methane conversion.  Three of the projects involve methane 
              activation by multiply-bonded Ti, Zr, and Hf complexes.  The effect of pi-bond
              energy and  polarity on the CH activation barrier will be explored, as well the
              effect of changing from amide  to imide ligands.  Other projects will examine
              metal-methyl complexes of lanthanides, Sc, and  Zr.  Oxidative addition and
              sigma-bond metathesis mechanisms for some Ir, Re, and W  compounds will be
              modeled.  The fifth project involves analysis of methane activation by 
              electrophilic Pt(II) and Hg(II) complexes.  In all cases, the computational
              results will be  compared to experimental findings.  The main goals of the
              study are to develop reliable methods  for describing d- and f-block chemistry
              and to assess how CH activation is affected by the  complex interaction of the
              metal, activating ligands, and ancillary ligands.    A number of catalysts are
              available for the conversion of methane, which is abundant, to other  organic
              products such as methanol, which is a transportable liquid fuel.  For any
              conversion  reaction, a carbon-hydrogen (CH) bond in methane has to be broken,
              or activated, and then  other steps in the reaction can take place. 
              Experimental data on a number of catalysts for  reactions involving methane are
              known, but a common framework for understanding the role of  the catalyst,
              which consists of a metal and accompanying groups, has not been developed.  By 
              carrying out computational studies on the electronic structure of the catalysts
              during these  reactions, Cundari will identify important factors in the
              reaction and develop a broader view of  the reaction mechanism.  The research
              will aid in the development of more activ e and selective  methane or alkane
              catalysts.
