Title       : Analyzing Real-Time Properties of Concurrent Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1995    
File        : a9314258

Award Number: 9314258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ugo A. Buy buy@eecs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Sloan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  The creation of error-free software of any sort is a notoriously  difficult
              activity.  For real-time software systems, which must interact with  the world
              in a timely fashion, the difficulties are even greater.  Since these  systems
              are often used in safety-critical  applications, it is especially  important
              that they be correct.  The objective of this project is to create  tools for
              the automated verification of various correctness properties of  real-time
              programs.  The goal is to guarantee rather than to test these properties  
              probabilistically.  Therefore, the development of formal models and analysis 
              techniques is a major part  of this research. This project defines  techniques
              for controlling the state space explosion problem in  reachability-based
              real-time analysis.  Several techniques of this kind have  been defined for
              (untimed) concurrency analysis.  These techniques have yielded  excellent
              experimental results, for instance, in the case of Petri-net-based  deadlock
              detection in Ada programs.  This project extends existing  techniques for
              concurrency analysis to real-time analysis and defines new  techniques for
              reducing state space size for real-time programs. The   product is a set of
              software tools for the verification of real-time programs  These tools would
              answer timing and other queries about programs written in a  high level 
              language, using the program source code and information about the  timing
              properties of the underlying hardware.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
