Title       : Toward Robust Spoken-Language Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1998  
File        : a9314959

Award Number: 9314959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $829886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. Cole   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Fanty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Novick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Etienne Bernard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hynek Hermansky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,1509,6845,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9314959  Cole       This is the first year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA
               Human Language Technology  initiative involving cooperation  between the
              Oregon Graduate Institute and the International  Computer Science Institute. 
              The proposed project  considers  research on: a) signal representation
              methodologies that would  combat environmental noise and non-linearities which
              detract from  automatic speech recognition,  b)  speaker variability which is a
               source of uncertainty also in recognition, and is to be tackled  from a
              probabilistic point of view from collected (telephone)  speech corpus,  and, c)
              dialogue enhancement methodologies and  strategies, including recovery, in
              order to increase the  probability of correct recognition. Each of these three
              areas  comprise major deterrents to robust recognition that will be 
              investigated.  The overall objective of the project is to  consider integrated
              approaches to spoken-language system  robustness.                              
                                     January 5, 1994    Abstract      IRI-9314946  $ 259,339 
              - 12 mos.  Flanagan, James L.; Levinson, Steve E.; Lin,  Qiguang and Davis,
              Donald  Rutgers University      Computational Models for Speech Generation  
              __________         This is the first year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA
              Human Language Technology   for cooperation between researchers at Rutgers
              University s Center for Computer Aids for Industrial  Productivity (CAIP), AT&T
              Bell Laboratories and General Dynamics Electric Boat Division.  The  research
              to be conducted concerns the generation of speech signals in terms of (a) an
              articulatory  description of the vocal system, and (b) a fluid dynamic solution
              to the generation, propagation, and  radiation of audible sound produced by the
              acoustic system.  This includes the computation of the  speech signal from
              first principles, using the Navier-Stokes description of fluid flow, already 
              demonstrated feasible.  Anticipated results include a potentially significant
              improvement in the  quality  of synthesized speech and fundamentally new and
              more robust designs of speech recognizers  stemming from a better understanding
              of the speech phenomena and how it can be made more  immune to interference. 
              Also it is expected that this research influence improvements in the coding  of
              speech at lower bit rates.                                                    
              January 5, 1994    Abstract      IRI-9314967  $185,250 - 12 mos.  Price, P. J.,
              E. E. Shriberg, H. Clark, and S. Shattuck-Hufnagel  SRI International     
              Modeling Disfluencies in Spontaneous Speech   __________         This is the
              first year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA Human Language Technology  
              initiative involving cooperation between researchers at SRI International,
              Stanford University and the  Massachusetts Institute of Technology.   The
              proposed project  considers research on the hypothesis  that disfluencies in
              spontaneous speech - pauses, repeated words, repairs, filled pauses, word 
              fragments,  and elongated segments - are far from random and that knowledge
              about their regularity  would shed light on aspects of human cognition  and
              provide principled methods for dealing with  them in spontaneous speech
              processing.  Several relevant disciplines are involved in this effort such as 
              human-computer interaction, linguistics, psycho-linguistics,  computational
              linguistics, prosody, and  speech technology.  The multi-disciplinary approach
              includes investigating the forms and distribution  of disfluencies across many
              corpora, conducting perceptual experiments to assess the saliency of  specific
              cues in the signal, and developing and evaluating new methods for automatic
              processing of  speech.        Abstract      IRI-9314955  $123,610 - 12 mos. 
              Pustejovsky, J. and B. Boguraev  Brandeis University      A Core Lexical
              Engine: The Contextual Determination of Word Sense   __________         This is
              the first year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA Human Language Technology 
               initiative involving cooperation between r esearchers at Brandeis University
              and at Apple Computer.   The research involves the building of a generative
              lexical engine at the core which aids in the  determination of word sense
              following lexical properties considered composable in a  given phrasal 
              context.  The project instantiates a lexical semantic segment of a substantial
              fragment of English by  constructing such core lexical engine with the
              following components: a semantic typing system,  relational structures for all
              categories, and generative mechanisms enabling  extension and  identification
              of word sense in context.  The project is complementary to other initiatives to
              develop  linguistic infrastructure resources on a large scale, such as COMLEX
              and WordNet.  The project  develops mechanisms that carry out the specialized
              lexical inferences that result, through composition  of lexical types, in word
              sense determination.        Abstract      IRI-9314969  $224,660 - 12 mos. 
              Sleator, D. and J. Lafferty   Carnegie Mellon University      Grammatical
              Trigrams: A New Approach to Statistical Language Modeling   __________        
              This is the first year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA Human Language
              Technology   initiative involving cooperation between researchers from Carnegie
              Mellon University and  International Business Machines.  This project intends
              takes advantage of the simplicity of the  classical statistical trigram model
              of language while augmenting it with the syntactic and semantic  aspects which
              constrain the use of the new grammatical trigram model to advantage over the
              purely  stochastic model.  The concepts of  probabilistic link grammars are
              used in this research,  incorporating trigrams into a unified framework for
              modeling long-distance grammatical dependencies  in computationally efficient
              ways.   The methods proposed are expected to have greater predictive  power
              over current methods from the point of view of entropy measurements,  and to
              integrate finite-  state automata models and new statistical estimation a
              lgorithms with modern powerful machines  resulting in improved speech
              recognition, translation, and understanding systems.        Abstract     
              IRI-9314961  $274,761 - 12 mos.  Thomason, R. H., and J. R. Hobbs  University
              of Pittsburgh      Integrated Techniques for Generation and Interpretation  
              __________         This is the first year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA
              Human Language Technology   initiative involving cooperation between the
              University of Pittsburgh and the Stanford Research  Institute.  This project
              involves research on integrating the intentional and informational perspectives
               in architectures for interpretation and generation of interactive discourse. 
              Particular problems  investigated include the recognition by the listener of
              the speaker s plan, a formalization of the notion  of  conversational record, 
              discourse structure from a computational point of view, and analysis of 
              implicatures involving quantity and similar phenomena involving interactions
              between the processes of  generation and interpretation.  Bases for the
              research are the use of abductive inference in finite-state  approximation
              methods and in knowledge-based systems, accommodation processes in interactive 
              discourse, generation of coherent text, use of defeasible reasoning in plan
              recognition, and utterance  planning to achieve communicative goals.           
              Abstract      IRI-9314992  $250,000 - 12 mos.  Young, S. R. and J. G. Carbonell
               Carnegie Mellon University      Multitext Fusion, Tracking and Trend Detection
                __________         This is the first year of a continuing award in the
              NSF/ARPA Human Language Technology   initiative involving cooperation between
              Carnegie Mellon University and the SRA Corporation.  This  project involves the
              investigation of methodologies for the extraction of information from text and
              its  summarization in structured data records for subsequent
