Title       : Synthesis, Reactivity and Catalysis of Novel Metallacarboranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9314037

Award Number: 9314037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $673000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Frederick Hawthorne mfh@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program provides
              continued support for research on carboranes and metallocarboranes by Dr. M.
              Frederick Hawthorne of the Chemistry Department, University of California at
              Los Angeles.  Diverse structural atomic arrangements such as "carboracycles"
              and "carborods" will be linked into large "supramolecular" structures.  By
              controlling the size and shape of these clusters, cages of many different
              sizes, shapes, and electronic properties which can be used for capturing small
              ions and molecules will be constructed.   Some of the most challenging target
              molecules will have "holes" of the appropriate size to contain three transition
              metal ions.  In addition, the reactivity and acidity of carboranes of
              lanthanide metals will be investigated.  The binding capabilities of
              electrophilic mercuracarborand hosts will be studied in a variety of new
              compounds in order to obtain selective anion carriers.   Supramolecular
              structures with specific chirality and binding power will be prepared.    Large
              new molecules of regular geometry which contain boron, carbon, and metal atoms
              will be synthesized.  The structures are sufficiently large that they can
              "capture" other atoms or small molecules.  Because these structures are
              attractive to negatively charged ions and because the size, shape, and strength
              of  the traps can be controlled, they have great potential as "ion channels"
              which can transport ions in living systems.  They also could be effective as
              analytical probes or as acid catalysts.  This basic reseach is relevant to
              molecular recognition, homogeneous catalysis, chemic al sensor fabrication and
              biomolecule modification.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          #                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  #          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             !         !     
                 !              F                                                            
              #         #     (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                        
                      "             h         1                           =        Margaret
              A. Cavanaugh Margaret A. Cavanaugh                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
