Title       : Collaborative Research: Physiology, Ecology and Biochemistry of Nitrogen
               Fixation by Marine Planktonic Microorganisms (ABR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1994  
File        : a9314252

Award Number: 9314252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael R. Reeve                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210696             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Capone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Capone  9314252    This project continues  studies into the ecology, physiology 
              and biochemistry of Trichodesmium and other planktonic N2  fixers, undertaking
              several cruises in more widespread areas  of tropical North Atlantic, W
              Caribbean, NE &  NW Australia  than pervious efforts. One objective is to
              assess  Trichodesmium population abundance and N2 fixation along  with
              concurrent assessment of phytoplankton population  abundance and N
              assimilation, new and regenerated nitrogen.  Species distinctions will be done
              using ultrastructure and  nifH gene sequencing.  This will involve protein
              labeling  and ultrastructural studies and  molecular biological  approaches. 
              The next objective is to  determine whether the  phenomenon of diel periodicity
              in nitrogenase activity is a  common characteristic of these populations as
              well as  further examining the basis for this periodicity and the  mechanisms
              of O2 protection.  The project will continue to  examine the fate of
              Trichodesmium C and N, determine the  release rates of labile organics
              (glutamate and other amino  acids) and the grazing rates by harpacytacoid
              copepods.  With respect to grazing, the project will to assess the  importance
              of the presence of toxins, which inhibit grazing  as a function of the species
              of Trichodesmium.   In  addition, the project will examine the mechanisms of 
              Trichodesmium buoyancy reversals, along with field research  on adaptational
              significance, and the use of isotopic and  biochemical "biomarkers" for
              tracking the fate of  Trichodesmium biomass.  Finally, Trichodesmium population
               measurements will be coupled with biooptic measurements with  the goal of
              developing remote sensing algorithms. Overall,  the project will provide
              information to assess critically  the inference that Trichodesmium is a
              quantitatively  significant input of new N.  This informantion will  contribute
              substantively towards obtaining a complete  understanding of the ecology,
              physiology and biochemistry of  planktonic N2 fixers and their role  in C and N
              fluxes in the  oceans.  ***
