Title       : Molecular Markers of Iron Limitation: Use of Flavodoxin to Assess the Iron
               Status of Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1995   
File        : a9314371

Award Number: 9314371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360881             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Luther luther@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Geider  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9314371  GEIDER  This project will examine the iron status of marine
              phytoplankton  using immunological probes of flavodoxin abundance.  Flavodoxin 
              commonly substitutes for the iron-sulfur protein ferredoxin as an  electron
              carrier in the photosynthetic electron transfer chain of  algae and
              cyanobacteria under iron limited conditions.  Flavodoxin  appears to have the
              attributes of a good molecular marker of iron  limitation because: (1) it only
              accumulates when iron is limiting,  (2) it is stable enough to allow isolation
              and quantification, and  (3) it shows a strong signal in response to iron
              limitation.  In  addition, flavodoxin may be quantitatively accumulated under
              Fe-  limiting conditions allowing estimation of relative growth rate if  the
              complicating effects of interactions with irradiance and  nitrogen source can
              be taken into account.    An antibody to a diatom (Phaeodactylum  tricornutum)
              flavodoxin  that cross reacts with flavodoxins from other diatom species has 
              already been developed.  The project will proceed along three  related lines. 
              First, flavodoxins will be extracted from other  taxa (cyanobacteria,
              cryptomonads, prasinophytes, chlorophytes), to  test for cross-reactivity with
              the diatom antibody, and to develop  taxon-specific antibodies as needed.  The
              antibodies will be used  to develop quantitative immunoassays for flavodoxin in
              total  protein extracts of marine particulate matter to examine bulk 
              flavodoxin concentrations, and to develop single cell  immunofluorescence
              assays to examine heterogeneity in the iron  status of natural phytoplankton
              populations. Second, the project  will examine the ecophysiology of iron
              limitation in diatoms using  flavodoxin synthesis as a measure of the internal
              iron status. The  project will also use measurements of the concentration of 
              dissolved "available" iron below which flavodoxin synthesis is  induced to
              develop a bioassay for measuring "available" iron.   Diatoms will be used for
              these experiments.  Third, the project  will u se immunofluorescent techniques
              to measure flavodoxin  abundance in samples of opportunity from natural
              phytoplankton  assemblages.  In addition, DNA amplification and sequencing 
              techniques will be employed to examine heterogeneity in the genes  encoding
              flavodoxin in natural phytoplankton assemblages.  ***
