Title       : Structural Kinetics, a Novel Tool Using Gas Electron Diffraction With a Pulsed
               Electron Beam Synchronous With Photoexcitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1994  
File        : a9314064

Award Number: 9314064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253400             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Ewbank   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lothar Schafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Professors J. Ewbank and L. Schafer of the Chemistry Department   of the
              University of Arkansas will continue the development and   application of
              real-time gas electron diffraction (GED) using a pulsed   electron beam
              synchronous with photoexcitation.  The technique will be   applied primarily to
              the study of the conformation and structure of   short-lived chemical species,
              namely those in highly excited electronic   states where the structure and
              conformation differ significantly from   those in the ground and low-lying
              excited states, or species undergoing   dynamical changes as the result of
              unimolecular reactions.    Traditional GED has relied on the use of the
              photographic plate to record   and store the information generated by the
              diffraction of electrons by   molecules.  This method was therefore limited to
              studying the structures   of stable molecules.  Current research in molecular
              dynamics concerns   itself with how the structure and conformation of a
              molecular system   evolves during a reaction process.  Experimental 
              information about such   processes can only be obtained by means of techniques
              in which the time   plays an essential role.  The methods of pico- and
              femtosecond   spectroscopy have been very successful in this regard but also
              have their   limitations owing to the difficulty in interpreting often
              extremely   complex spectral patterns.  The method of real-time GED developed
              by the   principal investigators has shown great promise in making important  
              contribution to the understanding of the properties of short-lived   species. 
              The aim of this project is to capitalize on this potential and   contribute to
              our understanding of the basic aspects of molecular   dynamics.
