Title       : Quantum Simulation of Chemical Dynamics in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1997   
File        : a9314066

Award Number: 9314066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $588000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Rossky rossky@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Peter Rossky is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his work in the area of   quantum simulation of
              chemical dynamics in solution.  This research   focuses on both the development
              and application of mixed quantum and   classical mechanical simulation methods
              for the description of chemical   processes in solution.  Emphasis is placed on
              the simulation of   nonadiabatic quantum dynamics.  The work will address in
              detail: 1) The   fundamental molecular level description of the solvent modes
              associated   with the non-radiative relaxation of solute excited electronic
              states in   liquid solution; 2) New applications of algorithms for quantum  
              nonadiabatic simulation to the dynamics of molecular photoionization and   to
              intramolecular charge transfer dynamics in both aqueous and   non-aqueous
              solution; 3) The development and implementation of new   algorithms for
              nonadiabatic quantum dynamics; and 4) Generalization and   testing of current
              nonadiabatic algorithms with emphasis on an analysis   of the role of quantum
              coherence in the results obtained in the condensed   phase.    The majority of
              chemical reactions occur in solution.  This fact has   stimulated a tremendous
              research effort to elucidate a set of unifying   principles describing chemical
              dynamics in liquids.  To fully address   this issue requires a detailed
              understanding of both the molecular   motions that occur during the course of a
              chemical event and the energy   flow within the solute and between the solute
              and the solvent.    Exceptional recent progress in clarifying these aspects has
              been made.    Advances in laser technology enable direct experimental
              measurement of   dynamical behavior of chemical systems on the time scale of
              the   fundamental events.  At the same time, significant advances have been  
              made in theoretical methods and models used in describing solution   chemistry.
               Rossky's research in the development of new computational   algorithms will
              allow for both cl assical and quantum mechanical dynamical   simulations of
              phenomena on time scales accessible by these new   experimental techniques.
