Title       : The Microeconomics of Transition: Business Starts, Joint Ventures, and the Role
               of Capitol Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1993    
File        : a9314266

Award Number: 9314266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16187              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah Lane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              9314266  Lane  The extraordinary increase of joint ventures and small-firm 
              start-ups in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union suggests  that these
              mechanisms make an important contribution to long-run  economic transformation.
               This Research Planning Grant (RPG)  develops an empirical research program
              that addresses the following  questions: What factors have contributed to the
              rapid increase in  joint ventures?  What can we learn about the formation and 
              management of joint ventures from this large sample? Have countries  and firms
              benefitted from cooperation and the capital, managerial  expertise, and
              production technology invested?  Finally, how does  the sectoral distribution
              of joint ventures compare to that of new  business starts?  The focus of the
              research is on joint ventures  because availability of data is better and the
              findings are more  generalizable to market economies.  The sectoral incidence
              of joint  ventures can be measured by the number of joint ventures or by the 
              amount of foreign capital invested.  Independent variables test the  relative
              importance of strategic factors, technological factors,  and specific Eastern
              European factors such as filling in the gaps  in industry distribution that are
              the legacy of central planning.   Though joint ventures have increased
              significantly in Western  economies, this increase is dwarfed by the increase
              in the joint  ventures between Western and Eastern European firms. The large 
              number and variety of joint ventures provides a unique opportunity  to test
              three important elements that influence the organizational  structure of a
              firm: technology (demand and cost  complementarities), limitations on contracts
              caused by  idiosyncratic assets, and incomplete contracts as a result of the 
              inability to contract for all contingencies.  The RPG will develop  further the
              survey data, initial analysis of the data, and  collaboration with Hungarian
              researchers to prepare a more  extensive proposal to evaluate the benefits to
              the firms of  und ertaking joint ventures.  Future research using actual case 
              studies will be a collaborative process between the principal  investigator and
              Hungarian researchers with contacts and expertise  in fieldwork.  ***
