Title       : Theory of Fluids, Phase Transitions, and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9314727

Award Number: 9314727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $496150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin Widom bw24@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Benjamin Widom is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his work on the theory of   fluids, phase
              transitions and interfaces.  Work is proposed in three   specific areas of
              research.  In the first area of study, interfacial   structure and interfacial
              phase transitions will be studied in an effort   to understand the nature of
              the inhomogeneous region of contact between   otherwise homogeneous fluid
              phases.  In these studies a theoretical model   will be used which should
              illuminate the connection, and resolve the   differences, between two
              alternative and sometimes discrepant points of   view, that of free energy
              functional theory and that of an interface   displacement theory.  The second
              area of study involves the coexistence   of periodically modulated (liquid
              crystal) phases, and the structure and   thermodynamics of the interface
              between such phases.  A theoretical study   will trace the evolution of the
              scattering peak in the isotropic fluid in   which there is an incipient
              periodicity into a true delta function Bragg   peak as the fluid undergoes a
              second order transition to an ordered,   liquid-crystalline state.  The third
              area of research involves the use of   scaling theory to develop a model for
              the electrophoresis of charged,   long-chain polymers.  The proposed study will
              elucidate the interplay   between the chain length of the polymer and the
              applied electric field.    In the everyday world, interfaces between fluid
              phases are ubiquitous,   yet very little is known about the details of the
              structure of the   interface or the processes which are going on at the
              interface.  Widom's   work will provide molecular level insights on the spatial
              structure and   thermodynamics of those contact regions.
