Title       : Mesoscale Magnetohydrodynamic Processes in the Magnetosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9314239

Award Number: 9314239
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret G. Kivelson mkivelson@igpp.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Southwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9314239  Kivelson  The large scale, time-averaged properties of the
              magnetosphere and  its interaction with the solar wind and the ionosphere are
              now well  understood in terms of steady-state theory.  The principal  challenge
              that remains is to understand the dynamics of the system  on microscales
              (<<1RE) and what we shall refer to as mesoscales (  1RE).  Attention need to be
              focused on those processes that  transfer the energy and momentum of the solar
              wind through the  magnetized plasma of the magnetosphere to the ionosphere.  In
               recent years, it has become increasingly apparent that the dynamics  of the
              magnetosphere are patchy or bursty in nature.  Intermittency  appears to be a
              fundamental feature of the interactions.  Although  they are intermittent, the
              important processes appear to occur on  time scales that are long compared with
              particle gyroperiods; the  corresponding spatial scales are large compared with
              particle  gyroradii but small compared with magnetospheric dimensions.   Hence,
              this proposal focuses on processes that can be characterized  as "mesoscale" or
              intermediate in scale.  The investigators will  use spacecraft data sets and
              new data analysis approaches to  characterize some of the mesoscale structures
              including:  coupling  of the solar wind to the magnetosphere through the
              process of  magnetic reconnection, striations in density and field magnitude 
              generally interpreted as the signature of saturated mirror mode  waves; the
              polar cusp which appears to pulsate as successive bursts  of reconnected plasma
              arrive at the ionosphere; large scale field-  aligned currents (Region 1
              currents) that are frequently highly  structured in ways that may arise from
              bursty reconnection; the  magnetotail plasma flows that are intermittent or
              bursty; and  magnetic signatures of thin rope-like structures that carry field-
               aligned currents along their axes and contain plasma confined by  twisted
              magnetic fields.    The investigators will develop new models and theory with a
              close  tie to  observations.  The analysis will begin by using the tools of 
              MHD, but it is probable that full understanding will require some  aspects of
              plasma kinetic theory.  The intent is to develop a  framework for the
              interpretation of existing observations and also  to define needs for
              additional measurements.    The proposed work addresses processes that appear
              to be central to  the dynamics of the interacting solar
              wind/ionosphere/magnetosphere  system, and the new results will illuminate the
              elemental coupling  processes.  Although the problems addressed are those of
              the  terrestrial magnetosphere, the results are likely to have wider 
              significance as they will apply to the interactions of magnetized  plasmas
              wherever they may be: in other magnetoshperes, in the solar  corona, or in the
              laboratory.  ***
