Title       : Collaborative Research: Hydrodynamic Forcing of Metabolism of Coral Reef Algal
               Communities (RUI)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9314470

Award Number: 9314470
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Carpenter robert.carpenter@csun.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Northridge
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308307    818/885-3000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Carpenter  9314470    The current paradigm explaining how coral reefs maintain
              high  biomass of organisms and extremely high rates of gross primary 
              productivity is that tight recycling of nutrients and organic  matter occurs
              within the reef resulting in zones of net autotrophy  alternating with zones of
              net heterotrophy.  Autotrophic upstream  communities are thought to support
              downstream heterotrophic  assemblages with the overall balance resulting in
              ecosystem P/R  ratios near unity. According to this paradigm, coral reefs are
              not  coupled significantly to the surrounding oligotrophic ocean.     Recent
              studies suggest that coral reefs may be much more dependent  on hydrodynamic
              processes than currently believed.  Although  nutrient concentrations of
              tropical waters are very low, an  enormous volume of water is advected across
              the reef and could  result in a large flux of nutrients to benthic primary
              producers.   The major upstream autotrophic zone is the reef flat where algal 
              turf assemblages are responsible for the majority of primary  productivity.
              Previous work has demonstrated that rates of primary  productivity and nitrogen
              fixation of algal turf are affected  significantly by water flow speed.
              Furthermore, flow measurements  on one reef suggest that algal canopy height
              significantly alters  the local hydrodynamic regime and as a result, metabolic
              processes  of algal turfs may be diffusion-limited for a significant 
              proportion of time.    This project will test the hypothesis that rates of
              primary  productivity and nitrogen fixation of coral reef algal turfs are 
              diffusion-limited.  Measurements of the flow environment on a reef  flat will
              be made and used to estimate the degree to which algal  turfs varying in canopy
              height are diffusion-limited. The project  will then move on to test hypotheses
              about the specific factors  that result in diffusion-limitation.  The results
              of this project  should fill a gap on empirical measurements of water flow in
              coral  reef environments and how wate r flow affects algal metabolism.    The
              results of this research may lead to a significant paradigm  shift in
              understanding how coral reefs function.  Demonstration  that reefs are open
              ecosystems that are strongly coupled to the  surrounding ocean environment
              would have important implications for  predictions of the effects of global
              climate change on these unique  ecosystems.  ***
