Title       : Collaborative Research: Atmospheric Controls on Northern Hemisphere Cryosphere
               Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9314721

Award Number: 9314721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121366             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1307,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9314721  Robinson, David A.  Rutgers University, New Brunswick 
              Title:    Atmospheric Controls on Northern Hemisphere Cryosphere           
              Variability     This award supports comprehensive study of relationships
              between  atmospheric variability and fluctuations in the snow and sea ice 
              covers the Northern Hemisphere.  The primary thrust of the work is  to provide
              a hemispheric synthesis of the sensitivity of the  cryosphere to regional
              changes in the atmospheric circulation, and  to diagnose this sensitivity with
              respect to associated  interactions between precipitation, temperature, winds
              and the  modes of large-scale teleconnection patterns.  The PIs will  identify
              those regions of the cryosphere warranting focused  monitoring for potential
              climate change, and possible future  responses of the cryosphere to changes in
              circulation regimes.  As  part of these efforts, they will perform a series of 
              intercomparisons between observed snow cover patterns and those  simulated by
              different GCMs under present and project future  climatic conditions.    The
              study will address at least six basic questions: 1) What are  the relationships
              between variations in northern hemisphere sea ice  extent and terrestrial snow
              cover? 2) What areas of the  cryosphere exhibit strong or weak responses to
              atmospheric  circulation changes and why? 3) Which areas contribute most 
              strongly to northern hemisphere cryosphere variability? 4) What are  the
              responses of the cryosphere to the modes of Large-scale  teleconnections
              patterns, and how do these compare with parallel  anomalies in synoptic
              activity, temperature and precipitation?   5) How well do different GCMs depict
              the present day distribution  and variability of snow cover, and are changes in
              the cryosphere  projected by GCMs in response to enhance CO2 warming reasonable
               from the viewpoint of modeled circulation changes? 6) Can the  cryosphere be
              used as a robust indicator of climate change?    For the snow and sea ice
              analyses, gridded NOAA charts  of Northern  Hemisphere snow extent and
              Navy/NOAA ice concentration data will be  combined with available station
              records of snow depth, snow fall,  precipitation and surface temperature.  For
              atmospheric analyses,  the PIs will use once to twice-daily NMC surface and
              upper-air  fields from the early 1960s to present, used to calculate grid- 
              point and regional time series of the frequency, position and  strength of
              cyclones and anticyclones, storm tracks, and other  indices of synoptic
              activity (e.g, positive vorticity advection),  as well as temperature. 
              Rawinsonde data from an existing archive  will be used to analyze patterns of
              moisture flux convergence and  their associations with snow cover and
              precipitation variations at  high northern latitudes.  Output from different
              GCMs will be  obtained for doubled CO2 (equilibrium) runs, transient runs (in 
              which CO2 is continually increased), as well as for runs using  identical
              present-day boundary conditions.    The research is a collaborative effort
              between University of  Colorado  (Drs. Mark Serreze and Roger G. Barry) and
              Rutgers University (Dr.  David Robinson).  The work is important because it
              seeks to clarify  the role of the cryosphere in climate variability.
