Title       : The Combinatorics of Affine Algebras and Weyl Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2001     
File        : a0100918

Award Number: 0100918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark M. Shimozono mshimo@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project is a combinatorial study of structures arising from
affine algebras
              and Weyl groups.

The first object of study is the crystal graph of a module
              over a quantized universal enveloping algebra of an affine Lie algebra. Lusztig
              and Kashiwara have developed the deep and intricate theory of canonical bases
              for suitable modules over quantized enveloping algebras of Kac-Moody algebras.
              When the quantum parameter is set to zero (the \low temperature limit"), one
              obtains a colored directed graph called the crystal graph of the module. This
              remarkable graph encodes nearly all the important algebraic data of the module.
              Using the crystal graph, many algebraic problems are reduced to combinatorial
              ones. In the case of a+ne Kac-Moody algebras the combinatorics is particularly
              favorable; it was shown by Kang, Kashiwara, Misra, Miwa, Nakayashima, and
              Nakayashiki, that the elements of the crystal graph can be expressed as certain
              eventually periodic finite sequences of elements of very special finite crystal
              graphs called perfect crystals. In turn, the perfect crystals can be studied
              using techniques of classical combinatorics such as the theory of Young
              tableaux.

One goal is to determine explicitly the colored graph structure of
              crystals in a family whose existence was conjectured by Hatayama, Kuniba,
              Okado, Takagi, and Y. Yamada and which arose from the study of the Bethe Ansatz
              in integrable systems. Another goal is to give explicit formulae for certain
              multiplicities that arise in conformal field theory and statistical mechanics,
              such as fusion coefficients and branching functions. It is of particular
              interest to express such quantities in a certain form (\fermionic"), one which
              admits a quasi particle interpretation for the states of the underlying model.
              Such formulae have combinatorial descriptions in terms of the rigged
              configurations of A. N. Kirillov and N.-Y. Reshetikhin.  The second object of
              study is the family of Kazhdan-Lusztig (KL) polynomials for a+ne Weyl groups.
              For simple Lie algebras these polynomials are prominent in the geometry of
              Schubert varieties and in the representation theory of both the Weyl group and
              the simple algebraic group; these phenomena generalize for the a+ne algebras.
              One goal is to give explicit combinatorial (no alternating sums allowed)
              formulae for certain of these polynomials, which appear as graded
              multiplicities of irreducible modules for the associated simple Lie algebra, in
              the modules of twisted functions on the nullcone, the closure of the principal
              nilpotent adjoint orbit of the simple Lie algebra. A second goal is to give
              such formulae for certain parabolic KL polynomials for the a+ne Weyl group of
              type A, which can be expressed in terms of the ribbon tableaux of Lascoux,
              Leclerc, and Thibon.
