Title       : Extending the Plus Closure for Mixed Characteristic Rings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a0100731

Award Number: 0100731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond C. Heitmann heitmann@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	In the study of local rings of equicharacteristic p, the 
tight closure has
              proved very useful, This closure also extends 
nicely to local rings of
              equicharacteristic zero.  Unfortunately this 
closure does not naturally
              extend to mixed characteristic rings. 
This project is designed to fill this
              void.  In earlier work, the 
principal investigator defined four variants of
              an extended plus 
closure.  As the name suggests, these closures are based
              upon the 
plus closure of an ideal, the set of elements which are in the
              
extension of the ideal in some integral extension of the original 
ring.  In
              the earlier work, a number of properties of the closures 
were demonstrated, 
              In this project, additional properties will be 
demonstrated,  While the
              benefits of this project will probably not 
be restricted to these, the
              objectives are the properties which shall 
allow the extended plus closure to
              fill the role of tight closure. 
Assuming the program is successful, the
              following will be 
demonstrated.  Ideals in regular local rings will be shown
              to be 
closed.  The colon-capturing property will be proved.  The
              
persistence property will be proved - an element in the closure of an 
ideal
              will remain in the closure upon taking homomorphic images.  It 
should also be
              shown that an element which is not in the closure of 
an ideal of a local ring
              will also not be in the closure when the 
ideal is extended to the completion.
               A successful project will have 
major ramifications for the homological
              understanding of mixed 
characteristic rings.  Among other things, this will
              imply the truth 
of the Direct Summand Conjecture.
	One of the most
              fundamental subjects in algebra is the 
understanding of ideals and modules in
              local rings.  For those local 
rings which contain a field, tight closure has
              evolved as a way to 
give a unified presentation - and a simplified one - for
              many of the 
known properties of these objects.  As a natural byproduct, it
              has 
also led to the discovery of new properties.  Understanding of local
              
rings which do not contain a field has always lagged behind.  The 
principal
              investigator has proposed several closely related and 
highly promising
              candidates to play the role of tight closure in the 
alternate setting.  In
              this project, the investigator will attempt to 
determine to what extent these
              new closures fill the void.
