Title       : Dynamics of Partially Hyperbolic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0100416

Award Number: 0100416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Burns burns@math.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project will investigate the dynamics of partially hyperbolic
              systems.
It is hoped to improve the recent theorem of Pugh and Shub by
              weakening the
center bunching hypothesis and adapting the proof so that it
              applies to the
pointwise (or Brazilian) version of partial hyperbolicity
              rather than more
stringent uniform assumptions made by Pugh and Shub. I also
              hope to extend
the classes of partially hyperbolic maps within which the
              hypotheses of the
Pugh-Shub theorem are known to hold generically by studying
              compact group
extensions of the compact group extensions already studied by
              myself and
Wilkinson. In addition I plan to continue my work with Paternain
              on
magnetic flows and to collaborate with Hasselblatt and Wilkinson on
              a
study of Lyapunov exponents for geodesic flows.

This project will study
              the dynamics of partially hyperbolic systems.
A differentiable dynamical
              system consists of a differentiable manifold which
represents the possible
              states of the system and a differentiable map of the
manifold to itself which
              represents the evolution of the system from its
current state to its next
              state. A basic mechanism which tends to produce
chaotic behavior is for the
              derivative of the map to stretch vectors in
some directions and to shrink
              vectors in the complementary directions.
Such behavior is called
              hyperbolicity. The system is called partially
hyperbolic if in addition to the
              expanding and contracting directions
that are stretched and shrunk there is a
              third direction which is stretched
less than the expanding direction and
              shrunk less than the contracting.
It has long been suspected that most
              partially hyperbolic systems should
have the same chaotic behavior as fully
              hyperbolic systems.
In the 1990's the work of Pugh and Shub (in collaboration
              with Grayson
and Wilkinson) has made it possible to prove this in considerable
              generality.
I aim to extend their work, by weakening the hypotheses in their
              main theorem
and studying a number of particular examples of partially
              hyperbolic systems.

