Title       : Extremal Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0100400

Award Number: 0100400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91653              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom A. Bohman tbohman@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The investigator is interested in a wide range of questions from extremal
              combinatorics and related fields.  A common theme is the exploration of new
              ideas  for the construction of extremal objects; in particular, the
              investigator suggests new ideas for constructions in the  settings of Shannon
              capacity, the lonely runner conjecture,  and combinatorial discrepancy.  In the
              area of Shannon  capacity, the investigator has developed a new construction 
              for independent sets in the powers of odd cycles that is, in a sense,
              asymptotically optimal.  It is hoped that the algebraic ideas used in this
              construction can be further developed to give more insight into the Shannon
              capacities of odd cycles.  The investigator suggests a similar algebraic
              approach to a number of conjectures (conjectures that follow from recent work
              of R. Holzman, D. Kleitman and the investigator) concerning the extremal
              objects for the so-called lonely runner conjecture.  The research on
              combinatorial discrepancy is motivated by a conjecture of Lovasz, Spencer and
              Vestergombi on the relationship between the linear discrepancy and hereditary
              discrepancy of a hypergraph.  In addition to work on new constructions, this
              research includes questions in the fields of random graphs and the
              combinatorics  of cellular automata.

Questions considered in extremal
              combinatorics are of the  form: `How large (or small) can an object that lies
              in a particular discrete mathematical system and satisfies a certain  condition
              be?'  We are usually interested in the size of extremal objects for very large
              systems.  Interest in such  questions grew extensively during the twentieth
              century.  Pioneers of the field, such as Paul Erdos, had posed  many
              fascinating questions of this form and had devised  powerful methods for
              solving them even before the close connections between extremal combinatorics
              and various other fields (including computer science, statistical physics and
              information theory) had been discovered.  Shannon capacity is a prime example
              of the significant link between extremal combinatorics  and information theory.
               Shannon capacity gives a measure of the zero-error performance of a noisy
              communications channel.  The investigator has developed new, near--optimal
              codes for  some notoriously difficult channels, and the proposed research
              includes further development of these codes with the goal of  determining the
              zero-error optimum of these channels.  The study  of cellular automata has been
              part of the recent interaction between extremal combinatorics and statistical
              physics.  Cellular  automata are discrete dynamical systems that have been used
              to model a wide range of physical phenomena.  The investigator  proposes
              research on the regularity of growth of certain cellular automata that model
              crystal growth.  This work is expected to have impact on our understanding of
              the shapes achieved by these models and their randomized counterparts.  

