Title       : Ground Motion Prediction Under Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0100046

Award Number: 0100046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129049             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro A. De Alba padealba@hypatia.unh.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to predict the strong ground motions at
              Treasure Island, in San Francisco Bay, resulting from postulated earthquakes on
              the Hayward and the San Andreas faults.

Earthquake prediction exercises have
              been carried by various organizations of engineers and seismologists in recent
              years; for example for Turkey Flat, California (1990), the Ashigara Valley,
              Japan (1992) and most recently for the Kobe/Osaka region in Japan (1998).  The
              basic idea was to attempt to model measured ground response and/or to predict
              response for sites at which recordings had not been made, permitting different
              methods of prediction to be compared.  These exercises highlighted several
              difficulties that this project will attempt to avoid by focusing on one very
              well documented site - the National Geotechnical Experimentation Site at
              Treasure Island, California - and asking for predictions of motion on the
              Hayward and the San Andreas faults.  A recent compilation of geologic data for
              the San Francisco Bay Area by researchers at the United State Geological
              Survey, combined with the intensive geologic studies by CALTRANS (California
              department of transportation) for the new Bay Bridge span have drastically
              reduced path uncertainty problems.

The project involves a two-part
              prediction exercise.  In the first part (this project), predictors will develop
              bedrock motion spectra under Treasure Island, for scenario earthquakes on the
              two faults.  Predictors will be selected after a first pre-qualification phase,
              in which a selection of a range of approaches will be made.  Once predictions
              for this well-documented setting are made, uncertainties implicit in the
              different methods will be easier to quantify at a final workshop.  At least
              five student teams from different universities will be invited to present
              predictions as well, to be discussed at the final workshop, and included in the
              proceedings.  A second phase is planned once this work is completed, in which
              predictors would then take the consensus bedrock motions under the island and
              predict soil response at various points in the 90-meter-deep soft soil profile,
              as well as at other points on the island.  This second phase will be a
              follow-on project, intended to study the final cumulative uncertainties
              involved in source-path-site predictions by state-of-the art methods.

