Title       : A Genetic Analyzer for DNA Sequencing and DNA Fragment Analysis in the Basic
               Sciences at Georgetown University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0100061

Award Number: 0100061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew B. Hamilton hamiltm1@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph H. Neale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi G. Elmendorf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to aid in purchase of an automated DNA sequencer and
              related equipment and software needed for sample preparation and data analysis.
               Use of the instrumentation in research and training efforts will be shared by
              a large group of  faculty, students and postdocs.  Research areas to be
              addressed include regulation of surface proteins in various protozoa, gene-flow
              in tropical trees, yeast gene regulation and variability in flower color.  Many
              research questions in biology now require use knowledge of genotypes as a basic
              unit of observation. These questions span diverse fields and include hypotheses
              related to protein structure and function, gene regulation, genome
              organization, relationships within and among species, spatial and temporal
              organization of genetic polymorphism and the exchange of gametes among
              populations or individuals.  Automated approaches to DNA sequencing and
              fragment genotyping are faster and more accurate than the manual methods they
              replace, increasing the quantity and quality of data. In addition to use in
              research, the faculty plan to employ the instrument in hands-on laboratory
              exercises, now technically beyond their laboratory capabilities, for both
              undergraduate and graduate courses. 
