Title       : Prediction of Microstructural Changes and Residual Stresses in Hard Machining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0100176

Award Number: 0100176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shreyes N. Melkote   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1468,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of a computational tool for
              analysis and prediction of microstructure changes and residual stresses
              generated in cutting of hardened steels using single-point tools.  The
              computational tool will be used to establish the optimal parameter values for
              cutting speed, feed, depth of cut and tool geometry that yield favorable
              residual stresses and a workpiece surface free of undesirable microstructure
              changes (e.g., white layer formation) in two-dimensional cutting of a hardened
              steel material.  To achieve this goal, analytical models of the metallurgical
              phase transformation occurring in quenching of steels will be developed and
              combined with a coupled thermo-mechanical updated Lagrangian finite element
              model of the two-dimensional cutting process developed using the ABAQUS
              Standard finite element code.  In order to validate the complete model,
              orthogonal cutting experiments will be performed with bearing steel (e.g., AISI
              52100) as the workpiece material and PCBN tool material using cutting
              parameters determined from the model.  Existing material property data and/or
              elevated temperature high strain-rate tests will be used to establish the
              material flow-stress models to be used in the simulations.  The microstructure
              of the machined workpiece samples will be characterized using optical and
              scanning electron microscopy while residual stresses will be measured using
              X-ray diffraction. 

If successful, the results of this research will provide
              the capability of accurately simulating surface generation in machining of
              hardened steels and determining an optimal window of cutting conditions to
              produce surface characteristics that enhance the service-life of hardened steel
              components.  This will in turn help to reduce cost, improve part quality, and
              promote the industrial use of hard machining technology.  On a fundamental
              level, the proposed research will advance current physical understanding of
              material and cutting process interactions in hard machining, particularly from
              a standpoint of workpiece microstructure changes (e.g., white layer formation)
              and residual stresses.  The proposed research will also provide a solid
              framework for future development of a three-dimensional model for simulating
              hard machining processes such as turning and milling.


