Title       : Collaborative Research in Operator Theory on Holomorphic Function Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0100502

Award Number: 0100502
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76896              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel H. Shapiro shapiro@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Shapiro will continue his long-term collaboration with Paul Bourdon on
              problems arising from the interaction between the modern theory of linear
              operators and the classical theory of analytic functions. Shapiro and Bourdon
              will study problems involving norms, numerical ranges, decomposability, and
              chaotic behavior for operators that occur naturally on spaces of analytic
              functions, most notably composition operators and operators that commute with
              backward shifts.




The theory of linear operators originates from
              mathematical physics, especially from quantum mechanics, and has more recently
              found significant application in control system theory.  The numerical range is
              a convex subset of the plane that has proven useful to engineers in determining
              the stability of control systems associated with linear operators. The chaotic
              behaviour of dynamical systems has recently become an important subject
              spanning mathematics, physics, engineering, and biology. It has only recently
              been discovered that significant classes of linear operators can give rise to
              chaotic systems, and this has led to unexpected connections between operator
              theory and dynamical systems. The idea of decomposability---the study of how to
              break a complicated linear system up into simpler ones---has recently been
              shown to have surprising connections with such chaotic behaviour. The research
              of Shapiro and Bourdon arises from, and has contributed to, these developments:
              it is anticipated that the project outlined in this proposal will further
              enhance our understanding of the connection between dynamical systems and
              operator theory.



