Title       : Research in Hadron Collider Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0100957

Award Number: 0100957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1392482            (Estimated)
Investigator: Randal C. Ruchti rruchti@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal M. Cason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell R. Wayne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Hildreth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Shephard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for the research program of the Notre Dame group,
              which emphasizes experiments performed at hadron colliders.  Key physics areas
              include the study of the top quark, the continued testing of the Standard
              Model, the search for physics beyond the Standard Model, and the investigation
              of the Higgs sector.  An important facet of this program is the education and
              preparation of the next generation of experimental high-energy physicists. 
              
This program is centered on the D0 experiment at Fermilab and the CMS
              experiment currently under construction at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at
              the CERN laboratory in Geneva Switzerland.  The physics of the D0 experiment
              involves the study of the top quark, strong interaction physics (QCD),
              electroweak physics (W/Z), B-quark physics, and searches for new phenomena.  Of
              particular interest is the possibility of discovering a Higgs boson with a mass
              less than 180 GeV/c2.  The LHC experiment will expand the physics horizon to
              include complete coverage of the Higgs sector and supersymmetry.
The Notre
              Dame program involves four major aspects: (a) installation, commissioning and
              calibration of the D0 detector for Run II at Fermilab; (b) analysis of the Run
              II data with emphasis on topics singled out by the ND faculty and graduate
              students, e.g., BS mixing, search for supersymmetry, hard diffraction, study of
              the top quark, searches for evidence of extra dimensions, and Higgs searches;
              (c) overall coordination and development of tracking algorithms and software
              for the new D0 scintillating fiber tracker including track algorithms, detector
              simulation, calibration, pattern recognition, and track fitting; and (d)
              detector R&D and construction of the CMS detector at the LHC.
On CMS, this
              group is participating in the development, construction and implementation of
              the hadron calorimeter (HCAL) with emphasis on the electro-optical readout of
              the detector sub-system.  This group has also provided major leadership in
              development of the Quarknet project involving high school teachers and students
              in high-energy physics nationwide.

