Title       : Ergodic and Geometric Properties of Diffeomorphisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0100314

Award Number: 0100314
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Wilkinson wilkinso@math.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wilkinson will continue to extend her previous work toward an understanding
of
              the dynamics of partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms.
In particular, with her
              collaborators, Wilkinson proposes to address
the issue of density of stable
              ergodicity in the space of partially 
hyperbolic diffeomorphisms, and the
              existence of Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen measures 
for these diffeomorphisms. 
              Wilkinson  will also study the dependence 
on smooth parameter of invariant
              structures for partially hyperbolic systems.

A diffeomorphism is a way of
              smoothly rearranging the points
in a space.  A diffeomorphism is a natural
              object, arising, for
example, in the study of planetary motion. By applying a
              
diffeomorphism repeatedly, one obtains a dynamical system; each
              iteration
corresponds to a unit of time in the evolution of the system. For
              any 
given space, there are infinitely many diffeomorphisms, with
              widely
varying dynamical behaviors; a goal of dynamics is to arrange
              
diffeomorphisms into classes whose dynamical behavior can be understood.
One
              class of diffeomorphisms whose dynamics are now well-understood
are Smale's
              Axiom A, or hyperbolic, diffeomorphisms, which 
are chaotic: among other
              things, they display sensitive
dependence on initial conditions. This project
              aims to better
understand the behavior of another important class of
              diffeomorphisms,
called partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms.  Partially
              hyperbolic 
diffeomorphisms have many of the features of Axiom A systems,
but
              their dynamical behavior is yet to be completely understood.

