Title       : Working Groups in Data Analysis and Mining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a0100921

Award Number: 0100921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred S. Roberts froberts@dimacs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project involves three "working groups" of researchers meeting at DIMACS,
              the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science, to
              address different aspects of massive data analysis problems in different
              applied contexts. One group is concerned with "streaming" data analysis and
              mining. The group deals with computational and analytical methods relevant to
              problems that arise when decisions must be made in one, initial scan as data
              "stream" by. The results will have impact on massive data set problems arising
              from credit card transactions, telephone calling, financial transactions,
              environmental modeling, and astrophysical experiments. The second group
              develops and analyzes new models and algorithms for and applications of
              multidimensional scaling. MDS, a traditional tool of data analysis in
              marketing, psychology, and other social and behavioral sciences, faces new
              challenges from the sheer volume of data in today's databases and from a
              variety of new applications, and the results should be useful in a wide variety
              of applications in economics, management science, chemistry, and psychology. A
              third group brings together researchers designing computers to generate
              scientific conjectures. Specifically, the group deals with conjectures in graph
              theory and related areas of chemistry that are generated from databases of
              graph invariants and relations between them and of chemical structures such as
              of fullerenes. The results should be of wide interest to researchers in graph
              theory and chemistry but also to researchers dealing with automatic theorem
              proving and generation. The results of the three working groups will be broadly
              disseminated to research communities via technical reports, papers, and books
              in the DIMACS book series. 
