Title       : Perturbation of Nucleotide Acidity in RNA Folding and Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0100057

Award Number: 0100057
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Strobel strobel@csb.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Scott A. Strobel, of the Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry at
              Yale University, is undertaking a combinatorial approach to the exploration of
              acidity perturbations important for RNA structure and function. By exploiting
              the technique of Nucleotide Analog Interference Mapping, Professor Strobel
              simultaneously yet individually monitors the effect of incorporating a
              nucleotide analog at every position within an RNA molecule. After developing a
              set of nucleotide analogs which retain a full set of base functional groups,
              but which have altered acidity of the A- and C-imino groups, a variety of RNAs
              will be screened for functionally important protonation sites. These analogs
              will then be brought to bear on an investigation of potential base ionization
              events important for the catalytic activity of three self-processing ribozymes,
              specifically the hepatitis delta virus, the Varkud Satellite, and hairpin RNA
              enzymes.

Many biochemical reactions are facilitated by "general" acid and/or
              base catalysis, wherein the reaction is assisted by a partial proton transfer
              somewhere along the reaction pathway. Since they possess acidic and basic
              groups of the appropriate strength, protein enzymes are well-suited to catalyze
              such reactions. Like proteins, large ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecules can also
              adopt complex structures and catalyze chemical reactions. However, unlike the
              protein enzymes, RNA does not contain acidic or basic groups which would be
              expected to participate in general acid or base catalysis. This implies that in
              particular circumstances, the acidity of a group within RNA must be
              substantially shifted by its specific, local microenvironment within the RNA
              molecule. With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,
              Professor Scott A. Strobel, of the Department of Molecular Biophysics and
              Biochemistry at Yale University, has developed a technique permitting the rapid
              analysis of the effects of multiple changes on the structure and properties of
              RNA. By developing a new set of "tools" for the application of this technique
              to the analysis of acidity effects, Professor Strobel will elucidate the
              molecular underpinnings of general acid and base catalysis by RNA, providing
              information about RNA structure and function and suggesting new ways to think
              about molecular evolution and catalysis.
