Title       : Design and Oligomerization of Uniquely Folded Supersecondary Structural Motifs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0100735

Award Number: 0100735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Imperiali imper@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Barbara Imperiali, of the Department of Chemistry at the Massachusetts
              Institute of Technology, is studying the structure, association properties, and
              function of "mini-protein" motifs. A 29-residue mini-motif containing a
              disulfide link will be rationally designed to a disulfide-free motif, and a
              biological strategy for "evolving" 23- and 29-residue motifs will be used to
              develop mini-motifs including only the 20 encoded amino acids, rather than
              relying on one or two D-amino acids currently used as turn stabilizing agents.
              New methods, including the use of fluorescent reporter groups and amino acids
              with solvatochromic properties, will be implemented to permit the discovery of
              peptide oligomers with discrete quaternary structure. Finally, Professor
              Imperiali will explore the possible function of these mini-motifs in the
              molecular recognition and sensing of small molecules such as fluorescent
              organic species and fluorescently labeled mono- and disaccharides.

Proteins
              (polypeptides), comprised of long chains of interconnected amino acids, play
              myriad biochemical roles. Their specific function is critically dependent on
              the three dimensional structure adopted by the polypeptide chain, yet the
              factors responsible for protein folding are still at best incompletely
              understood. Through the design, synthesis, and study of small polypeptides,
              Professor Barbara Imperiali, of the Department of Chemistry at the
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology, with the support of the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program, is shedding light on the factors responsible
              for the formation of particular protein folding motifs. Her studies also
              explore the possibility that these "mini-motifs" could serve as scaffolds to
              permit the recognition and sensing of small organic molecules, including
              sugars, leading in the longer term to the design of peptide-based chemosensing
              agents.
