Title       : Scanning Electron Microscope for Paleontology and Systematic Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0100317

Award Number: 0100317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160157             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Lupia rlupia@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Cifelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Westrop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas J. Czaplewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to assist in the purchase of a modern scanning
              electron microscope (SEM) for research in systematic biology and paleoecology
              at the Oklahoma Museum of Natural History (OMNH). In addition,  the funds will
              assist in the purchase of a critical point dryer and a sputter coater, items
              required for the preparation of some types of materials for study with the SEM.
              The SEM to be purchased operates with variable pressure in the specimen
              chamber, and thus can image specimens at low pressure that are large (e.g.,
              dinosaur teeth), too fragile (e.g., block of trilobite-rich shale), or too rare
              to be studied with conventional SEM preparation techniques. In addition, the
              SEM is capable of imaging very small, coated specimens (e.g., pollen, flowers)
              in the conventional high magnification/high pressure mode.  Initially the
              instrument will be used by faculty/curators, research associates, graduate
              students, and undergraduates for studies of the systematics and evolution of
              flowering plants and heterosporous ferns, early Cretaceous vertebrates, Lower
              Paleozoic and Cenozoic bats, and other small mammals.  The availability of the
              microscope will improve the research and educational capabilities of the
              University, and improve the museum's ability to preserve biological,
              paleontological, and archeological specimens while insuring their availability
              for research.
