Title       : Arithmetic and Representation Theory of Reductive Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0100429

Award Number: 0100429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105603             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gopal Prasad gprasad@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Reductive groups often arise as groups of symmetries of arithmetic and geometric
              structures.  This connection makes their study very interesting and it is also
              a major source of important questions.  For example, for the celebrated
              Langlands Program (in Number Theory), a complete classification of unitary
              representations of reductive groups over local fields is needed.

I propose
              to investigate arithmetic, group theoretic and geometric properties of
              reductive groups using various tools.  Among the powerful tools I have used in
              the past is the geometry of a nice space known as the "building" of the group
              provided by the Bruhat-Tits theory.  This theory, together with a detailed
              understanding of the structure of reductive groups, and their cohomology (these
              are certain subtle geometric invariants of the groups), has helped to settle
              many important questions about these groups. In my own work on rigidity of
              certain "large" subgroups known as "lattices", and also in my study of
              arithmetic questions about these groups, including the congruence subgroup
              problem, these techniques played crucial role. In my joint work with Allen Moy,
              the Bruhat-Tits theory of reductive groups over local fields was used to settle
              some questions about their representations and also to classify admissible
              representations of depth zero.  Subsequently, several other mathematicians used
              our frame-work and techniques to find solutions of many interesting problems in
              the representation theory and harmonic analysis.  I will use some of the
              geometric techniques mentioned above to find a classification of irreducible
              admissible representations of reductive groups over local fields. I will also
              investigate the congruence subgroup problem which remains unresolved for
              certain (anisotropic) groups.  The latter would require understanding their
              normal subgroups first.  I am working on this question with Andrei Rapinchuk
              and Yoav Segev.  I also plan to write a book on the congruence subgroup problem
              in collaboration with Andrei Rapinchuk.

