Title       : Restricted Versions of the Hilbert 16th Problem and Related Topics in the Theory
               of Analytic Foliations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2001  
File        : a0100404

Award Number: 0100404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yulij Ilyashenko yulij@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Hilbert 16th problem, part 2, is: "What may be said about the number and
              location of limit cycles of a planar polynomial vector field?" Traditionally
              this question is interpreted as a problem of finding an upper bound of the
              number of limit cycles of a polynomial vector field as a function of the degree
              of the polynomials. Even for the degree two, the upper bound is not yet found,
              and its existence is not yet proved. It makes sense to consider "restricted
              versions" of the Hilbert 16th problem. Namely, the set or all polynomial vector
              fields is replaced by a particular subset of by a similar class. The examples
              are Lienard and Abel equations (the latter ones are polynomial in the phase
              variable with coefficients 1-periodic in time). Even for these equations the
              problem of the number of limit cycles stays open. It is solved by the PI with
              an extra restriction: Abel equations, and Lienard ones with the polynomial of
              odd degree, are considered together with an upper bound for the magnitudes of 
              the coefficients; the upper estimate on the number of limit cycles depends on
              this upper bound of the magnitudes. This is the result from the prior NSF
              support. In the current project we try to get rid of this latter restriction,
              and to give an estimate of the number of limit cycles that depends on the
              degrees of the polynomials in the right hand side only; for Abel equations the
              coefficients should be trigonometric polynomials of given degree. We hope to
              use mighty tools of the theory of complex analytic foliations, growth and zeros
              theorems for holomorphic functions and methods developed under the prior NSF
              support. Another important problem to be studied is the infinitesimal Hilbert
              16th problem. It requires to estimate the number of limit cycles generated by a
              small perturbation from the ovals of the Hamiltonian polynomial vector field;
              closed orbits of the latter field form continuous families. This problem is
              reduced to the estimate of the number of zeros of an Abelian integral, that is,
              an integral of a polynomial 1-form over the ovals of a real polynomial in the
              plane; the estimate should be given in terms of the degrees of the polynomial
              Hamiltonian function and of the integrand. This problem was investigated by the
              author since 69; later on by Yakovenko, D.Novikov, Horosov, Gavrilov, Petrov,
              Khovanski, Varchenko and others. Some progress was obtained by Glutsuk and the
              author for the restricted version of the problem when the Hamiltonian
              polynomial is taken of a special type and of arbitrary degree. One of the goals
              of this project is to get an explicit upper estimate that is expected to be an
              exponential of a polynomial of the degree of the Hamiltonian function, provided
              that the integrand has a smaller degree.

The theory of dynamical systems is
              the realm of determinism, on one hand, and of chaos, on the other hand. Vector
              fields in the phase space of dimension higher than two form the realm of chaos.
              This was understood in 1960's, and henceforth, this realm is the subject of the
              top interest for mathematicians, computer scientists and physicists. On the
              other hand, the classical subject of planar differential equations which may be
              called "realm
of order" attracted the interest of researchers during more that
              one hundred years, beginning with Poincare and Hilbert. Hilbert's 16th problem
              is the main one in this domain. It persists the efforts of mathematicians
              during 100 years, and it is clear now that simplified "restricted" versions of
              the problem should be attacked first. The project suggests some concrete ways
              of this attack based on new ideas and the progress from the prior NSF
              support.

