Title       : Spatial and Spatio-Temporal Aggregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0100436

Award Number: 0100436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bongki Moon bkmoon@cs.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Snodgrass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Aggregate computation is expensive, especially when time-varying attributes are
              involved in it. The task of computing aggregates becomes more challenging for
              spatial and spatio-temporal databases, as the spatial and temporal extent over
              which the aggregate value holds must be computed. For example, multi-attribute
              images are often the result of a query in the Earth Observing System (EOS)
              environments, which retrieves all of the measurements incident on the pixels
              that satisfy the spatio-temporal bounds of the query. Each pixel of
              multi-attribute images has several values associated with it. This project
              develops a suite of techniques for computing spatio-temporal aggregates. While
              there has been significant work done in temporal aggregation, little is known
              about how to evaluate spatial aggregates. The existing temporal aggregation and
              spatial join algorithms are generalized to create efficient algorithms for
              computing spatial aggregates, and then further generalized these algorithms to
              accommodate spatio-temporal aggregates. In addition, scalable techniques will
              be developed by parallelizing the aggregation algorithms on a shared-nothing
              architecture. The project team includes a hydrologists at the United States
              Geological Survey on the USGS Death Valley Regional Flow System (DVRFS)
              Project, which is investigating ground-water flow in the Nevada Test Site,
              proposed as a repository for high-level nuclear waste. The results from this
              research has a direct impact on many large-scale spatio-temporal database
              applications such as EOS, cadastral databases, atmospheric databases and
              hydrologic databases. 
