Title       : Extending Hilbert Space Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0100607

Award Number: 0100607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128586             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim Agler jagler@math.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
   

After the spectral theorem it is difficult to think of a
              theorem that has had a more profound effect on the development of operator
              theory and its myriads of applications to mathematics and science than the
              Sz.-Nagy Dilation Theorem. The idea of representing a general operator in a
              specialized class of operators as a part of a nice operator in the class has
              had many successes and we seek to develop this point of view with a primary
              focus on problems in the theory of functions in one and several complex
              variables. A particular group of problems that we propose to attack involves
              the generalizations to several complex variables of some of the classical
              moment and interpolation problems on the unit disc such as the interpolation
              theorem of Nevanlinna and Pick and the moment theorems of Caratheodory and
              Herglotz. Another group involves deriving analogs of the theorem of Adamyan,
              Arov, and Krein on spaces more general than the classical Hardy space. Research
              intrinsic to operator theory that we will undertake includes issues involving
              model theory in one variable on nonsimply connected domains in the plane and in
              several variables on domains other than the bidisc. 

Operator Theory, the
              particular type of mathematics that we are proposing to investigate, has direct
              and concrete benefits for a number of areas of human endeavor. For example, the
              model theory aspects of our proposal all involve the generalization of the
              Commutant Lifting Structure which leads to an effcient algorithm for the
              discovery of oil from acoustical data taken on the surface of the earth. Other
              aspects would add to the theory of Linear Matrix Inequalities. LMI 's, which
              currently are all the rage in several areas of engineering, are an extension of
              linear programming, a mathematics which has made possible not only the
              optimization of large scale resource allocation but the accurate prediction of
              economic markets as well. Finally, the particular branch of function theory we
              propose to study, forms the mathematical core of the recently developed
              H-infinity control theory, which has been used to design control systems for
              fusion reactions inside Tokamaks and feedback stabilization systems for the
              space shuttle.  


