Title       : Reduction of Labor Turnover Impact through Dynamic Work Allocation and Active
               Operator Replacement Policies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0100370

Award Number: 0100370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249243             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Rene Villalobos rene.villalobos@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1786,5922,5977,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate different work allocation strategies in
              conjunction with operator replacement policies that appear to be more suitable
              for high labor turnover environments.  The idea is to find work allocation
              methods that give less workload to new operators and automatically increase
              this load as they gain experience. In particular, the reduction of the effects
              of labor turnover on productivity when hybrid assembly methods based on bucket
              brigade and work sharing are used will be will be researched.  This
              investigation will be performed by constructing the appropriate analytical and
              simulation models of different production lines and work allocation and
              operator replacement strategies.  An important characteristic of the research
              is the close collaboration that will be maintained with industry.   In order to
              develop and test the models, the investigators will gather information and
              validate the research results in the facilities of the industrial
              partner.

High labor turnover, frequently cited as a major contributor to
              lagging productivity and competitiveness of the U.S. industry, represents
              enormous costs that impact the competitiveness of a manufacturing firm.   The
              costs more frequently associated with labor turnover include those associated
              with recruiting and training the new employees.  However, there are other
              costs, such as production losses caused by the variability introduced by the
              new operators into the assembly line, that are frequently ignored.  These
              production losses are the result of the learning process that the new employees
              go through and that the current assembly lines are not designed to accommodate.
               While the usual approach to deal with high labor turnover focus on reducing it
              by using long-term strategies such as better recruiting and giving incentives
              to employees to stay with the company, this research project seeks engineering
              solutions to mitigate its negative effects.  This is particularly important for
              the period in which the benefits of the implementation of long-term policies
              are not felt yet.


