Title       : United Engineering Foundation Conference, "Structural Ceramics and Ceramic
               Composites for High Temperature Applications," Seville, Spain; October 7-12,
               2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0100739

Award Number: 0100739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles V. Freiman engfnd@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1711,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Funding is granted to assist in holding a conference on "Structural Ceramics and
              Ceramic Composites for High Temperature Applications" in Seville, Spain,
              October 7-12, 2001, sponsored by the United Engineering Foundation. The
              conference will encompass five sequential sessions on Modeling of High
              Temperature Mechanical Properties, New Thinking about Silicon Nitride
              Deformation, New Developments in SiC-based Materials, New Developments in Oxide
              Materials, and Environmental Effects on Non-Oxide Structural Ceramics. Each of
              these sessions attempts to address areas that are both timely and that have not
              been the subject of recent conferences. The modeling session will focus on new
              microstructure-based models for deformation The session on silicon nitride will
              attempt to link recent work on internal friction to that of the recently
              developed non-traditional deformation models. The session on Environmental
              Effects will bring together experts interested in solving the recently
              recognized susceptibility of non-oxide ceramics to degradation in
              high-temperature, high-velocity, water-containing environments. This problem
              effectively blocks widespread adoption of nitrides and carbides in
              high-temperature engines, an area of research for more than 30 years. The
              session on new developments in SiC-based materials will have a large component
              on the new so-called "Eco-ceramics" and biomorphic ceramics--silicon carbides
              with microstructures either fabricated from or inspired by natural materials. 
              The session on oxide ceramics is roughly equally divided between superplastic
              behavior and the deformation of directionally solidified eutectics. Although
              superplasticity has been around for quite some time as a topic in and of
              itself, it has resisted complete explanation.   %%%
Over the past thirty years
              outstanding efforts and resources have been devoted to research in ceramics,
              particularly for high-temperature structural applications such as turbine
              blades, heat exchangers, and diesel engine components. Improved fabrication
              procedures and novel materials have resulted, understanding of the
              properties-microstructure relationships has been achieved, and tentative models
              have been proposed, all leading to a better knowledge of the fundamentals and
              potential applications of ceramics in modern technology. Fracture, creep,
              slow-crack growth, and anelasticity are important mechanical properties at
              high-temperatures. These properties are strongly sensitive to environment
              (atmosphere, temperature, etc.) so understanding their  interaction with the
              environment is particularly appropriate. Furthermore, it has also been six
              years since the previous United Engineering Foundation Conference on Plastic
              Deformation of Ceramics, held in Snowbird, Utah, in August of 1994.  This
              conference united a number of researchers, and there has not been a similar
              conference since then.     

