Title       : Symposium: Minisymposium on Amphibian Metamorphosis, to be held Chicago, IL,
               January 3-7, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2000   
File        : a0100650

Award Number: 0100650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaishri Menon menonj@wpunj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Denver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Paterson Universit
	      300 Pompton Road
	      Wayne, NJ  074702103    201/595-2000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              During the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
              (SICB) to be held January 3-7 in Chicago, Illinois, the Division of Comparative
              Endocrinology will sponsor a mini-symposium on amphibian metamorphosis.  This
              mini-symposium will concentrate on molecular mechanisms and hormonal control of
              metamorphosis.  

Metamorphosis consists of a series of postembryonic
              developmental steps that leads to the transformation of an aquatic tadpole into
              an often land-dwelling frog.  This sequence of events is triggered and
              controlled by hormones.   Although humans are direct developers, and thus do
              not undergo a metamorphosis, many of the same basic developmental processes
              occur in frogs and man.  Amphibian metamorphosis provides an ideal animal model
              system to analyze, at the cellular and molecular level, how hormones
              orchestrate development. 

Concern over the status of amphibian populations
              has been mounting due to widespread reports of population declines and
              deformities in adult frogs. Recent reports of malformed frogs throughout the
              Great Lakes Region have focused concern on the effects of pollution on
              amphibian development. Both wildlife and human populations in the Great Lakes
              region and beyond are potentially at risk from the teratogenic effects of such
              pollutants. Because many of these pollutants can mimic or alter hormonal
              signaling there is a strong potential for disruption of basic developmental
              processes. Amphibians can serve both as indicator species of environmental
              contamination and powerful model systems for assessing potential deleterious
              effects of pollutants on wildlife and humans.

In this symposium, experts in
              various scientific disciplines and whose central theme of investigation is
              amphibian metamorphosis will take a multidisciplinary approach to analyzing
              this complex process. Speakers will address the molecular, evolutionary and
              hormonal aspects of amphibian metamorphosis.  This synthesis of scientific
              expertise from different disciplines will advance understanding of this
              fundamental developmental process and may advance our understanding of the
              physiological problems underlying declines of some amphibian populations.
              



