Title       : RUI: Semigroups of endomorphisms on von Neumann algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a0100407

Award Number: 0100407
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75564              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey L. Price glp@nadn.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Naval Academy
	      
	      Annapolis, MD  21402    301/267-6100

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract
Price

	This proposal is directed towards the investigation of
              some problems on dynamical systems on von Neumann algebras, and is related to
              recent work by a number of authors on the subject of semigroups of
              endomorphisms on von Neumann algebra factors.  This research project involves a
              number of areas of mathematics, including operator algebras, finite fields,
              number theory, and combinatorics.  In contrast to semigroups of automorphisms,
              a semigroup of endomorphisms may be viewed as a dynamical system that may
              proceed forward but not backward in time.  It is remarkable how challenging
              this subject has proven to be in light of the relatively simpler theory of
              one-parameter semigroups of automorphisms on a type I factor.  A principal goal
              of this proposal is to make additional progress in the classification of
              one-parameter semigroups of unital endomorphisms, analogous to Wigner's
              characterization of groups of automorphisms acting on factors of type I.    
              

	The study of operator algebras traces its origins back to the work of von
              Neumann and others.  Their goal was to construct mathematical models that
              capture the behavior of quantum mechanical systems, and to use these models to
              make predictions about the time evolution of such systems.  As knowledge has
              grown and techniques in the field have been refined, connections have been
              established between operator algebras and a number of other areas of
              mathematics and science.  This proposal involves connections among the fields
              of operator algebras, commutative algebra, number theory, and combinatorics. 
              The principal objects of study in this project are known as binary shifts on a
              certain type of operator algebra and are defined using bitstreams of 0's and
              1's such as one studies in the theory of linear recurring sequences.  A major
              goal of this project is to complete  the classification of the binary shifts
              and to relate this classification to the analysis of linear recurring
              sequences.  Binary shifts will also be studied for their potential applications
              to the theory of quantum dynamical systems, specifically those systems that may
              proceed forward, but not backward, in time.  


