Title       : Studies in noncommutative dynamics and multivariable operator theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0100487

Award Number: 0100487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187800             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Arveson arveson@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Averson

This work relates to two loosely connected areas, a) the
              theory of one-parameter groups of automorphisms of the algebra of all operators
              on a Hilbert space which posses a certain causal structure, and b) the theory
              of commuting n-tuples of operators acting on a Hilbert space.  We have been
              attempting to understand the nature of noncommutative dynamics for many years,
              and our approach recently has been based on the theory of E_0-semigroups. 
              There has been exciting recent progress on several fronts, the full
              implications of which are still being sorted out.  In multivariable operator
              theory, we have introduced a "curvature" invariant which is somewhat analogous
              to the integral of curvature of a Riemannian manifold.  We have shown that it
              is an integer in many cases by relating it to another invariant, the Euler
              characteristic of a certain finitely generated module.  However, the key
              formula is valid only in certain cases, and we are now in the process of
              relating the curvature invariant to a more subtle integer invariant,
              essentially the index of a "Dirac operator" that can be associated with the
              given n-tuple of operators.
In quantum theory the observable quantities are
              represented by operators.  The algebra of operators differs sharply from the
              algebra of numbers because the result of multiplying two operators A and B
              depends on the order in which they are multiplied: AB is not the same as BA. 
              This failure of the commutativity law has profound consequences, the most basic
              one being the uncertainty principle.  The flow of time in quantum theory is
              represented by certain transformations, each of which moves operators in subtle
              ways, and the dynamics of quantum theory is the study of such groups of
              transformations.  This "noncommutative dynamics" is very different from the
              commutative dynamics of classical physics.  Our approach is based on a certain
              notion of causality, which involves the technical idea of semigroups of
              endomorphisms.  Recent progress has been very encouraging - with the discovery
              of new connections with probability theory, in which one may now pass back and
              forth between noncommutative flows of time and certain random processes which
              can be thought of as "off-white" noise, in that they are close to white noise,
              but not exactly white noise.  In a different but related direction, our work on
              sets of (commuting) operators establishes significant connections between sets
              of operators and fundamental geometric ideas such as curvature.  At issue is a
              numerical invariant for sets of operators.  While this invariant appears to be
              a real number capable of taking on any value, it is in fact an integer.  What
              integer?  The answer that appears to be emerging now is that this number is the
              numerical index of a certain Dirac operator.  There appear to be significant
              connections with other parts of mathematics, including Riemannian geometry and
              algebraic geometry.

