Title       : Modeling and Design of Reconfigurable Point Actuated Aperture Antennas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0100246

Award Number: 0100246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Washington washington.88@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. D. Burnside  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0100246
Washington

In order to meet the communication and broadcasting needs
              of the 21st century, aperture antennas are generally required to have shaped
              surfaces so that their radiation patterns efficiently match the geographical
              regions where the signals are to be transmitted and received.  These antennas
              are, in general, rigid and consist of parabolic, paraboloidal, cylindrical,
              spherical, or hyperboloidal shapes.  In terms of the current state of the art,
              beam shaping with these rigid structures is possible with multiple off-center
              feed arrays or asymmetric shaping of the reflector surface (contour beam
              reflector antennas).  Beam steering can be accomplished electrically by
              utilizing the feed array or mechanically by using specially designed gimbals
              that tilt the whole reflector.  In the case of spaceborne contoured beam
              reflector antennas, a major limitation is the fact that a rigid shaped
              reflector is optimized for coverage of a specific geographical area.  Once the
              antenna is deployed on orbit, radiation pattern modification cannot be
              accomplished.  As satellites become more reliable and their expected service
              life increase, the probability that the satellite service area and/or operator
              will change also increases.  Mechanically active antennas have been proposed as
              a solution to this problem, but at time there are no commercially viable units.
               The main rationale of this stems from the following issues:

1. We have
              algorithms that can accurately predict reflector shapes based on user defined
              radiation patterns, but we have very few mechanisms that deal with real
              structures and even fewer for how to achieve these deflections for reflectors
              that will change their shape dynamically.

2. There is very little
              fundamental research on how many actuators to use, actuator placement, and
              optimal actuator deflections for active aperture antennas.

3. There is no
              fundamental mechanism for coupling the electromagnetics to the mechanics in a
              seamless fashion.

The research proposed in this study seeks to effectively
              design, model and construct a mechanically reconfigurable antenna that
              addresses these issues.  Since this type of antenna can be built at a fraction
              of the total cost of a traditional phased array antenna there is commercial
              significance as well.  For example, a commercial manufacturer of phased array
              antennas claims that they can build phased array antennas at a cost of about
              $100.00 per element.  The resolution needed for space based communications
              ranges from about 10,000 to 1,000,000 elements.  This puts the total cost
              anywhere between ($1.0M-$100M).  The system weight and complexity can also
              elevate this cost.  A mechanically reconfigurable system can be built with off
              the shelf components today for less than $25,000.  Presently there are roughly
              600 satellites in commission throughout the world.  By the year 2010, it is
              expected that up to 1000 new satellites will be launched, many with multiple
              antenna systems.  Based on this fact it is easy to see the potential payoff.  A
              fundamental approach to design and construction of these antennas will
              revolutionize the way these aperture antennas are built today!

