Title       : Automatic Data Segmentation and Geometric Reasoning of Unorganized Point Cloud
               for Reverse Engineering of Precision Mechanical Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0100074

Award Number: 0100074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chia-Hsiang Menq   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of the necessary technologies
              that support automatic geometric model reconstruction of existing objects
              having arbitrary topology when the prototype is created or modified on the shop
              floor and when a computer-aided design model does not exist.  Particularly, the
              focus is to automate the data segmentation process on the reconstructed
              manifold surface and to facilitate optimal geometric model reconstruction for
              precision mechanical parts by geometric computation and reasoning.  An
              algorithm will be developed to efficiently reconstruct a triangle mesh from
              3-dimensional unorganized coordinate points to optimally recover the object
              shape.  The reconstructed triangle mesh captures object topology with the
              associated 2-manifold represented as a combinatorial structure, which
              establishes explicit relations among the data points, and provides a
              topological domain with necessary differential geometric characteristics for
              the subsequent data segmentation process.   By extending segmentation concepts
              from the regular image domain to the irregular mesh domain, a robust two-step
              automatic data segmentation approach will be developed, combining the
              border-based approach and the region growing approach.  Finally, algorithms for
              geometric computation and reasoning will be developed to automatically classify
              the segmented patches into surface elements and to infer possible topological
              relations and geometric constraints among them. 
 
If successful, the results
              of this research will lead to significant improvements in automatic geometric
              model reconstruction and reverse engineering.  With automatic data segmentation
              and intelligent geometric reasoning, user intervention can be eliminated and
              the entire model reconstruction process can be shortened from days to minutes. 
              When integrated with state of the art scanning devices, the developed
              technologies could lead to a seamless reverse engineering process and support
              rapid design and prototyping of high-precision mechanical components.  The
              results will have potential application in a whole spectrum of engineering
              problems with a major impact on rapid design and prototyping, shape analysis,
              and virtual reality.


