Title       : The Characterization of Organic Bistable Device and the Formation of High
               Performance Organic Memory Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  2001     
File        : a0100611

Award Number: 0100611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77759              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yang Yang yangy@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Recently, we observed that organic semiconductor device shows strong bistable
              states with remarkably differing electrical conductivities when it is structure
              right.  The transition from an electrically insulating state to a conducting
              state in the device is accompanied by a drastic increase in injection current
              by as much as six orders of magnitude.  The retention of the high conductivity
              state was observed even after switching off the power.  Furthermore, the low
              conductive states can be re-established by applying a negative voltage pulse. 
              These discoveries pave the way for potential applications such as low-cost,
              large-area, electrically addressable high-density data storage devices, organic
              switches, and sensors.  This newly invented organic device is significant for
              two reasons.  First, this device uses organic insulators as the active
              material, thereby providing new options for organic electronic devices, which
              have been traditionally associated with organic semiconductors.  Second,
              electronic memory is a very important component in all electronic devices such
              as computers, cell phones, PDAs etc.  It is anticipated that the successful
              development of this device as memory cells will have a tremendous impact in the
              electronic industry.  Unfortunately, the mechanism of this device, for example
              the sudden change in electrical conductivity at ~3V; and the reason behind the
              retention of the high conductivity state even after switching off the power, is
              not yet clearly understood.  Our goal of this project is to gain the
              understanding of the organic bistable device, from both experimental and
              theoretical modeling approaches.  Based on the obtained results, we will try to
              further improve device performance and to realize other applications.

