Title       : Non-commutative Analysis and Symmetry in Operator Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0100883

Award Number: 0100883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1302680            (Estimated)
Investigator: Masamichi Takesaki mt@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sorin Popa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Effros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
Effros/Popa/Takesaki
 
The three PI's intend to continue their
              investigations on a broad range of problems in operator algebra theory. Effros
              and Ruan are continuing their collaboration on operator spaces. Effros and Ruan
              are particularly interested in studying the local theory of von Neumann
              algebraic preduals. Building on their earlier result with Junge that that all
              von Neumann preduals are locally reflexive, and that the injective preduals
              have a simple characterization, Effros and Ruan hope to prove that the general
              architecture of a von Neumann algebra can be described in terms of the local
              structure of the preduals. Effros also intends to look at the quantized
              analogues of rotundity. A number of Popa's research projects will be concerned
              with his axiomatization of the standard invariant for subfactors. In particular
              he plans to work on the most challenging problem in subfactor theory: finding
              techniques that would be applicable to the theory of subfactors of hyperfinite
              factors. He intends to continue his studies with Bisch of property T in the
              context of subfactors. In a very different direction, he will investigate the
              structure theory of C*-algebras based in part on his earlier work on the theory
              of local approximation by finite dimensional algebras, and of the relative
              Dixmier property for C*-algebras. Takesaki plans to continue his development of
              a canonical approach to the theory of type III factors. In the next stage of
              his research program, Takesaki and his collaborators intend to complete their
              studies of outer automorphism actions of a discrete amenable group on an
              approximately finite dimensional (or hyperfinite) factor of type III-lambda
              (lambda larger than zero) and he expects that the type III-zero case will yield
              to this analysis. He will continue his investigation into the most difficult
              problem in the area: the classfication of one-parameter groups of
              automorphisms. Takesaki expects to apply classfication principles learned from
              factor theory to the classification of certain classes of
              C*-algebras.

Operator algebraists study the mathematics of quantum physics.
              In 1926 Heisenberg discovered that the paradoxes of atomic particles could be
              resolved with a modified version of Newtonian physics. He showed that the
              equations of the classical theory were still valid, provided one reinterpreted
              their symbols. In the classical theory these variables stand for functions.
              Heisenberg showed one can predict the behaviour of atomic particles if one
              instead regarded the variables as representing possibly infinite arrays or
              ``matrices'' of numbers. A few years later, von Neumann gave a mathematically
              precise formulation of these quantum variable in terms of Hilbert space
              operators. He went on to suggest that since the classical notions of
              measurement and geometry that underlie so much of mathematics no longer
              correspond to our understanding of the real world, it was necessary to seek
              quantized versions of mathematics. As in physics, one must begin by replacing
              functions by operators. In the last fifty years, operator algebraists have
              succeeded in quantizing a remarkable number of areas of mathematics, including
              analysis, topology, differential and Riemanian geometry, probability theory,
              and the theory of symmetry. As in quantum physics, the quantum world of
              mathematics is remarkable in the completely new phenomena that occur. The
              theory has had profound applications to various areas, including knot theory
              and low-dimensional topology, index theory on foliated manifolds, the
              classification of dynamical systems, and most recently, mathematical frameworks
              for both the standard model of quantum field theory (Connes) and
              renormalization theory (Connes and Kreimer). In this broad framework, Effros is
              one of the founders of quantized functional analysis (operator space theory),
              Popa is a leading figure in the theory of quantum symmetries (subfactor
              theory), and Takesaki is internationally recognized for his work on the modern
              theory of non-commutative integration and its use in studying the structure of
              von Neumann algebras and their automorphism groups

