Title       : Partial Differential Equations and Variational Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0100260

Award Number: 0100260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Han Qing.Han.7@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator would like to continue his work on
              partial
differential equations and variational problems. The first theme
              of
this project, and also of the research of the PI over the past
              several
years, is to study special sets associated to solutions to
              differential
equations and variational problems. The problems that the PI
              would
continue to work on include the geometric structure of level sets,
              in
particular the nodal sets and the singular sets. The study is
              partly
motivated by the desire to understand to what extent the solutions
              can
be described quantitatively by polynomials or by homogeneous
              solutions.
These problems have a close connection with other fields in
              mathematics,
including several complex variables and algebraic geometry. A
              new
research trend is the study of the relation between the growth of
              nodal
sets and the growth of solutions themselves. It is expected that
              they
are closely related to each other. The second theme of this project
              is
to study the isometric embedding of two-dimensional metrics in the
              three
dimensional Euclidean space, both locally and globally. In general,
              the
isometric embedding is based on the complicated Nash-Moser
              iteration,
which requires detailed discussions of the linearized equations.
              Moreover,
the global isometric embedding is expected to meet some
              topological
obstacles. Difficulties arise when the Gaussian curvature changes
              its
sign. Singular sets may appear even if the embedding exists.

The
              problems of the singular sets originate from the material science
and the
              control theory. Singular sets, as the name suggests, are those
sets where
              singularities occur. Precise definitions vary according to
problems where they
              arise. In reality it is impossible to eliminate
singular sets, the so-called
              "bad sets". An example is provided by
cracks in the building material. Hence
              one of the central tasks is to
investigate the conditions under which the
              singular sets can be
controlled and hence can be made small. Another
              application involves
the high-performance computing, in particular the image
              processing. One
problem is to recover the image from a distorted copy and the
              difference
is measured exactly by some singular sets. It is highly expected
              that
such sets should be small enough to be neglected. The problems stated
in
              the project are simplified mathematical models. It is the hope by
the
              investigator that the discussion of these mathematical problems
would improve
              the methods to control the singular sets in various
applications.

