Title       : A Novel High-Speed Electrometer for Nanoscale Electronic Device Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0100075

Award Number: 0100075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Fay patrick.j.fay.9@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexei O. Orlov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory L. Snider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The development of a high-speed,high sensitivity single-electron detector for
              research in the area of quantum-effect electronics and computing is proposed.
              The electrometer will be applied directly to the study of quantum cellular
              automata (QCA)for the implementation of logic circuits using
              anostructures.

The proposed work will result significant progress in both
              the  understanding of single-electron transistor (SET)and QCA switching
              dynamics as well as the performance of high-speed QCA circuits.  Previous work
              has shown the feasibility of QCA-based digital logic;logic gates and latches
              have already been demonstrated experimentally.What is still needed is
              experimental verification of the high speed capabilities of these devices. 
              Once this has been achieved, real applications can be contemplated which employ
              nanostructure-based logic.The proposed research will make this possible.

The
              proposed detector is based on a sub-nanosecond temporal resolution
              continuous-wave micro-wave-frequency reflectometer.  In contrast to
              conventional approaches, this technique uses changes in the reflection
              coefficient of a resonant single electron transistor (SET)sensor rather than
              attempting to directly sense the voltage or current in the SET.The
              capacitively-coupled external charge changes the conductance (via the Coulomb
              blockade)in the SET 's tunnel junctions.  

This proposed work will provide
              both undergraduate and graduate students with excellent opportunities for
              research in nanostructure-based devices and circuits,as well as serve as a
              vehicle for demonstrating, in Prof.Fay 's Microwave Circuit Design course (EE
              458), the use of microwave-frequency engineering concepts in a novel and
              unconventional context. The proposed work will also enhance research
              infrastructure for applications other than QCA-based circuits, since the
              high-speed electrometer will enable numerous experiments in a variety of fields
              in science and engineering that are not yet possible.

