Title       : Inner Model Theory and Descriptive Set Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0100745

Award Number: 0100745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Steel steel@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Steel is working in the theory of canonical inner models for large cardinal
              hypotheses, and in descriptive set theory. In inner model theory, he has
              focussed on questions related to the fundamental iterability problem, and on
              questions concerning how to construct inner models in various situations so as
              to obtain consistency-strength lower bounds. He is particularly interested in 
              obtaining large cardinal strength from the Proper Forcing Axiom,  from the
              failure of Jensen's square principle at a singular cardinal, and from the
              failure of the Unique Branches Hypothesis. In descriptive set theory, Steel is
              working on various questions related to the structure of models satisfying
              strong forms of determinacy.

    Strong axioms of infinity, or as they are
              more often called, large cardinal hypotheses, have been a focal point of work
              in set theory and the foundations of mathematics for thirty or forty years, for
              at least two reasons.  First, large cardinal hypotheses can be used to decide
              in a natural way many questions which cannot be decided on the basis of the
              commonly accepted system of axioms for mathematics, and second, large cardinal
              hypotheses provide a way of organizing and surveying all possible natural
              extensions of this commonly accepted system.   One important way to study large
              cardinal hypotheses is to construct canonical minimal inner models in which
              these hypotheses are true. Such models admit a systematic, detailed analysis of
              their internal structure which makes them an invaluable  technical tool in both
              sorts of application of large cardinal hypotheses.   At the moment, we have a
              good theory of canonical inner models satisfying ``There is a Woodin cardinal",
              and even slightly stronger large cardinal hypotheses.  A fundamental open
              problem, one of the most important open problems in set theory, is to extend
              this theory to models satisfying ``There is a supercompact cardinal". Steel is
              working in this direction.


