Title       : Hopf Algebras and their Actions on Rings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a0100461

Award Number: 0100461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107913             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Montgomery smontgom@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will study the relationship between the prime ideals of a Hopf
              crossed product and the prime ideals of the underlying algebra on which the
              Hopf algebra acts.  A more general problem is to compare the primes in a Hopf
              Galois extension; such extensions include some well-known extensions of quantum
              groups.  Finite-dimensional semisimple Hopf algebras and their representations
              will also be considered, in particular questions on the Schur indicator of an
              irreducible representation, as well as other invariants of the representation. 
              Finally some problems about generalized Lie algebras will be studied, such as
              when can they be twisted via a Hopf cocycle to an ordinary Lie superalgebra. 
              These generalized Lie algebras are Lie algebras in the category of comodules
              over a cotriangular Hopf algebra, and include, for example, Lie color algebras,
              the case when the Hopf algebra is a group algebra.  

It is desirable in many
              areas of mathematics to try to classify certain objects,or at least to know
              enough about them to distinguish them from similar objects.  Thus one tries to
              attach "invariants" to these objects. Hopf algebras appear as such invariants
              both in mathematical physics (in areas such as conformal field theory) and in
              several areas of mathematics itself (such as studying knots in geometry). Thus
              to describe these structures, it would be useful to understand Hopf algebras
              better and to begin to classify them, as well as to understand how Hopf
              algebras act on other objects.  Moreover within algebra itself, Hopf algebras
              provide a unifying framework for other algebraic objects, such as groups, Lie
              algebras, and their recent generalizations coming from quantum mechanics.  Thus
              studying them should give new insights within algebra as well.

