Title       : Experimental Investigations on Chemically Treated Sulfate Soils For Fundamental
               Understanding of Heaving Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0100255

Award Number: 0100255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anand J. Puppala anand@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laureano R. Hoyos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Sulfate-rich cohesive soils are found in several regions of the United States.
              When the sulfate-rich soils are treated with calcium based lime and cement
              stabilizers for soil improvements, the sulfates in soils react with the calcium
              of stabilizers and alumina of clayey soils to form a crystalline mineral,
              ettringite. This mineral, upon hydration, undergoes a large amount of heave in
              the soils. This heave is termed as sulfate induced heave in the literature.
              Buildings, pavements, runways and embankments built on cement and lime treated
              sulfate-bearing soils have been affected by this heave distress. Repair and
              maintenance of the distressed structures costs millions of dollars annually.
              Potential heave problems may arise in the future due to the increased use of
              industrial sulfuric waste products for soil stabilization and solidification.
              Hence, it is necessary to fundamentally understand sulfate-stabilizer reaction
              mechanisms in soils that cause sulfate heave movements.  

This project is
              designed to investigate the influence of soil compositional and environmental
              factors on the heave mechanisms in sulfate rich soils and establish problematic
              sulfate levels for various soil compositional and environmental variables. Four
              types of clayey soils with different types of clay mineralogies, two cement and
              lime treatment levels, five sulfate amounts, two moisture content levels, and
              three temperature conditions will be investigated. Treated and untreated soil
              samples will be prepared, cured if necessary, by accelerated curing methods at
              different temperatures and then tested under a variety of mineralogical,
              chemical and engineering swell, suction potential and shear strength tests.
              Test results will be analyzed to understand the possible causes of sulfate
              heave mechanisms and investigate time periods at which ettringite formation
              takes place in soils. Additionally, models will be developed to predict
              problematic sulfate levels in soils at which heave distress can be expected for
              a given chemical treatment. These models will be verified by comparing their
              predictions with the known heave distresses of field sites.

This project
              will make a strong contribution to the fundamental understanding of the sulfate
              induced heaving mechanisms in soils. Potential benefits of this research
              project are: (1) develop problematic sulfate conditions for different clayey
              soils at which cement and lime treatments cause heave distress, (2) develop
              better chemical treatment methods in the future by targeting the factors that
              influence the ettringite formation, and (3) facilitate the use of sulfuric
              wastes for recycling applications in stabilization. Also, applications of free
              alumina and electric conductivity measurements in soils to identify problematic
              sulfates will be evaluated. This project will also have a strong impact on the
              researchers' educational activities. An integral part of this project is to
              teach swell, shrink, mineralogical and chemical characterization methods as
              well as data acquisition, data reduction and analysis and data presentation
              concepts to graduate and undergraduate students. Both graduate and
              undergraduate students will be encouraged to work as a team in performing the
              research tasks. The research project information will be made available to
              interested individuals through the web address of the geotechnical program.
              Updates on research status and findings will be posted throughout the year.
              Also, the research findings will be disseminated in various journals and
              proceedings articles.


