Title       : Spectral Geometry of Non-Compact Domains and Riemannian Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0100829

Award Number: 0100829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Perry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for DMS - 0100829

The principal investigator will study the spectral
              geometry of non-compact
domains and Riemannian manifolds in order to elucidate
              the geometric
content of scattering poles. First, the PI will continue his
              study of the
spectral geometry of hyperbolic manifolds and their
              perturbations. He will
study resonances as functions on the deformation space
              of the underlying
discrete group, and define and analyze a determinant of the
              Laplacian.
Secondly, the PI will study scattering theory for the wave equation
              on
two-step nilpotent Lie groups and their quotients by discrete
              subgroups.
New parametrices or the wave equation on the Heisenberg and
              Heisenberg-type
groups will be derived, and trace formula for certain
              quotients obtained.
Riemannian submersion techniques of Gordon, Wilson, and
              others will be used
to obtain pairs and families of `isoscattering' manifolds
              which will help
determine the limits of geometric information which may be
              deduced from a
knowledge of the scattering poles.  Thirdly, the PI will study
              the
isoscattering problem for exterior domains in Euclidean space.


The
              fundamental problem of spectral geometry is to elucidate the
geometric content
              of the Laplace spectrum on a Riemannian manifold.
For so-called scattering
              manifolds, the eigenvalues of the Laplacian
together with scattering
              resonances constitute the spectral data for the
manifold.  Elucidating the
              geometric content of such spectral data
advances our understanding of
              quantization, produces new analytic tools
for the study of geometric objects,
              and provides insight into inverse
problems of a more `applied' nature where
              the eigenvalues and scattering
poles are measurable quantities. The present
              work aims to begin with
geometrically natural examples where techniques of Lie
              theory, automorphic
functions, and harmonic analysis may be used, and progress
              to harder
problems such as target identification by radar where such
              techniques 
are not available but the underlying mathematical problems are
              very similar.


