Title       : Collaborative Research: Managing Material Flow and Cash Flow in the Supply Chain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a0100511

Award Number: 0100511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel Q. Zhang rqz2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this collaborative research project is to develop new models that
              can help firms make their production and financial decisions simultaneously. 
              Production decisions (e.g., when to produce and how much to produce, when to
              order and how much to order) and financial decisions (e.g., short term
              borrowing, issuing of dividends) are interrelated in a firm.  This project will
              integrate recent results in production and inventory control with those in
              finance, as well as new methodologies in stochastic programming, to develop
              models that can help firms make their production and financial decisions
              simultaneously in the presence of demand uncertainty and financial
              constraints.

In this research, models will be developed for making
              production and financial decisions simultaneously and study the effect of
              financial constraints on production decisions. This is motivated by experience
              working with industry.   The research tasks offer the potential to integrate
              the state of the art in traditional production and inventory control modeling
              with finance.  If successful, the research will provide structural results for
              the problems and meaningful insights for managers; and, useful tools for
              improvement in production and inventory planning. The decision tools will
              integrate material flows and financial flows and help firms make production and
              financial decisions simultaneously in the presence of uncertainty.  The models
              will be demonstrated through actual use by industrial partners.

