Title       : Structure and Dynamics in Boron- and Fluoride-Containing Oxide Glasses and
               Liquids: High-Resolution and High-Temperature Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2001      
File        : a0100986

Award Number: 0100986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345771             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan F. Stebbins stebbins@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Solid-state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance will continue to be used to study the
              structure and dynamics of two classes of oxide glasses that have major
              technological applications, namely boron-containing glasses and oxyfluoride
              glasses. We will acquire quantitative microscopic information on borate,
              borosilicate, aluminoborate, and oxyfluoride glasses at ambient and high
              temperature, including systems containing diamagnetic analogs of rare earth
              elements, and will interpret and model existing thermodynamic and transport
              property data in light of these new findings. We will continue to emphasize
              temperature effects, with both in situ, high temperature measurements and
              studies of glasses prepared with varying thermal histories, which record the
              liquid structure at a range in temperature. We will use a wide range of NMR
              methods (on nuclides including 11B, 170, 19F, 23Na, 25Mg, 27AI, and 29Si),
              supplemented where needed by other methods such as Raman and infrared
              spectroscopy. Instruments available at Stanford include spectrometers with 9.4,
              14.1, and 18.8 Tesla magnets (the latter the highest field strength currently
              commercially obtainable), with sophisticated high-speed magic-angle spinning,
              double and triple resonance, and high temperature NMR probes. A newly-developed
              rapid quench apparatus that will allow thermal history studies of small,
              valuable, isotopically enriched samples to be done. Applications of new NMR
              methods, in particular multiple quantum NMR, will continue to play a major
              role, as will the empirical calibration of NMR observables with structure of
              known crystalline model compounds. Models linking the microscopic and
              macroscopic will continue to be developed and tested and a new program of ab
              initio energy calculations, based on density functional theory, will be used to
              complement experimental results. 

Boron-containing oxide glasses are widely
              used in corrosion- and temperature-resistant containers, pipes and tanks, in
              "fiberglass" composites, in optical components, computer display screens, etc.
              Borosilicate glasses are also likely to play a major role in sequestering
              radioactive wastes. The ease with which the boron cation changes its local
              structural environment as a function of composition and temperature not only
              contributes to the useful properties of these materials but makes them a unique
              and intriguing subject scientifically. In oxyfluoride glasses, some oxygen ion
              is replaced by fluoride, again giving the resulting glasses and glass-forming
              liquids unique properties, and again posing a wealth of fundamental scientific
              issues concerning the structure and dynamics of mixed-anion systems. Fluoride
              has long been used to lower viscosities and melting temperatures of
              glass-forming liquids without clear understanding of mechanism; in recent
              high-tech innovations, oxyfluoride glasses are becoming interesting as hosts
              for rare earth elements in laser and optical amplifier materials.   In all of
              these materials, the ability to tailor their properties to specific
              technological applications requires quantitative knowledge of their structure
              at the atomic scale, and the dynamics with which that structure changes in the
              precursor high-temperature glass melts.               Nuclear magnetic
              resonance "sees" the local atomic structure and dynamics, often in a highly
              quantitative way, around selected isotopes of many of the most important
              constituents of oxide glasses. NMR has thus proven to be a near-ideal tool for
              studying such non-crystalline materials, and has increased our understanding of
              them enormously. This project should have direct interest to the Materials
              Science community, but its results will also have real significance to
              physicists working on the dynamics of glass- forming and other complex liquids,
              to physical chemists developing new applications of solid-state NMR, and to
              geochemists trying to model and predict the behavior of silicate magmas in
              nature. In the past, and hopefully in the future, the discipline-crossing
              nature of this type of study has broadened the perspectives of students in our
              group, with backgrounds in spectroscopy or geochemistry, into the fascinating
              and technologically important world of glass and ceramic sciences.

