Title       : Microplasma for Dry Etching: New Approaches for Micro and Nano Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a0100366

Award Number: 0100366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266567             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yogesh Gianchandani   (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy E. Wendt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0100366
Gianchandani

Plasma processing is routinely used in semiconductor
              processing applications, and is the dominant technique for silicon etching.
              Conventional etchers aim to create a uniform plasma across the process chamber
              in which the silicon wafers are located. However, there are applications in
              micromachining and nanotechnology in which alternative paradigms may prove
              useful. For example, present fabrication techniques are not practical for
              manufacturing an array of trenches with 100 different depths, which would
              require 100 lithography steps. Such a array could be useful for applications
              like biological cell sorting.

This proposal addresses questions pertaining
              to the science and technology of spatially confined reactive plasmas
              (microplasmas) and their application to the etching of silicon and other
              materials. In particular, it focuses on in-situ microplasmas, which are
              generated by electrodes patterned on the silicon wafer itself. The viability of
              this concept, which differs radically from other recent work in microplasmas,
              has been demonstrated by preliminary experiments in which in-situ DC
              microplasmas were used to etch completely through a silicon wafer in less than
              one hour. The proposed effort will explore the physics, technology, and
              diagnostics for reactive microplasmas for etching silicon and other
              materials.

A number of etching configurations will be examined for their
              impact on plasma confinement, etch rates, anisotropy, mask selectivities, and
              electrode wear. Promising electrode structures will be explored, including
              options in which the ion flux is electrostatically controlled to locally adjust
              the etch rate and sidewall profile. Various electrode materials, powering
              schemes, and gas chemistries will be evaluated. Both in-situ and ex-situ
              diagnostic tools (including thin-film Langmuir probes) will be developed and
              used. Spectroscopic analysis will be performed. The dependencies of the Paschen
              breakdown curve, the molecular behavior of the ambient gas, the ionization
              rates and the electron energies, as well as the relationship of these
              parameters to the etch rates and profiles will be explored.

Theoretical
              models will be developed for the reactive microplasmas by refining global
              plasma analysis. This includes the incorporation of realistic basic data and
              consideration of discharge geometry and electrode material. The theoretical
              models will be used for scaling studies to determine if the plasmas can be
              reduced to nanometer dimensions. Supporting experiments will be carried out to
              explore the scaling limits and validate the theory.

The proposed reactive
              microplasmas have the potential not only for making a contribution to
              traditional etching applications, but also facilitating the fabrication of
              microstructures that were previously infeasible. Using microplasmas, an array
              of 100 trenches with different depths could be built with just two masking
              steps. In addition, if the proposed research is successful, not only will it be
              possible to individually specify the profile of every trench in the array, but
              also to skew the direction of the etch with the help of local electric fields
              controlled by secondary electrodes. In the longer term, the proposed research
              could lead to other avenues of research, including localized deposition by
              sputtering or plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD).

