Title       : GOALI: Process Modeling and Analysis for "Smart Tool" Redevelopment in Flexible
               Line Boring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0100210

Award Number: 0100210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Endres wjendres@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip S. Szuba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9146,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project aims
              to extend the results of basic research in an industrial setting to assist in
              the development of a more reconfigurable line boring process.  Line boring is
              widely used to machine a concentric line of bores, such as those for an engine
              camshaft or crankshaft.  The industrial partner, Lamb Technicon Machining
              Systems, recently completed a prototype flexible line-boring machine, but
              further development is needed for its "smart tool", which is to provide
              compensation for tool vibration through internal laser feedback and
              piezoelectric actuation.  A new process stability solution that addresses the
              real, corner-radiused tooth geometry seen in boring operations will be extended
              to account for the dynamic effects of the tool's guide-pads, the actuator and
              the controller.  A new cutting tooth concept will then be modeled and analyzed
              toward reducing the radial machining force by 50%.  Model-based tooth designs
              will be tested to compare forces, cutting power and tool wear to those measured
              using conventional corner-radiused tools.

If successful, the extended
              stability solution will help avoid instability that can damage the expensive
              smart tool.  Having a science-based tool like this is particularly important
              here due to the added complexity of the system.  If the radial force can then
              be reduced through the new cutting tooth concept, either the requirements on
              actuator size and power will be reduced or increased actuator motion will be
              achieved.  This will facilitate smaller boring bars and less demand on the
              actuator power-induction system that must operate across a rotating interface. 
              Perhaps the most important outcome of this collaboration will be the bilateral
              impact on the research programs of both Lamb Technicon and the investigator.  
              The investigator will bring specific expertise to the smart tool problem while
              learning more about the industry's true needs and their day-to-day
              challenges


