Title       : Certain operators and operator algebras in perturbation theory and on function
               spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0100249

Award Number: 0100249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91021              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jingbo Xia jxia@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposer will continue the research that he has
been pursuing under the
              support of the National Science Foundation.  The
specific areas of the
              proposed research include the following:  (1)
Simultaneous diagonalization of
              commuting tuples of self-adjoint operators
modulo various norm ideals.   This
              problem has been solved (with NSF
support) in the case where the norm ideal is
              the Schatten p-class  when  p 
is strictly greater than  1.    The proposer
              will next consider the case
where  p  is  1, i.e., where the norm ideal is the
              trace class.   This is
a difficult problem,  but this is also an important
              problem because of its
potential applications. The proposer will  also
              consider a class of
ideals which are related to the Schatten class.  (2) The
              complete
determination of automorphisms of the full Toeplitz algebra on the
              unit
circle which are induced by homeomorphisms of the circle.   This has
              been
accomplished under previous NSF support in the case where
              the
homeomorphism in question is bi-Lipschitz.  The final goal is to
              remove
the bi-Lipschitz condition.  This involves some careful estimates of
              norms
in the Toeplitz algebra and the use of certain singular integral
              operators.  
(3) Toeplitz algebras associated with minimal flows.  The
              ultimate goal
here is to use  K-theory to characterize the invertibility of
              systems of 
Toeplitz operators associated with such flows.   (4)   Hankel
              operators on
certain reproducing-kernel Hilbert spaces.   Here the main
              question is the
Schatten-class membership of these operator.    The
              reproducing kernel
will be involved in certain quantitative estimates.

The
              proposed problems are fairly representative of the current
research interests
              in operator theory and operator algebras, which is a
study of, among other
              things,  the spectral properties of various linear
operators.  In part
              inspired and demanded by the development of the
quantum theory in the early
              part of the 20th century, this study was
initiated by great mathematicians
              such as H. Weyl and J. von Neumann.
Because additivity (i.e., linearity)
              appears in many fundamental aspects 
of nature, operator theory provides the
              right mathematical tools for
scientific fields ranging from atomic physics to
              optimal control.  Many
abstract problems in operator theory and operator
              algebras owe their
origin to these fields of applications. For example,  both
              for theoretical
reasons and for practical applications,  quite often one must
              deal with, 
or introduce,  perturbations which are "small"  by  some measure
              or other.
Problem (1) is about such perturbations.  The root of this problem
              can be
traced back to a paper of Weyl published in 1909, which asserts that
              a
continuous spectrum can be turned into a discrete one by a  compact 
              
(which a measure of "smallness")  perturbation.  Problem (2) requires
              both
modern techniques and classical-style mathematical analysis.   A
              theme
which underlies all these problems is the establishment of various 
              
estimates (i.e., bounds or growth rates).   In general, the sharper
              the
estimates, the better theorems one obtains.


