Title       : Intermediate Energy Physics at Boston University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0100468

Award Number: 0100468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1560000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Miller miller@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Carey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Lee Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Our Intermediate Energy research group at Boston University consists of
              three
faculty, two postdoctoral fellows, four graduate students, and
              several
part-time undergraduate students. In the next three years, we
              will:
1) Continue to work on the Muon g-2 experiment. The muon is like
a
              heavy electron but is unstable and decays like a radioactive nuclear
isotope.
              Because it has both spin and charge, it behaves like a microscopic
bar magnet,
              whose magnetism we measure in our experiment (g-2). Our latest
value, based on
              a small part of our data, disagrees with the Standard Model
(a theory which
              describes the particles in nature and the forces between them)
prediction by
              several times the error. If this disagreement persists after
we analyze all of
              our data, it will be very exciting since it suggests the
existence of new
              physics beyond the standard model. We plan two other
experiments using the
              same large storage ring magnet which is used for
g-2, the measurement of the
              muon electric dipole moment(EDM) and the
direct measurement of the muon
              neutrino mass. The EDM is expected in
theory to be smaller than we can
              measure, while indirect  measurements
from other experiments suggest that the
              neutrino mass is not zero.
2) Measure the muon lifetime, which determines the
              strength of the
weak interaction within the standard model.
3) Measure the
              muon to electron conversion rate to unprecedented accuracy,
a process which is
              forbidden by the Standard Model.
All of these measurements directly test the
              Standard Model. Any
significant deviation of the experimental values from
              theory would imply
that there is physics beyond what we already know.


