Title       : Noise Spectroscopy for the Investigation and Characterization of Ultra-Thin Gate
               Dielectrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0100202

Award Number: 0100202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dim-Lee Kwong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rashid Bashir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of our research is to develop a new and highly sensitive technique for
              the characterization and investigation of stress-induced breakdown in the
              advanced, ultra-thin gate dielectrics which constitute one of the key
              components for next state-of-the-art and next generation VLSI technology. 
Our
              technique of Noise Spectroscopy is based on the realization that dielectric
              breakdown must involve the breakage and rearrangement of atomic bonds arising
              from the impact of energetic carriers (electrons or holes) which invariably
              leads to the formation of CARRIER TRAP STATES.  EXCESS CURRENT NOISE in the
              tunneling, leakage current through gate dielectrics represents an extremely
              sensitive probe of both the presence and the nature of these TRAPS which serve
              as stepping stones in the tunneling process and therefore the detailed and
              systematic investigation of excess noise via Noise Spectroscopy has the
              potential of providing direct information on the QUALITY OF DIELECTRIC FILMS
              immediately after growth as well as the PATHWAY TO DIELECTRIC BREAKDOWN.

The
              potential impact of this research in the shorter term is the development of a
              more sensitive and informative technique to ascertain the quality and
              robustness of ultra thin gate dielectrics which will be useful to the silicon
              VLSI industry complementary to conventional charge to breakdown and CV
              techniques.  In the longer term, when a clear understanding of the physical
              mechanism of dielectric breakdown is achieved it should lead to the ability to
              design and manufacture better and more robust gate dielectrics e.g. via
              addition of trace impurities to pin atomic motion and reduce trap formation. 
              In terms of education, we intend to involve three graduate students, one for
              the Noise Spectroscopy technique and the others for dielectric growth.  Both
              aspects will involve state-of-the-art methods in the respective areas.  In
              addition we plan to foster industrial ties to the fullest extent.

