Title       : Semicrystalline Polymers under Confinement as Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0100646

Award Number: 0100646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy Cebe peggy.cebe@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Crystallizable polymers in the thin film geometry will be studied using
              electrical and optical methods.  Constraints on molecular mobility that arise
              from the thin film geometry will be investigated and compared to behavior
              observed in the bulk polymers.  Materials chosen for the study are model
              systems having well-characterized molecular weights and tacticity, comprising
              isotactic polystyrene (i-PS), and miscible blends of isotactic with atactic
              polystyrene (a-PS).  Effects of film thickness on the glass transition and
              cold-crystallization kinetics film thickness and root mean square end-to-end
              distance of the polymer chain will be determined for homopolymer i-PS and
              blends.  In nanometer-scale thin films, optical methods measuring alignment
              layer relaxation, and surface studies using elevated temperature atomic force
              microscopy, will be used to corroborate the dielectric experiments.  Ex-situ
              characterization of the films will include thickness measurement by
              profilometry, and surface structure analysis by scanning electron microscopy. 
              Degree of crystallinity of thin films will be assessed using Fourier Transform
              infrared spectroscopy.  In bulk-scale films, simultaneous wide and small angle
              X-ray scattering will be performed to assess structural parameters and to
              determine crystallization kinetics from the time development of scattered
              intensity.  Differential scanning calorimetry and its temperature-modulated
              variant will be used to determine the glass transition temperature and degree
              of crystallinity of thicker films.
%%%
Thin polymer films are being used more
              frequently in technological applications, and it is therefore of great
              practical interest to understand the structure and properties of crystallizable
              polymer nanometer-scale films.  This work will provide fundamental information
              about the molecular motions and crystallization processes in thin polymer
              films, which impact directly the material properties and performance
              characteristics of thin films.

