Title       : Subelliptic Jets and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0100107

Award Number: 0100107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118117             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Metzger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan J. Manfredi  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A major part of the success in the linear and quasilinear theory of
 partial
              differential equations is based upon interpreting
 derivatives in the 
              generalized sense of distributions, allowing
 for a more powerful calculus.
              However, Distributions do not seem, 
 in general, well suited to non-linear
              problems because   they cannot be
 multiplied. "Jets" are generalized (local)
              pointwise derivatives that
 allow for the interpretation and calculation of
              non-linear functions
 of derivatives. In this proposal, the PI presents a
              project to extend the notion of jets from the Euclidean or Riemannian case to
              more general state spaces. Typically, in these spaces higher derivatives with
              respect different parameters do not commute, as in the Euclidean
case, but
              rather satisfy more complicated  algebraic relations. Jets adapted to the
              geometry of a state space endowed with a family of vector fields satisfying a
              
 non-degeneracy condition are called  "subelliptic jets". Basic analysis
              topics like Taylor developments and maximum principles have to be adapted to
              conform to the new
 subelliptic geometry. The PI proposes to study
              Hamilton-Jacobi
 equations, to provide with a natural approximation
              procedure
 for semi-continuous functions, and to explore notions of
              "subelliptic
 convexity" to help formulate appropriate second derivative

              subelliptic estimates.
 
The derivative is a basic tool in mathematical
              analysis, used to
 measure the growth and decay of functions. Knowledge of
              the
 derivative of a function allows for its recovery by means
 of
              integration. When trying to model complex scientific
 phenomena it is often
              necessary to write down equations
 satisfied by derivatives, and derivatives
              of derivatives,  
 of functions with respect to several parameters. These
              equations are called
 partial differential equations. If these equations are
              linear,
 a well developed theory exists to study their solutions. 
 Much less
              in known in the more interesting case of nonlinear
 equations, although when
              the state space is Euclidean, there
 is  vast fully-nonlinear theory developed
              in the last twenty years.
 However,  in applications coming from Control
              Theory, Robotics and
 Finance, very often we find derivatives which do not
              commute. The analysis of nonlinear
 operator of these derivatives is the main
              object of this project. The significance of this proposal relies in the
              interconnection between areas of classical mathematical analysis and applied
              mathematics as well as  the use  of computational tools not available until now
              in  mathematical analysis.



