Title       : Robust Design Optimization for Product Platform Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0100123

Award Number: 0100123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436298             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwok-Leung Tsui ktsui@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet K. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victoria C. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Farrokh Mistree  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to develop a systematic yet flexible approach to
              build a series of metamodels for robust design space exploration and
              optimization of large systems along a design timeline.  Six statistical
              metamodeling approaches will be evaluated, namely, response surface modeling,
              kriging, multivariate adaptive regression splines, classification and
              regression trees, artificial neural networks and wavelets.  Both classical and
              space-filling experimental designs will be tested with the most promising
              statistical metamodeling approaches and verified for use along a design
              time-line.  The design of families of general aviation aircraft (to verify
              product platform development), and the design of vehicle body structures (to
              verify the metamodeling and robust design methodology) are used to evaluate the
              efficacy of the method.

This work, if successful, will provide the
              proof-of-concept for the development of a formal, generic, mathematically
              rigorous method for use in rapidly exploring concepts in the early stages of
              project initiation.  The outcome is anticipated to have an impact both on the
              engineering design community and the statistical community bringing both
              communities closer to addressing real problems with tools anchored in a
              rigorous and mathematically correct foundation.  In addition, the successful
              use of this method by manufacturing enterprises will allow them to rapidly and
              cost-effectively design product platforms thereby enhancing their
              competitiveness.



