Title       : Modular Representations of Finite Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a0100662

Award Number: 0100662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144237             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon F. Carlson jfc@sloth.math.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project is an investigation into the representation theory and cohomology of
              finite groups over fields of prime characteristic.  The Principal Investigator
              is particularly interested in the homological properties of representations
              which underlie the basic module theory.  He plans to consider a question open
              for more than 20 years on the classification of a specific type of modules that
              play an important role in the larger category theory of the modules, and also
              to look the structure of the cohomology ring of the group which acts on the
              fundamental homological constructions.  Carlson and his collaborators have
              shown that many facets of the module category are controlled by the group
              cohomology of p-subgroups.  The proposed work would build on this foundation.
              Other projects involve investigations of the structure of module categories of
              finite groups and the general theory of extensions of modules.  Results from
              the project could be of interest in the area of algebraic topology as well as
              in representation theory.  Professor Carlson plans to continue his development
              of computer algebra systems for experimentation with modules and homomorphisms.
               He intends to expand his collection of programs for the computation of group
              cohomology and other aspects of the module theory.  The programs are also being
              rewritten for more general applications in the area of the representation
              theory of algebras. 

In basic terms the Principal Investigator will look at
              certain types of algebraic systems together with the actions of operators. 
              Such a system is called a module and it might have many dimensions in the sense
              of depending on many variable. The operations may represent something like the
              geometric rotation of points on a space.  The project will concentrate on the
              classification and properties of modules whose associated operators have a
              preset collection of interactions.  A significant part of the project is the
              development of computational techniques and software for analyzing the
              structure and properties of modules.  Groups of transformations on modules and
              spaces are basic objects in modern mathematics and arise in many applications
              of the mathematics.  Some of the methods of the study are closely related to
              geometric techniques used in topology.
