Title       : Geometry of Real Submanifolds in Complex Space and CR Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a0100110

Award Number: 0100110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Ebenfelt amckee@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Eberfelt

In this project, the principal investigator (PI) studies
              geometric, analytic, and algebraic aspects of real submanifolds in complex
              manifolds and, more generally, of manifolds with a CR structure. More
              specifically, he focuses on questions that are related to the local
              classification problem, which asks for a local description of the CR structure
              on a manifold near a distinguished point up to equivalence. For instance, for a
              real submanifold in complex space, one would like to know which other real
              submanifolds are equivalent to it by a local biholomorphic transformation. The
              PI studies this problem extrinsically by trying to find normal forms in classes
              of real submanifolds, and intrinsically as an equivalence problem for systems
              of differential equations.  An important part of the classification problem is
              to understand the group of transformations preserving the structure or, more
              generally, the set of mappings between two given structures. The PI of this
              project studies the local stability group of a real submanifold in complex
              space, i.e. the group of local biholomorphisms preserving the real submanifold
              and a given distinguished point on it. He investigates under what conditions
              this group can be embedded as a subgroup of the jet group of a predetermined
              order, and seeks to describe the subgroups that arise in this way in more
              detail. He looks for conditions that imply coercivity results such as e.g. 
              convergence of all formal mappings between real-analytic submanifolds, or
              real-analyticity of all smooth CR mappings. He also investigates closer the
              prolongation of the system defining CR mappings to a Pfaffian system, and
              explores its applications.
The theory of several complex variables is a
              rapidly developing subject in mathematics which has applications in
              contemporary mathematical physics (e.g quantum field theory and string theory)
              as well as in engineering (e.g. control theory). The study of the geometry of
              real submanifolds in complex spaces, such as e.g. smooth boundaries of domains,
              is central to this theory, and is also related to other areas of mathematics
              such as partial differential equations and differential geometry. In this
              project, we investigate questions regarding the geometry of real submanifolds
              in complex space and their mappings that arise in the classification problem of
              such up to equivalences that preserve the complex structure of the ambient
              space. 

