Title       : GOALI: High Efficiency, Large Area Solar Cell Devices Based on Crystalline Si
               Thin Films by Low Temperture Growth and Solid State Laser Crystallization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0100243

Award Number: 0100243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239124             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mool C. Gupta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               

Thin film solar cells, active matrix displays and displays with driver
              electronics require crystalline silicon thin films on inexpensive, large area
              and/or transparent substrates such as glass for improved performance and low
              manufacturing costs. To achieve this goal the difficulties are: (1) amorphous
              nature of glass makes it impossible to employ current growth techniques that
              take advantage of crystalline character of the substrate. (2) the inability of
              relatively inexpensive glass to withstand high processing temperatures required
              for growth of crystalline silicon films. To overcome these problems we propose
              a solid state laser crystallization technique where laser pulse causes melting
              and re-solidification of the near surface region however short duration of
              laser pulse prevents sustained heating of the underlying substrate and makes
              the process compatible with glass substrates. The goal of the proposed program
              is to understand the basic science of laser crystallization using solid state
              lasers with near infrared wavelengths and grow amorphous silicon films by a low
              temperature process on glass substrates and then crystallize them by
              semiconductor diode lasers for seed layer followed by thicker films by plasma
              enhanced chemical vapor deposition to demonstrate high efficiency solar cell
              devices.

The research effort is Academy-Industry collaboration under the
              National Science Foundation GOALI program. The university faculty and graduate
              students will work in close collaboration with the team of scientists and
              engineers at the BP Solar Corporation. The university industry collaboration
              will provide additional opportunity for students to work with industrial
              scientists and use of their additional state of the art equipment facilities.
              Besides improvements in solar cell technology, this project will provide
              education to students in thin film growth, laser processing and electronic
              device fabrication, which are highly desired skills and important areas of
              current interest. The proposed program will have a strong outreach activity
              such as summer experience for high school teachers to work in solar energy and
              laser applications area, visit to industry and a display in a local museum of
              improved device for public knowledge and generate interest in science and
              engineering. 

