Title       : Definability, Constructibility and Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0100778

Award Number: 0100778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69276              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Schoutens hschoute@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

In this research project, the investigator studies the uniform nature of
              constructions from Algebraic Geometry and Commutative Algebra. Uniformity has
              to be understood here in the following sense. Suppose an  algebraic-geometric
              object, such as  a variety or a coherent sheaf,  is presented to us by means of
              some polynomials over an algebraically closed field. From this object other
              objects or invariants can be derived by applying some algebraic-geometric
              process. The question posed is now when can this  construction be carried out
              by using only polynomials of degree bounded by the degree of the initial
              polynomials? In particular, when is an invariant associated to this object
              uniformly bounded by the initial degrees only? Provided such uniform bounds
              exist, the following transfer principle can be applied. Encode, allowing
              negations and quantification, the construction or some of its properties in the
              field by means of the coefficients of the polynomials involved--the existence
              of uniform bounds is certainly a necessary, but often even a sufficient
              condition for this to hold. Then use the Lefschetz Principle to carry over
              results from positive characteristic to zero characteristic, or, conversely,
              from zero characteristic  to almost all positive characteristics. The
              investigator has already successfully applied this method to the following
              non-trivial facts: the Bass Conjecture, the Zariski-Lipman Conjecture and the
              New Intersection Theorem. In this proposal, he is especially interested in
              applications to tight closure in characteristic zero. Moreover, he proposes to
              infer from the existence of uniform bounds, the constructible nature of certain
              algebraic-geometric constructions. For instance, he seeks to continue the
              following program originally initiated by Nagata and Grothendieck: for a given
              geometric property of a point on a variety,  when is the set of all points on
              the variety for which this property  holds, constructible?

This program
              provides an alternative approach to some open problems in the field, as well as
              a simplified treatment of previous results. The author takes a special interest
              in the following old problem, simple to state but yet so far resisting all
              known proof methods: is every curve in three dimensional space obtained by
              intersecting two surfaces? On a deeper level, the current proposal can be seen
              as an attempt to analyze and better understand the constructive nature of
              Algebraic Geometry, by looking at it from a logicians point of view. In this
              way, the Principal Investigator intends to present the domain in a more
              coherent and unified way and obtain an improved link between Geometry and
              Algebra.

