Title       : Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0100538

Award Number: 0100538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lai-Sang Young   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Four projects on the mathematical theory of dynamical systems are
proposed.
              Each project contains a cluster of problems with a common 
theme. The first
              pertains to strange attractors with strong dissipation 
and a single direction
              of instability. Extensions of a general theory 
developed under a previous
              grant to arbitrary phase-dimensions are 
proposed, as are applications to
              concrete problems such as nonlinear 
oscillators. The second project concerns
              the statistical behavior of 
dynamical systems with predominantly hyperbolic
              behavior. The focus of
the proposed research is on mechanisms leading to
              various rates of 
correlation decay in both discrete and continuous times. The
              topic of 
the third project is lattice dynamical systems. A systematic
              analysis 
of the aggregate behavior of large numbers of dynamical systems
              coupled 
together is proposed. The final project proposes dynamical systems
              
methods of solution for three unrelated problems on the Schrodinger
              
operator, kinematic fast dynamo and Navier-Stokes equations.

As a branch
              of mathematics, dynamical systems is concerned with 
the time evolutions of
              processes governed by certain underlying laws.
A primary goal of the subject
              is to develop unifying mathematical
theories to explain observed phenomena and
              predict future occurrences. 
In this proposal, the investigation of a number
              of models amenable to 
mathematical analysis and with potential applications
              to the physical 
and biological sciences is proposed. It has been known for
              some time 
that relatively simple laws can lead to complicated dynamics. The
              
first part of this proposal focuses on systems with chaotic behavior. 
Two
              topics are proposed: an analysis of strange attractors and a 
statistical
              theory of mixing. (Strange attractors are highly complex 
objects which
              capture the long term behaviors of dissipative dynamical 
systems; they have
              been observed frequently in nature and in simulations 
but have thus far
              resisted rigorous analysis.) Other projects proposed 
include the relations
              between aggregate properties of large dynamical 
systems and those of their
              individual components, and a few problems 
from physics and hydrodynamics
              which the principal investigator 
believes can be solved by the methods of
              dynamical systems.
Four projects on the mathematical theory of dynamical
              systems are
proposed. Each project contains a cluster of problems with a
              common 
theme. The first pertains to strange attractors with strong
              dissipation 
and a single direction of instability. Extensions of a general
              theory 
developed under a previous grant to arbitrary phase-dimensions are
              
proposed, as are applications to concrete problems such as nonlinear
              
oscillators. The second project concerns the statistical behavior of
              
dynamical systems with predominantly hyperbolic behavior. The focus of
the
              proposed research is on mechanisms leading to various rates of 
correlation
              decay in both discrete and continuous times. The topic of 
the third project
              is lattice dynamical systems. A systematic analysis 
of the aggregate behavior
              of large numbers of dynamical systems coupled 
together is proposed. The final
              project proposes dynamical systems 
methods of solution for three unrelated
              problems on the Schrodinger 
operator, kinematic fast dynamo and Navier-Stokes
              equations.

As a branch of mathematics, dynamical systems is concerned with
              
the time evolutions of processes governed by certain underlying laws.
A
              primary goal of the subject is to develop unifying mathematical
theories to
              explain observed phenomena and predict future occurrences. 
In this proposal,
              the investigation of a number of models amenable to 
mathematical analysis and
              with potential applications to the physical 
and biological sciences is
              proposed. It has been known for some time 
that relatively simple laws can
              lead to complicated dynamics. The 
first part of this proposal focuses on
              systems with chaotic behavior. 
Two topics are proposed: an analysis of
              strange attractors and a 
statistical theory of mixing. (Strange attractors
              are highly complex 
objects which capture the long term behaviors of
              dissipative dynamical 
systems; they have been observed frequently in nature
              and in simulations 
but have thus far resisted rigorous analysis.) Other
              projects proposed 
include the relations between aggregate properties of large
              dynamical 
systems and those of their individual components, and a few
              problems 
from physics and hydrodynamics which the principal investigator
              
believes can be solved by the methods of dynamical systems.

