Title       : Partial Differential Equations in Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0100492

Award Number: 0100492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102429             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mei-Chi Shaw mei-chi.shaw.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mei-Chi Shaw will investigate topics in partial differential equations
which
              arise from   function theory in several complex variables. Problems
in three
              specific areas are discussed in this proposal :  the
Cauchy-Riemann equations
              on nonsmooth  domains, tangential Cauchy-Riemann equations and their interplay
              with singular integrals and geometric measure theory.  Aspects of  the
              Cauchy-Riemann equations on Lipschitz domains addressed include  the complex
              Neumann boundary value problem and estimates of the Cauchy-Riemann equations.
              Function theory will be analyzed   on strongly pseudoconvex Lipschitz domains,
              as well as the Bergman projection
and biholomorphic maps. Recent results in
              harmonic analysis  on Lipschitz
domains are the main tools. Research on the
              regularity property
of the  global and local solutions of the tangential
              Cauchy-Riemann
equation will  be continued.  This includes the existence and
              regularity
theorems on CR manifolds which are Lipschitz or of higher
              codimension.
Homotopy formulas, Szego projection,  Hodge theory  and the
              embeddings of
abstract CR manifolds are also studied. Singular integral theory
              and
geometric measure theory  on Lipschitz curves and nonsmooth domains
              will
play a major role in the approach to these problems.

These problems
              are at the interface of harmonic analysis, geometric measure
theory, complex
              geometry and partial differential equations with rough coefficients,  important
              fields  all in modern analysis.  Classically, harmonic analysis offers a 
              powerful tool to solve partial differential equations, especially the Dirichlet
              and Neumann boundary value problems.  Harmonic analysis is also intertwined
              with one complex variable, especially for function theory in the unit disc. In
              its modern version, harmonic analysis has evolved into singular integral theory
              and geometric measure theory.  The development of one influences the other and
              both collectively are viewed as  one of the most important and elegant theories
              in mathematics. In several complex variables, these overlapping areas  have
              produced even richer and more profound results whose impact have shaped modern
              partial differential equations, several complex variables and harmonic
              analysis. Their influence even extends beyond these fields into other areas,
              like complex differential geometry, algebraic geometry and mathematical
              physics. While great progress has been made in the past few decades for the
              case when the domains are smooth, little is known when the domain is less
              regular.  The investigation of these problems on nonsmooth domains is already 
              central to the study of classical Dirichlet and Neumann boundary value problems
              using harmonic analysis. Built on these solid foundations, the PI intends to
              tackle more challenging problems in several complex variables. Their solution
              will
advance all the aforementioned intricately related fields and open up a 
              vast unexplored area.







