Title       : Number Theory and Allied Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0100500

Award Number: 0100500
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91061              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Dale Brownawell wdb@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main thrust of this research is to establish in the setting of
function
              fields analogues of major conjectures by Rohrlich and,
Shimura on the
              algebraic (in)dependence of coordinates of periods 
of certain abelian
              varieties.  The current step involves the 
analysis of the structure of
              certain types of t-modules, which 
correspond roughly to abelian varieties. 
              With these tools, one 
expects further progress on related questions.  In
              particular, 
the PI and his coworkers will establish precise conditions for
              
the independence of the periods of certain one dimensional 
t-modules,
              called Drinfeld modules.  Another approach to 
Nesterenko's recent work on the
              Ramanujan functions will also 
be attempted by means of determining the
              rational solutions to a
certain differential equation.  This would allow the
              application 
of the PI's Lojasiewicz inequality rather than the
              original
fundamental, but considerably more complicated,
              independence
criterion due to Philippon.  Moreover the PI will provide a
              
quite general arithmetic version of the fundamental Lojasiewicz
inequality
              which is best possible in its important respects.


The present proposal
              centers about the properties of numbers and
polynomials.  One central question
              is whether those numbers which
arise in various contexts in mathematics
              (analysis or geometry) 
have unkown linkages.  Some of the first research of
              this type 
over a hundred years ago resolved problems which had
              puzzled
mathematicians for two millenia.  One main objective of the 
present
              research is to show that such linkages do not exist in 
a broad setting
              analogous to certain central puzzles of today.  
In that setting, polynomials
              correspond to integers and power 
series correspond to real numbers. The core
              of this work will be 
carried out by the PI together with M.A. Papanikolas and
              G.W. 
Anderson.  A coordination of quite diverse elements is crucial 
to
              establishing these results on the boundary between the broad 
fields of
              analysis, geometry, and number theory.  In the classical 
case, the PI will
              try to develop an understanding of the behaviour 
of certain differential
              equations to simplify our view of certain 
recent work of Nesterenko.  Just as
              one tries to show that there 
are no "hidden" linkages between values, one
              also strives to
establish that polynomial values cannot be "unnaturally"
              small.  
The PI has one good version of such a result, and he will extend
              
its applicability even further.
