Title       : Electrokinetic Remediation of Heterogeneous and Low Permeability Soils
               Contaminated by Hydrophobic Organic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0100073

Award Number: 0100073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna R. Reddy kreddy@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Throughout the United States, hydrophobic organic compound (HOC) contamination
              has become a widespread and pervasive problem.  HOCs, which include tars,
              creosotes, petroleum residues, and chlorinated solvents, are commonly used in a
              myriad of different industries.  They are generally classified as irritants
              and/or toxins, and many have been identified as lethal carcinogens.  Therefore,
              in order to protect public health and the environment, sites with existing
              contamination urgently need remediation.  Unfortunately, removing HOC
              contamination has proved to be very difficult.  These compounds are extremely
              persistent due to their low aqueous solubilities, and their distribution within
              the subsurface is highly dependent on particle and macro-scale heterogeneities.
               In spite of attempts to develop efficient HOC remediation technologies, very
              few have been successful.  In-situ flushing with surfactants/cosolvents,
              though, has been shown to be promising.  Surfactants/cosolvents are pumped into
              the subsurface to increase HOC desorption/solubilization by lowering
              interfacial tension.  Once in solution, the contaminants are mobilized towards
              wells where the solution is commonly pumped out and treated.  The effectiveness
              of the flushing process, however, depends largely on the extent of contaminant
              desorption and solubilization, and the degree of interaction between the
              solution, contaminant, and soil.

The objective of this research is therefore
              to characterize the distribution of HOCs in heterogeneous soil environments and
              develop and evaluate the electrokinetic enhancement technique for the
              remediation of HOCs under difficult heterogeneous subsurface conditions. 
              Though electrokinetically enhanced flushing has great potential, the
              physicochemical reactions and transport mechanisms are complex.  A complete
              fundamental and conceptual understanding of the various components of the
              process is essential.  To achieve this goal, the following tasks will be
              performed: (1) characterization of the HOCs in heterogeneous soils, (2)
              evaluation of surfactants/cosolvents for enhanced HOC desorption and
              solubilization, (3) assessment of HOC removal from particle-scale heterogeneous
              soils, (4) assessment of HOC removal from macro-scale heterogeneous soils, and
              (5) development of design guidelines for remediating HOC-contaminated
              soils.

In conjunction with the research objectives, the project will offer
              educational opportunities and infrastructure improvements for geotechnical and
              geoenvironmental education at both the graduate and undergraduate student
              levels.  Equipment for the research, especially the physical two-dimensional
              simulation models, will serve as important demonstration tools for classroom
              instruction.

