Title       : Collaborative Research: Exploitation of Finite Element Method in Robustness and
               Reliability Assessments for Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2001      
File        : a0100024

Award Number: 0100024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hae Chang Gea gea@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative research deals with the development of a rigorous finite
              element method-based approach to studying robustness and reliability of
              Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS).  Exploitation of the finite element
              formulation is proposed to incorporate higher order moments into the
              probability analysis without incurring excessive cost.  The computational
              burden from introducing higher order moments will be eliminated by taking
              advantage of the finite element formulation of selective functionals.  New
              modeling methods for MEMS will be explored and a variety of MEMS devices will
              be studied.  To overcome the limitations of existing methods for propagating
              the effect of uncertainty, a reliability analysis-based procedure for
              probability analysis is proposed, which will achieve a good balance between
              accuracy and efficiency.

If successful, the research will benefit the MEMS
              community with improved quality assessment and a better understanding of the
              intrinsic relationship between robustness and reliability.  The ability to
              efficiently evaluate higher order derivatives in the finite element method is
              also beneficial to other applications where this derivative information is
              needed.  Comparative study on various methods for probability analysis can
              provide better guidelines for choosing the most appropriate technique.  The
              reliability analysis-based procedure for probability analysis is expected to be
              applicable to design problems with nonlinear behavior and large uncertainty
              variations
