Title       : Geometric Theory of Meromorphic Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0100512

Award Number: 0100512
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandre Eremenko   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposer intends to continue his study of geometric questions 
in the
              theory of meromorphic functions, using the new techniques 
developed in his
              previous work. The main directions of the 
proposed research are the
              following.
a) Questions related to Bloch's theorem and the Type Problem of
a
              simply connected Riemann surface, especially the relations
between the
              conformal type of a surface and its integral curvature.
b) Problems of
              geometric function theory arising in real algebraic
geometry. More
              specifically, it includes counting real solutions
of certain systems of
              algebraic equations of geometric origin, which
have important applications in
              linear control theory. 
c) Generalization of results of geometric function
              theory to
quasiregular maps in spaces of arbitrary dimension.
d) Normality
              criteria for families of holomorphic curves in projective
spaces.

One of
              the basic questions in mathematics and its applications is
whether a given
              equation or a system of equations has solutions,
how many, and where are they
              located. In the theory of meromorphic functions
one studies these questions
              for equations of the type
f(z)=a, where a is a given complex number and f a
              given meromorphic function.
The class of meromorphic functions includes
              elementary functions,
such as rational, exponential and trigonometric ones, as
              well as the special
functions, a. k. a. higher transcendental functions, such
              as the
Gamma function, Airy functions, elliptic functions and so on.
Most
              functions arising in applications of mathematics belong to
this class. In
              modern mathematics, questions about solvability
of equations are usually
              formulated in geometric language, which makes
the results appealing to our
              geometric intuition. 
The logic of development of mathematics and its
              applications
require an extension of results to vector-valued functions
              known
as ``holomorphic curves''. The proposer plans to continue his study
of
              geometric theory of meromorphic functions and holomorphic curves.
A part of
              the proposal is related to existence of real solutions, which is
by far more
              subtle than the existence of complex solutions, which are usually
studied.
              This part is inspired by the so-called "pole placement problem", which is a
              major unsolved mathematical
problem in control theory of linear systems. The
              results in this area
will have implications for the design of complicated
              automatic control systems. 
These results would establish limitations on the
              possibility to
control a system of given size by a control device of certain
              class. 


