Title       : Orthogonal Polynomials of Several Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0100539

Award Number: 0100539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79190              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Dunkl cfd5z@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The analysis of multi-variable functions or configurations is an important
              problem area with connections to topics like quantum systems of many bodies,
              multi-variate statistical distributions, special functions, numerical cubature,
              and algebraic combinatorics. The common thread of the problems posed in this
              proposal is the existence of a symmetry group. An important class of
              applications, for example, is formed by the Calogero-Sutherland-Moser (CSM)
              systems; these are quantum-mechanical problems of a number of identical
              particles in a one-dimensional space with certain interactions (inverse square,
              for one). The symmetry group is the group of all permutations of the coordinate
              functions (the type-A Weyl group) or the group of permutations and sign-changes
              (the type-B Weyl group); the latter occurs in spin models. Some of the
              classical orthogonal polynomials are associated to Weyl groups and compact
              homogeneous spaces. Dunkl has developed a theory of differential-difference
              operators (called "Dunkl operators" in both mathematics and physics literature)
              which are crucial devices for this analysis. These operators are a parametrized
              version of the usual derivatives. They are used to construct certain invariant
              differential operators (which prove the complete integrability of several CSM
              models). There is also an associated generalization of the Fourier transform.
              Specifically this project concerns the construction of generating functions for
              polynomials with certain desirable properties (orthogonality or eigenfunctions,
              for example) associated to finite reflection groups (of types I, A, B, H); a
              study of the generalized binomial coefficients defined in terms of nonsymmetric
              Jack polynomials, a search for useful self-adjoint operators enabling
              orthogonal decomposition of type-B harmonic polynomials (which would be used to
              express wave-functions of CSM models on the line in spherical polar
              coordinates), a study of special CSM models with three-body interactions. Also
              it is proposed to investigate possible modifications of the original
              differential-difference operators connected with bispectral problems or 
              super-integrable models.
	Mathematical analysis can be considered as having
              two different emphases, one is to find exact formulae to describe some
              mathematical system, like the motion of the planets or of a pendulum, or an
              electron belonging to an atom which is part of a crystal, and the other is to
              find good and useful approximations and processes which can get as close as
              desired to the solution of a problem by taking an adequate number of steps. For
              example, computed tomography does not give a perfect image of a cross-section
              of the subject, but it does provide all the detail needed for practical
              purposes. This project is in the part of analysis which aims to give exact
              solutions in situations which enjoy some symmetry. This could be the
              quantum-mechanical problem of indistinguishable particles, a statistical
              analysis which treats each data point the same way, or the molecular structure
              of a crystal where each atom has six nearest neighbors, up, down, left, right,
              front and back. In particular, Dunkl has developed a calculus which takes the
              symmetry into account, thus allowing   precise and powerful techniques for the
              analysis. The problems in the proposal can be categorized by the types of
              symmetry, such as those formed by rotating a circle through multiples of sixty
              degrees (that is, one sixth of a complete revolution), or those associated to
              permutations of identical objects, to name just two. The goal of the project is
              to develop tools and discover methods for multi-variable analysis of problems
              with symmetry; these will be useful in understanding the physics of interacting
              particles, statistical analysis of complicated data, and the techniques of
              digitizing and the subsequent reconstruction of sounds and images.



