Title       : Instrumentation for the Purification and Quantification of Proteins and Nucleic
               Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0100667

Award Number: 0100667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44044              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Stuart rosemary.stuart@marquette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail L. Waring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Munroe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen M. Karrer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to enable purchase of storage phosphor screens and a
              phosphorimaging device  that can be used in combination to locate and measure
              radioactive biological macromolecules.  Such devices have become essential
              instrumentation for a large variety of procedures in the qualitative and
              quantitative analysis of proteins and nucleic acids, typically following
              separation procedures that make use gel electrophoresis.  Latent images,
              produced by ionizing radiation emitted by the radioactive biomolecules, are
              captured by the storage phosphor screens which are then scanned by the
              phosphorimaging device.  The resultant image can be stored in digital format to
              permit image display, analysis and if required, the preparation of
              publication-quality images of the data. The use of storage phosphor screen and
              phosphorimager replaces the use of conventional X-ray film and eliminates the
              need for development and scanning of film. The imager can also be used to
              detect molecules chemically labeled with fluorescent chromophores without the
              need for screens.
The instrumentation will serve 5 major users and 3 minor
              users in interdisciplinary research and education efforts at both the
              undergraduate and graduate level. The requested equipment will be housed in a
              central location in close proximity to the research laboratories of all the
              major users. The availability of such instrumentation will have an enormous
              impact on the quality and volume of the research being performed by the user
              groups, including graduate students and participants in an NSF-funded Research
              Experience for Undergraduates - Site project.  The experimental problems being
              investigated by the user groups include developmental regulation of drosophila
              and tetrahymena gene expression, studies of thyroid hormone receptor m-RNA, and
              analysis of yeast mitochondria.   


