Title       : Interactions of Logic with Group Theory and Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0100794

Award Number: 0100794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Cherlin cherlin@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cherlin and Thomas will pursue interactions of the techniques of logic with
              problems in algebra and combinatorics. Cherlin will work with groups of finite
              Morley rank using methods modeled heavily on finite group theory, aiming
              particularly at an approach to the odd characteristic case compatible with the
              existence of bad fields, and on problems in graph theory susceptible to model
              theoretic analysis (universal graphs and problems of wqo). Thomas will work on
              Borel equivalence relations, particularly with those associated with  natural
              classification problems in algebra, which may well provide the examples needed
              to settle some problems presently open in full generality, as well as providing
              information on the relative difficulty (according to a very robust system of
              measurement)  of the algebraic problems, some very classical and open, for what
               can now seen to be essential reasons. Thomas will also pursue his work on the
              automorphism tower problem, using set theoretic techniques.

Mathematical
              logic provides tools of great generality which can be applied to various areas
              of mathematics. In combinatorial contexts the model theoretic point of view
              provides methods that can be used  to handle specific problems very uniformly,
              rather than on the case by case basis sometimes encountered in the literature. 
              Descriptive set theory provides methods for analyzing the relative difficulty
              of both solved and unsolved problems in algebra, and in particular provides
              concrete information as to how detailed an answer one may usefully seek in a
              classification problem, making it possible to distinguish dead ends from
              fruitful lines of inquiry on an a priori basis. 

