Title       : RUI-Combinatorial Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0100975

Award Number: 0100975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106326             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Halverson halverson@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will continue his collaborations with undergraduate researchers
              on combinatorial aspects of the representation theory of a collection of
              algebraic structures:  Chevalley groups, Iwahori-Hecke algebras, affine Hecke
              algebras, centralizer algebras, and quasi hereditary algebras.  This research
              is unified by its methodology: using discrete,  combinatorial structures and
              algorithms to give explicit answers to algebraic questions.  Combinatorial
              analyses will be performed on topics such as irreducible representations and
              characters, unipotent representations of Chevalley groups, flag varieties, the
              Chevalley-Hecke correspondence, Springer representations, and Langlands
              parameters.

The goal of this project is to use discrete structures to model
              and analyze abstract properties of algebraic systems that are used in particle
              physics, data analysis, data encryption, engineering, statistical mechanics,
              and geometry.  These discrete structures are concrete objects that can be
              enumerated and investigated on a computer. Using computer explorations,
              investigators have made startling new theoretical discoveries, and computation
              has become a significant method of mathematical investigation.  The work in
              this project furthers the understanding of these algebraic systems and makes
              them more accessible to computational studies.  Furthermore, these methods
              allow the investigator to fully involve undergraduate students in research. 
              Young researchers can construct, manipulate, and analyze these objects without
              needing a huge amount of advanced training.  At the same time these
              manipulations reveal deep truths about fundamental systems from algebra,
              geometry, and topology.

