Title       : Jordans Theorem in Number Theory, Group Theory, and Quantum Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0100537

Award Number: 0100537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99555              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Larsen larsen@math.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator intends to work on several projects related to variants of
              Jordan's theorem characterizing finite subgroups of GL(n).  These include a
              joint project with Richard Pink to analyze the adelic image of Galois
              representations with coefficients in a function field, a joint project with
              Alex Lubotzky to understand specializations of Zariski-dense representations of
              discrete groups, and a joint project with Michael Freedman and Zhenghan Wang to
              understand monodromy of representations of mapping class groups arising from
              TQFTs.  The last project is part of Freedman's project of replacing the qubit
              model of quantum computation with a new model based on ideas from quantum
              topology.

Symmetry is a unifying theme in many areas of mathematics and
              physics, including the subjects touched on in this proposal, number theory,
              algebra, topology, and quantum field theory.  Mathematicians have studied
              groups, that is, abstract symmetry types, for almost two hundred years.  One of
              the earliest major results is Jordan's theorem, which asserts, more or less,
              that a geometric figure can have a complicated symmetry group only if it lives
              in a space of many dimensions.  This proposal deals with several extensions and
              applications of Jordan's result.  The motivating problem comes from algebraic
              number theory, the study of number systems.  These systems can have intricate
              groups of symmetries, which can be externalized as symmetries of "spaces"
              analogous to the usual spaces of geometry.  The investigator intends to probe
              the symmetry of certain number systems by means of a new extension of Jordan's
              theorem.  In a different direction, the investigator intends to use a similar
              class of methods to analyze the internal symmetry of certain physical systems. 
              Michael Freedman has recently proposed using the systems in question as the
              basis for a fundamentally new type of quantum computer which should be much
              less vulnerable to the decoherence problem which has plagued existing designs. 
              For this to work, one needs a large enough symmetry group to allow the new
              machine to simulate the internal state of a machine of the old type.

