Title       : Diffusion Studies of Multicomponent Penetrants in Polymers using Fast FTIR
               Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0100428

Award Number: 0100428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack L. Koenig jlk6@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Fast FTIR imaging using newly available Focal Plane Array detectors and
              step-scan interferometers allows the acquisition of multicomponent images of
              the diffusion process from which the nature of the diffusion process and the
              magnitude of the diffusion constants can be measured.   The images allow the
              detection of anomalous diffusion in the polymer samples arising from voids or
              cracks.  These studies will be initially directed at characterization of the
              role of residual and diffusing water in poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA).  The
              initial studies will be made on diffusion of water into ultrapure and ultradry
              PMMA samples of varying molecular weights and at different temperatures above
              and below the glass transition. The PI will study the plasticizing effect of
              residual water in PMMA on the diffusion behavior of other substances.  Solid
              state NMR will be used to measure the changes in the polymer dynamics due to
              the presence of water in the PMMA in order to determine the impact of polymer
              chain mobility.  The PI will study the role of physical aging of the PMMA and
              establish the correlations of multicomponent diffusion with the changes in the
              average size of microcavities or voids in the glassy polymer (measured by
              Positron Annihilation Lifetimes).  Subsequently, multicomponent diffusion
              studies will be made with water and environmental agents to determine the role
              of substance molecular size, shape and chemical interactions on the
              multicomponent diffusion process.  Additionally, the PMMA will be
              systematically oxidized and the role of gradient in polymer degradation from
              the surface to the bulk evaluated.  The experimental results will be compared
              with current theories of molecular diffusion.  The experimental images will be
              utilized as visualization aids in an educational module (PCL.cwru.edu) which
              will be used to interactively teach students the mechanisms and parameters of
              the diffusion process in polymers.
%%%
This award, co-funded by the Division
              of Materials Research and Chemical and Transport Systems, is directed toward
              the utilization of a powerful analytical tool-Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR)
              Imaging for the study of diffusion of multicomponent penetrants into polymers. 
              Diffusion of small molecules such as monomers, catalysts, diluents, and
              solvents in materials is of vital importance in many applications.  Information
              concerning diffusion coefficients is necessary in many industrial processes
              such as devolatization, polymerization, membrane separation, crying, coating,
              and painting.  The plasticization, coloration, curing and drying of coatings
              are all influenced by the mobility of solvents, dyes, and low molecular weight
              additives. 

