Title       : Mathematical Analysis of Vortex Dynamics and Waterwave Problem.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0100204

Award Number: 0100204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81006              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sijue Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI proposes to study problems in three subjects of fluid dynamics: the
              motion of the interface of general two layered flow, the boundary layer
              problem, and the motion of water wave. The motion of the interface of general
              two layered fluid flow includes vortex sheet motion as a  special case. In a
              recent work, the PI shows that arbitrarily specifying independent position and
              velocity data generally will yield no Sobolev class vortex sheet for any
              positive time. Some crucial assumptions in this work are: the fluids are
              inviscid, there is no surface tension, and the interface remains a regular
              surface at positive time.  A problem of interest is therefore a well-posed
              model for the vortex sheet motion. The PI proposes to reintroduce viscosity
              into the fluids, and to understand the effect of the viscosity near the
              interface. This leads to the study of the zero viscosity limit of two layered
              viscous fluids. A related problem of both mathematical and practical importance
              is the boundary layer problem. The question is to find the zero viscosity limit
              of the incompressible Navier-Stokes flow in a domain with a fixed nonempty
              boundary. It is well-known that the difficulty is in the boundary layer, within
              which the normal velocity gradient generally becomes very large. The PI's
              approach is different from the usual one, in the sense that the PI will assume
              no knowledge of the possible limit equations. The PI proposes to analyze
              directly the Navier-Stokes flow, and to obtain the qualitative behavior of the
              boundary part and the interior part of  the solutions of Navier-Stokes
              equation. The method will be from harmonic analysis. It is expected that the
              techniques and results developed in solving the boundary layer problem will
              provide insight in finding a well-posed model for the vortex sheet
              motion.

The PI proposes to continue her study in the water wave problem.
              Recently, the 
PI proved the existence and uniqueness of solutions locally in
              time for the 
Water wave problem. The proposed research concentrates on issues
              relating to 
the long time behavior of the water wave: the global
              existence
and uniqueness of solutions, the lifespan of the water wave before
              singularity,
and the singularity profile of the solution. The method will be
              from harmonic 
analysis and Clifford analysis.
The methods and techniques
              developed by the PI in solving the water wave problem
has found applications
              in the vortex sheet problem. 
Success in this project will enhance our
              understanding of the wave motion, of 
the mixing of fluids, separation of
              boundary layers, generation of sounds
and coherent structures in turbulence
              models.

