Title       : Differential Collision Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0100137

Award Number: 0100137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald D. Quinn quinn@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at conducting a dynamic analysis of the control and
              containment requirements for a high performance, axial piston, hydrostatic
              pump.  Over the last thirty years, a great deal of information has been added
              to the literature which describes the control requirements for a standard
              swash-plate pump design; however, virtually nothing has been written on the
              topic of swash-plate containment.  Also, within the pump industry itself, a few
              innovative companies have identified certain advantages in using a non-standard
              swash-plate design, which utilizes a variable primary swash-plate angle and a
              fixed secondary swash-plate angle; but, again, nothing has been added to the
              literature to generally describe and apply these advantages to a broad range of
              pump designs.  In this ascertain the control and containment requirements for
              this design.  Furthermore, this work will go a step beyond current-day practice
              by considering the general case when both the primary and secondary swash-plate
              angles vary.  The outcome of this study will be to identify the mechanical and
              control requirements for this novel machine and to theoretically prove the
              advantages of implementing the design.

If successful, the work of this
              research will be used to significantly enhance the performance of axial piston
              pumps that are widely used in fluid power applications today.  The improved
              performance will be demonstrated in increased operating efficiency and quieter
              pumps.  These improvements will be achieved by optimizing the internal pressure
              transients of the pump for operating conditions that may vary over a wide range
              during the normal duty cycle of the machine.  A secondary impact will be to
              reduce valve-plate erosion within the pump.  The overall objectives of this
              work are reduce waste and to increase the productivity of axial-piston pump
              technology.  The successful accomplishment of these objectives will manifest
              itself in lower pump operating costs, longer product life, and a reduction in
              engineering time for product maintenance and design.

