Title       : Nonconvex Combinatorial Optimization without Auxiliary Binary Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0100020

Award Number: 0100020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405693             (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Nemhauser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is about solving Nonconvex Combinatorial Optimization Problems
              (NCOPs) by linear programming based branch-and-bound algorithms.  Most NCOPs
              can be reformulated as mixed-integer programs (MIPs) by the addition of
              auxiliary binary variables.  For this reason the study of NCOPs other than MIPs
              has been very limited.  However, reformulation may have many disadvantages
              including increasing the size of the problem significantly.  There are some
              NCOP structures that arise naturally in many practical applications and
              therefore merit study in their own right.  These include:  (1) semi-continuous
              -  if a nonnegative variable is positive, it must be at least some positive
              constant;  (2) k-cardinality -  no more than k variables from a set of n
              nonnegative variables may be positive;  (3) special ordered set of type 2 -  no
              more than 2 variables from a sequence of n nonnegative variables may be
              positive, and if 2 variables are positive, they must be adjacent in the
              sequence.  The primary objective of this project is to study these and a small
              number of other NCOP structures, as has been done for MIPS, and to develop
              preprocessing procedures, polyhedral results (cuts), branching procedures, and
              primal heuristics for dealing with them directly.  The end result will be
              efficient branch-and-cut algorithms for linear programs with piecewise linear
              nonconvex objectives, nonconvex quadratic programs, scheduling and facility
              location problems, and several other NP-hard problems for which an MIP approach
              has not been very successful. 

Decision making problems in manufacturing and
              logistics, such as resource allocation and facility location are represented by
              optimization models.  This project contributes to the knowledge of algorithms
              for solving such optimization models that contain certain types of
              nonlinearities that make the models very difficult to solve. The results of
              this project will provide significant enhancements to the optimization tools
              that are used in practice.

