Title       : Arithmetic Groups and Tessellations of Homogeneous Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0100438

Award Number: 0100438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87420              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dave Witte dwitte@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract
Witte
One focus of this project is the study of tessellations of
              homogeneous spaces. Namely, if G/H is a non-compact, simply connected
              homogeneous space of a connected Lie group G, the question is whether there is
              a properly discontinuous subgroup D of G, such that the orbit space D\G/H is
              compact.  Some special cases were studied by L.  Auslander, Y. Benoist, G. A.
              Margulis, R. J. Zimmer, and others.  In collaboration with H. Oh and A. Iozzi,
              the PI has recently made progress in understanding the case where G is a
              semisimple Lie group of real rank two, including a detailed study of the case
              where G = SO(2,2n) or SU(2,2n).  The PI will continue this research, both for
              real rank two and higher real rank.  He will also continue his study of actions
              of arithmetic groups on the circle, and related questions.
This project
              studies crystals in mathematical spaces other than the 3-dimensional universe
              that we live in. (A crystal is a material whose atomic structure is very
              symmetric.)  The most fundamental problem in this subject is to decide which
              spaces contain crystals, and which do not.  (For this question, the most
              interesting spaces are homogeneous, which means that every point of the space
              looks exactly like all of the other points.)  Mathematicians have made
              substantial progress on this problem in recent years, and this project will
              continue the work.  In cases where crystals do exist, the project will
              investigate the algebraic properties of the group formed by the symmetries of a
              crystal.


