Title       : Reproducing Kernels and Function Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0100294

Award Number: 0100294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68598              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tavan T. Trent Ttrent@mathdept.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

The proposer plans to examine function theory problems, invariant
              subspace problems, and model theory on certain reproducing kernel Hilbert
              spaces of analytic functions on domains in Cn.  The main cases concern, but are
              not limited to, spaces whose reproducing kernel has one positive square. 
              Recent commutant lifting theorems and Beurling-Lax-Halmos type theorems for
              such spaces provide the rationale for connecting these topics.  Among the
              function theory questions considered are corona theorems for various multiplier
              algebras of operators on reproducing kernel spaces.  In addition, using Hilbert
              space methods, the principal investigator expects to derive new estimates for
              the H2(D2)-corona theorem on the bidisk and consider vector valued corona
              theorems.  The invariant subspace topics which will be pursued include
              consequences of the Beurling-type invariant subspace theory for reproducing
              kernel Hilbert spaces with Nevanlinna-Pick kernels.  In addition, a concrete
              model theory of commuting n-tuples related to that of Agler and Athavale will
              be developed.

One of the unifying themes of the proposed work is the
              systematic use of control theory ideas in the context of reproducing kernel
              Hilbert spaces.  Such spaces provide a fundamental notion for connecting
              problems in, for example, classical mechanics, quantum mechanics, circuit
              theory, and signal analysis.  Some of the proposed problems may be viewed as
              inverse problems or "partial knowledge" problems.  For example, to effect a
              desired output, how should one decide on an appropriate input?  Interpolation
              type problems have long been studied for the stabilization of systems in
              feedback control in one dimension.  Much of the emphasis of the proposed
              research will be on the multidimensional theory.  The proposer expects this
              viewpoint to be productive in developing new techniques for the inverse
              problems being considered. 

