Title       : Development of Piezoelectric Implant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a0100199

Award Number: 0100199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney D. Roseman Rodney.Roseman@UC.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Relva C. Buchanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The long-term goal of this research is development of a piezoelectric-based
              cochlear implant, while complementing research in existing implant technology
              and to the understanding of hearing processes. The device will utilize the
              incoming mechanical energy into the cochlea to generate electrical charge by
              virtue of the piezoelectric effect, and stimulate surviving nerve fibers in the
              cochlea. Another goal will be to overcome challenges in the fabrication of
              miniature piezoelectric devices, and gain insights into their properties.
              Compared to currently used cochlear implants, this unit is self-contained and
              designed to work without any signal amplifiers or transmission elements,
              greatly simplifying the stimulation process. A considerable amount of
              background research has already been performed in our laboratories, both in
              vivo and in vitro. Results have demonstrated feasibility, and have indicated
              the need to focus on device analysis and development. A device utilizing
              bending mode piezoelectricity has been designed. The design is flexible,
              allowing a number of engineering parameters to be varied to obtain optimum
              performance. Specific aims of the proposed research are to: a) determine the
              dynamic acoustical piezoelectric properties of PVDF in the bending mode; b)
              systematically evaluate device performance as a function of engineering
              variables; c) perform in vitro testing in a mechanical model of the cochlea;
              and, d) study the nature of mechanical forces in the cochlea to enhance
              transducer performance. Research will involve collaborations with acoustics,
              biophysics and polymer surface treatment specialists to improve upon the
              initial efforts and bring to fruition an implantable device.


