Title       : Lamellae Formation and Reorientation in Diblock Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0100903

Award Number: 0100903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge Vinals vinals@csit.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0100903
Vinals
This research project will use analytical and computational
              techniques to study the formation, stability and coarsening of lamellar phases
              in diblock copolymers.  Although block copolymers are already widely used in
              industry, newer technologies that rely on high performance polymeric materials
              often require precise control of the polymer microstructure and its
              self-assembly.  Processing by temperature quench or solvent casting from a high
              temperature isotropic phase always leads to the formation of a polycrystalline
              structure comprised of domains or grains of differently oriented lamellae.  The
              focus of this research is on mechanisms controlling long-ranged orientational
              order, including the reorientation of lamellar phases by reciprocating shears,
              and the motion of topological defects and its effect on coarsening of the
              lamellar structure.  A theoretical analysis is carried out at a mesoscopic
              level to find nonlinear solutions under imposed, reciprocating shears, as well
              as to elucidate their stability.  Viscoelastic contrast between the microphases
              is explicitly taken into consideration.  In addition, the longest relaxation
              times in the lamellar phase are likely to be determined by the spatial
              distribution and motion of topological defects.  The motion of grain
              boundaries, disclinations (in two-dimensional samples), and dislocations is
              considered, as well as their effect on the coarsening times of the
              microstructure, and on the possible existence of asymptotic
              self-similarity.
%%%
This research project will use analytical and
              computational techniques to study the formation, stability and coarsening of
              lamellar phases in diblock copolymers.  Although block copolymers are already
              widely used in industry, newer technologies that rely on high performance
              polymeric materials often require precise control of the polymer microstructure
              and its self-assembly.  Processing by temperature quench or solvent casting
              from a high temperature isotropic phase always leads to the formation of a
              polycrystalline structure comprised of domains or grains of differently
              oriented lamellae.
The focus of this research is on mechanisms controlling
              long-ranged orientational order and the motion of topological defects and its
              effect on coarsening of the lamellar structure.
***

