Title       : Problems in Combinatorial Functional Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0100298

Award Number: 0100298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasad Tetali tetali@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While attempting to solve a problem raised by Talagrand in the context of
              deviations from a median, the PI and his collaborators introduced  the notion
              of the subgaussian constant in the context of concentration inequalities on
              product graphs.   Estimating the subgaussian constant amounts to estimating a
              certain log-moment generating function, and is useful in establishing tight
              concentration phenomenon on graphs. Some known (classical) results of Maurey,
              McDiarmid, and others  are derived using this notion, leaving open still some
              fundamental problems, a few of which are addressed in this proposal.  Besides
              the subgaussian constant, in recent work the PI (with his  collaborators) has
              introduced new  Poincare- and Log Sobolev-type functional constants in the
              discrete setting of Markov chains and graphs. Algorithmic problems such as
              computing and approximating these and related isoperimetric constants are
              considered here.  Mathematical problems such as estimating the vertex
              isoperimetric constant and its functional analog on product graphs are also
              proposed.

The combination of combinatorial and functional-analytic
              techniques has proved quite fruitful, especially in the last few years, in
              investigating discrete isoperimetry, and in establishing  tight inequalities
              between isoperimetric and Poincare-type constants.   These inequalities in turn
              were invaluable to problems  in extremal and probabilistic combinatorics, and
              to the design and analysis of randomized and approximation algorithms. Not as
              well understood, in the discrete setting, are the finer so-called Log-Sobolev
              inequalities, and their connection to isoperimetric and concentration
              inequalities. Some fundamental  problems are addressed here with a view towards
              a better understanding. In summary, this proposal addresses some important and
              current  problems  in discrete  probability and combinatorics. The motivation
              for some of these problems stems from questions which arose in the fields of
              probability theory and computer science.

