Title       : Physics-Based Finite-Dimensional Modeling and Adaptive Control of Underwater
               Vehicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0100783

Award Number: 0100783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179544             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis L. Whitcomb llw@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,9199,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research program will develop finite-dimensional nonlinear dynamical models
              for underwater robot vehicles, and  incorporate these models in the development
              of provably stable nonlinear controllers for dynamic maneuvering of underwater
              vehicles. This research will directly address the following two problems:

1.
              Nonlinear Finite Dimensional Dynamical Modeling: We are developing unsteady
              dissipative hydrodynamical models and numerical simulations for marine
              vehicles, and experimentally verifying these analytical models under the
              low-speed operating conditions typical for dynamically positioned vehicles
              engaged in survey, sampling, docking, and maneuvering operations.

2. Stable
              Model-Based Nonlinear Adaptive Control: We are developing 6-DOF model-based
              adaptive tracking controllers, and experimentally evaluating both the new and
              previously reported techniques in full-scale experimental trials. 

The goal
              is to enable marine vehicles to perform missions presently considered either
              infeasible or impractical with existing manned and unmanned systems.  The
              intellectual merit of the activity is the analytical development and
              experimental validation of finite-dimensional plant models with explicit
              dissipative structure, and the development and experimental validation of a new
              class of model-based adaptive identifiers and tracking controllers for
              underwater vehicles.  The broader impacts of the activity include: Development
              and web-based dissemination of "Dynamics and Control of Marine Vehicles," a new
              course at JHU. Advances developed under the proposed research will be
              transitioned to the vehicles of the NSF supported National Deep Submergence
              Facility to improve their operational capabilities for U.S. oceanographic
              science.





