Title       : Number Theory with Emphasis on Algorithms and Algebraic Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a0100485

Award Number: 0100485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hendrik W. Lenstra hwl@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lenstra
0100485

The proposed research belongs to the interface between
              number theory and
algebra. It is inspired by problems that come up in an
              algorithmic
context and in arithmetic algebraic geometry. Altogether, the
              proposal
contains 19 problem sets: five from Algorithmic Number Theory,
              three
from Algebraic Number Theory, five from Commutative and
              Homological
Algebra, three from the Geometry of Numbers, and three from Group
              Theory.
The collection has been composed with a view towards assisting
              the
investigator's many current and future graduate students in
              choosing
suitable thesis subjects. The problems have the appealing features
              of
appearing to be feasible without being trivial, and of being
              specific
without being narrow. They belong to mainstream areas that will
              also
serve the students after obtaining their degrees. Of the
              nineteen
problem sets, the following two are both easy to formulate
              and
attractive. The first is the development of an algorithmic theory
              of
quadratic forms over rings and fields of arithmetic interest. A
              typical
question is how quickly one can find a representation of a
              positive
integer as a sum of four squares. Or: it is known that any odd
              unimodular
indefinite inner product space over the ring of integers
              is
diagonalizable; given the symmetric matrix that defines the inner
product,
              how quickly can one find the change of basis that diagonalizes
the form? A
              first investigation shows that one may expect a wide spectrum
of answers to
              the algorithmic questions in this area, displaying all the
riches of
              number-theoretic algorithms. The second is giving class number
estimates for
              orders in number fields. What is a good upper bound for the
number of
              equivalence classes of fractional ideals of a giving order,
expressed as a
              function of the degree and the discriminant of the order?
And can one find
              better estimates for orders that have nice properties,
such as being
              Gorenstein? This type of question is of importance in the
theory of abelian
              varieties, and one will need to apply techniques coming
from commutative
              algebra, abelian group theory, combinatorics, and
elementary analytic number
              theory.

In order to place the project in perspective one may consider the
              recent
development of number theory. Present day number theory differs in
              two
important respects from number theory twenty five years ago, namely
              in
the roles played by algorithms and computers, and by algebraic
              geometry.
It has been found that algorithmic number theory has
              important
applications, notably in cryptography, and in addition number
              theorists
have learned how to use computers for their research. Inventing
              good
computational methods for number-theoretic problems has thus become
              of
central importance. One of the principal investigator's strengths is
              in
the interaction between theory and practice, on the one hand using
              recent
theoretical advances for algorithmic purposes and on the other
              hand
deriving purely mathematical inspiration from the problems suggested
              by
the applications. At the other end of the spectrum, knowledge of
algebraic
              geometry has become a standard requirement for aspiring number
theorists.
              Virtually every breakthrough in number theory over the past
few decades,
              including Andrew Wiles's work on Fermat's Last Theorem, has
involved
              arithmetic algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry depends on a
broad spectrum
              of techniques from algebra and algebraic number theory,
and gives rise to an
              unending array of tantalizing questions in those
areas, of which the project
              studies a sample. What is maybe the most
exciting of all, is the way in which
              arithmetic algebraic geometry and
algorithmic number theory are presently
              being tied together, both in the
application of geometric objects to
              cryptography and in the application
of algorithmic techniques to investigate
              geometric objects in number
theory. The project will be carried out by the
              investigator's graduate
students, many of whom will, as experience shows,
              acquire combined
expertise in these two areas, which is a very precious but
              fairly rare
commodity.


