Title       : D-modules, Groebner Bases and Toric Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0100509

Award Number: 0100509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95163              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Ulrich Walther   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator intends to study problems in the theory of differential
              operators that arise from de Rham cohomology theory, from the theory of
              D-modules, in the context of toric varieties and GKZ-systems, or from
              stratified spaces.  He will investigate the category of quasi-coherent
              D-modules on a toric variety, and the modeling of operations within that
              category by more familiar objects, as well as problems related to the nature of
              characteristic varieties.  The investigator will also consider practical
              questions related to algorithmic D-module theory via Groebner bases, which give
              rise to certain stratifications. He will study the relation of D-modules with
              Dwork cohomology, and try to characterize jump parameters in
              GKZ-systems.

This is a project in the mathematical area known as algebraic
              geometry. During the 20-th century, algebraic geometry has changed its nature
              from analytic geometry into a much more complex science.  The result is a
              complicated but powerful method for studying curves, surfaces and other
              geometric objects.  This modern approach to geometry allows mathematicians to
              use geometric techniques and intuition in many other situations. The methods
              used in algebraic geometry are of a very wide range. The investigator's work
              concentrates on the applications of differential calculus and computer power to
              the subject, thus combining geometry, algebra, calculus and modern technology
              in his work. As he continues to uncover the interplay of these objects by
              theoretical and computational means, algebraic geometry is becoming ever more
              valuable as a tool in other parts of mathematics, physics and engineering.


