Title       : Urban Containment Programs and the Vulnerability of Infrastructure to Hazards:
               Are Cities Being Engineered to be Safe as Well as Smart?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0100012

Award Number: 0100012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Burby burby@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Proposal: CMS-0100012
PI: Raymond Burby
Institution: University of
              North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Date: July 10, 2001

ABSTRACT: Urban
              Containment Programs and the Vulnerability of Infrastructure to Hazards: Are
              Cities Being Engineered to Be Safe as Well as "Smart"
 "Smart Growth" is now
              being advocated in the United States by federal agencies, industry, and
              professional associations in order to bring about more efficient,
              environmentally sensitive, and livable urban communities. One key tenet of
              smart growth is containment of urban sprawl through the use of regulatory
              growth boundaries, greenbelts, and curtailment of water and sewer extensions.
              Smart growth and urban containment, however, may have a serious unintended
              consequence: increased vulnerability of urban development and related civil
              infrastructure systems to natural hazards due to increased development
              pressure. In this interdisciplinary project (civil engineering and urban
              planning) we will document the dimensions of this threat and identify
              engineering and other measures that can be used to counter it. The study will
              focus on a paired sample of four metropolitan areas. Two metropolitan areas
              have had urban containment programs in place for twenty or more years:
              Portland, Oregon and San Diego, California. They will be paired with
              neighboring Vancouver/Clark County, Washington and Orange County, California,
              respectively, which do not have containment policies.  Several hundred parcels
              within each metropolitan area will be randomly sampled to determine the change
              in the value of parcels and intensity of development before and after
              containment began. Data will also be collected on a range of other factors that
              can affect development (e.g., hazard mitigation and other infrastructure
              standards and development regulations, parcel size, soils and slopes,
              accessibility, public services, and nearby development trends). Regression
              models will be used to isolate the effects of containment while controlling
              statistically for other factors that can affect development and value. Then,
              using ratios of infrastructure (roads, bridges, water, sewerage, and
              electricity) to housing units of various types, the degree to which containment
              programs increase the potential for losses to civil infrastructure systems will
              be estimated. The development of engineering standards for the built
              environment and planning standards for contained urban growth will be explored
              through discussions with representatives of federal agencies, industry trade
              associations, and engineering and planning professional associations. The
              implications of the study findings for engineering urban growth will help to
              ensure that "smart growth" now being advocated widely is also "safe growth." 

