Title       : Proof Theory and Computational Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a0100589

Award Number: 0100589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238520             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel R. Buss sbuss@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project focuses on some of the unexpectedly fruitful connections between
              proof theory and important open questions in computational complexity. In
              mathematical logic, Buss investigates proof theory and proof complexity,
              especially weak proof systems with close connections to open problems in
              computational complexity.   He investigates aspects of theoretical computer
              science related to open questions such as the "P versus NP" problem and related
              problems in complexity including open problems in the mathematical foundations
              of cryptography. Buss studies the proof complexity of propositional systems
              such as Frege systems, cutting planes systems, Nullstellensatz proof systems,
              counting axioms, the polynomial calculus, and intuitionistic proof systems. He
              plans to extend previous work on bounded arithmetic and its relationships with
              proof complexity, computational complexity and cryptographic conjectures.  The
              goals of this research are firstly to give bounds on proof size and on proof
              search algorithms, and to determine what kinds of computational content can be
              extracted from formal proofs; and secondly to investigate open problems in
              computational complexity from the viewpoint of mathematical logic.

The work
              of this project is motivated by the desire to obtain a better understanding of
              open problems in computational complexity.  These open problems include the "P
              versus NP" problem regarding the difficulty of solving a large range of
              combinatorial problems including scheduling and optimization; they also include
              establishing the possibility of mathematically secure cryptographic systems. 
              It is commonly believed that many of the computational problems in NP and in
              cryptography are intractible, and it important for many applications that they
              be intractible.  However, mathematical proofs of intractibility have not been
              obtained yet, in spite of extensive efforts. Buss works on aspect of these
              problems in the setting of mathematical logic and proof theory.  His work
              addresses the logical and computational complexity of formal, symbolic proofs;
              this includes the analysis of proofs in a variety of proof systems
              corresponding to feasible computation, and the possibility of extracting
              computational information from proofs. 

This project will be supported by
              the Foundations program of the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Theory
              of Computing program of the Division of Computer and Communications Research.

