Title       : Topics in Degenerate Evolution Equations and Applied Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2001   
File        : a0100660

Award Number: 0100660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuele DiBenedetto em.diben@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A Hele--Shaw cell consists of two horizontal, slightly separated,  parallel
              plates, forming a 2-dimensional strip and filled with a viscous fluid (say for
              example oil). The oil is then removed by forcing a less viscous fluid (say
              water) into the channel. After an initial formation of several invading
              fingers, the penetrating fluid reaches a steady state and takes the form of a
              single finger. Mathematically one seeks a harmonic function within the set
              occupied by oil and vanishing on the set occupied by water. On the free
              boundary separating the two fluids, one imposed a kinematic condition
              guaranteeing conservation of mass.  Saffman and Taylor in the late '50's
              computed explicitly a family of profiles of the invading finger, parameterized
              by the asymptotic upstream width of the finger. Experimental data however show
              that such a width is always 1/2 of the width of the channel.

The
              mathematical and physical mechanism by which Nature selects the solution
              corresponding to the value 1/2 of  the parameter, is not well understood. We
              have shown that among all the Saffman-Taylor explicit solutions, the one
              corresponding to the value 1/2 of the parameter, maximizes the thrust of the
              fluid across the channel at the tip of the invading finger. The problem, which
              is non--variational, is recast into one that has a variational form, through a
              Baiocchi-type transformation. The non-variational nature of the problem, set in
              an unbounded domain, is accounted for by a precise description of the
              asymptotic behavior at infinity of the solutions of the corresponding
              non-linear elliptic equation. Such estimation is achieved through non-standard
              applications of the Harnack Inequality and the identification of the 'nose' of
              the finger. We have also shown that for the value 1/2 of the parameter the
              motion of the finger occurs by mean curvature. An effort will be made to
              connect and understand these two features. 
In another direction, we will
              investigate local behavior and uniqueness of solutions to the
              
Buckley--Leverett system. This is a system of two degenerate (in the
              principal part)  and singular (in the lower order terms) of parabolic
              equations. The degeneracy yields 
a hyperbolic-parabolic behavior. Kruzkov
              observed that  uniqueness of boundary value problems for such a system is
              linked to the regularity of the solutions. We intend to use recent ideas
              developed in connection with hyperbolic--parabolic problems and our long
              standing investigations on the regularity of solutions for degenerate evolution
              equations, 
to investigate the uniqueness of such solutions. More
              theoretically, we will continue our investigations on Harnack--type estimates
              for solutions of degenerate parabolic equations and quasi--minima in the
              Calculus of Variations. The Hele-Shaw problem simulates the penetration of oil
              into water.  It's importance stems from its applications to the recovery of oil
              trapped into layered rocky soil (hence the 2-dimensional model). Physically one
              observes that the asymptotic width of the penetrating finger is 1/2 of the
              width of the channel. The natural questions we are attempting to understand is
              why Nature selects such a value and what's the underlying mathematical and
              physical reason for such a specific selection to occur. On the same realm of
              physical application one asks whether two fluids one penetrating into another
              (Buckley-Leverett system) do so in a unique manner, and if not, what is the
              reason the a possible lack of uniqueness. The supporting mathematics to such
              physical issues involves fine estimates of the local behavior of solutions of
              degenerate and/or singular evolution partial differential equations, such as
              
for example the Harnack inequality.

