Title       : SGER: New Opportunitiues with Intrinsic Left-handed Metamaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0100962

Award Number: 0100962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon Schultz sschultz@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) award.  The project will
              allow a  rapid follow-up to the PI's discovery of a new class of materials, the
              so-called left-handed materials (LHM).   In normal materials, both the electric
              permittivity  and the magnetic permeability are observed to be positive
              quantities.  LHM are composite materials constructed so that the permeability
              and permittivity are simultaneously negative.  The properties of LHM are quite
              different from ordinary materials.  Some of the most important and
              non-intuitive properties of LHM are exposed when electromagnetic radiation
              propagates through such a LHM medium.  For example, Snell's law is reversed. 
              In work to date, materials have been constructed that behave as LHM in the
              microwave region.  This SGER award will allow the exploration of theoretical
              and experimental work to determine if LHM materials can be fabricated at
              optical frequencies.  If this can be achieved, and it is not known with
              certainty whether this will be possible, the potential impact of LHM in
              photonic materials, laser applications and other technical areas would be
              substantial.

This is a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) Award. 
              The Principal Investigator and co-workers have produced a new class of
              composite materials with physical properties that scientists theorized might be
              possible, but had never before been produced.  The materials are called
              left-handed materials (LHM) because they reverse many of the physical
              properties observed in ordinary materials in response to electromagnetic
              radiation. The new class of materials has the ability to reverse properties
              such as the Doppler effect, the principle that changes the frequency of waves
              as the source of the waves moves. Thus, a train whistle sounds higher in pitch
              as the train approaches and lower as the train recedes. Maxwell's equations,
              which describe the relationship between magnetic and electric fields, suggest
              that microwave radiation or light would show the opposite effect in this new
              class of materials, shifting to lower frequencies as the source approaches. 
              Similarly, Maxwell's equations suggest that a lens made of such materials,
              instead of dispersing electromagnetic radiation as usual, would focus it as it
              passes through. This SGER award will allow the exploration of theoretical and
              experimental work to determine if LHM materials can be fabricated at optical
              frequencies.
Such materials would have strange properties such as a flashlight
              shining on a LHM slab would be focused at a point on the other side.   Students
              and post-docs working on this project will received excellent training in a new
              area, and will be qualified for a range of employment in academe, industry and
              government.


