Title       : Application of Radiosity Methods to the Prediction of Sound Fields in Diffusive
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0100196

Award Number: 0100196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph T. Muehleisen ralph.muehleisen@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Most architectural acoustic prediction programs utilize ray-tracing techniques
              that work best for environments with large reflecting surfaces such as
              auditoria and concert halls.  This project will apply the radiosity method that
              has been developed for illumination and visual computer rendering to the
              prediction of sound fields in diffuse acoustic environments.  The new
              prediction method will allow for prediction of sound levels in small
              complicated environments such as open plan offices and factories where ray
              tracing techniques fail.  The decreased computational requirement of the method
              may allow acoustics to be added to the visual architectural "walk-through" of
              office and factory designs.  

In the radiosity method a set of energy
              balance equations between the bounding surfaces of the room is developed.  Most
              of these equations are independent of the source and receiver positions and
              thus acoustic prediction on multiple source and receiver locations can be
              significantly faster than with ray tracing techniques.  In the first phase of
              this project, the acoustic radiosity method is developed assuming perfectly
              diffuse surfaces and radiators and ignoring diffraction effects.  In the second
              phase the method is extended to include non-diffuse surfaces.  In the third
              phase diffraction effects are added to the model.  Students working on the
              project will present their results at national conferences and through
              publications in peer reviewed acoustic journals.  Results of the work will be
              incorporated into existing classes on building noise control and room acoustics
              where students will develop their own radiosity programs for acoustic
              prediction.


