Title       : Logic and Computability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0100035

Award Number: 0100035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Shore shore@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil Nerode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project includes research into a broad range of topics in
              computability theory (recursion theory) and logic both theoretical and applied
              to other areas of mathematics and computer science. Included in the first area
              are investigations of the structures of sets and functions ordered by relative
              complexity of computation. Particular emphasis will be placed on the issue of
              definability in the complexity structures of all sets and those which are
              effectively enumerable. Included in this area is the analysis of the relations
              between difficulty of computing functions and other issues such as rates of
              growth, complexity of their definitions in arithmetic and the strength of axiom
              systems needed to prove their existence. Applications of the methods of pure
              computability theory will be made in the areas of computable algebra and model
              theory. General methods will be developed for transferring results from
              arbitrary structures to ones in specific classes of interest such as lattices,
              groups and rings. Another area where issues of computability and complexity are
              to be studied is that of modal and intuitionistic logics and their model
              theory. These logics are now used to model issues in program verification and
              computer security. The second area includes the study of structures
              representable by finite automata, decision procedures, the analysis and
              development of nonmonotonic logic, concurrent programming models, and
              applications of linear programming ideas and algorithms to data structures and
              logic programming. A primary focus here will be the logical and mathematical
              foundations of hybrid (continuous and discrete) control theory as well as the
              practical implementation of algorithms for these subjects based on the
              theoretical work being done. An important tool to be developed in this area is
              that of infinitary automata.

The research proposed is of two types. The
              first is directed at a better understanding of the fundamental notions of
              computability and relative difficulty of computation for different tasks. The
              theoretical work deals both with the abstract notion of computability as well
              as with applications to specific branches of, and questions in, other areas of
              mathematics. One important application (within mathematics) concerns the
              general question of what starting information is needed to be able to compute
              various aspects of many important classes of mathematical structures. In
              practical terms, the results at times indicate that there are no algorithms for
              certain important tasks or that more information than might have been expected
              is needed to write programs calculating the desired results. Another aspect of
              this work stresses the impact that the specific concrete choice of
              representation of an abstract mathematical structure has on one's ability to
              compute specific functions and relations. The second type deals more directly
              with developing the mathematical (and especially logical) tools needed for the
              crucial areas of program verification, data management and automated control of
              real-world complex systems. Commercial applications are expected for some of
              this work and there has already been a spin off to a start-up company
              developing several applications including data compression and network
              management algorithms. Other applications of these techniques to be
              investigated include multimedia applications and distributed continuous
              systems.

