Title       : Investigations in Model Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0100594

Award Number: 0100594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90004              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Baldwin jbaldwin@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Baldwin proposes  investigations in stability theory, the model theory of
              algebra and finite model theory. Baldwin will continue to investigate the the
              construction of homogeneous universal models with respect to a notion of strong
              submodel. One application of this method links stability theory with
              probability on finite models by providing a technique for not only proving 0-1
              laws but obtaining model theoretic properties of the almost sure theory.  These
              model theoretic properties of the almost sure theory can be applied to problems
              in finite model theory. Baldwin has been a leader in the application of
              stability theory to the development of logic with finitely many variables. This
              work has, for the first time, provided serious links between the deep work of
              Cherlin, Harrington, Lachlan, and Zilber on homogeneous structures and the
              mainstream of finite model theory. Baldwin and Baizhanov are studying
              expansions of stable structures by arbitrary predicates; this is motivated by
              the earlier work with Benedikt on embedded finite model theory. Baldwin's
              earlier work with Holland has included applications in the area of algebra,
              specifically group theory, and in expansions of the complex numbers by an
              arbitrary subset. The present project will try to find some specific new
              structures which expand the complex numbers by subgroups of the multiplicative
              group.

Most of Baldwin's work has been in model theory, a branch of
              mathematical logic.  The general aim of this work is to understand `ordinary
              mathematics' at a higher level of abstraction.  This abstraction allows the
              discovery of common features in widely different areas of mathematics, ranging
              from probability theory to combinatorics to algebraic geometry.  This kind of
              work has been fruitful both in a better understanding of algebraic structures
              and in providing a background for investigations in database theory. In
              particular, Baldwin's work with his co-author Michael Benedikt of Lucent
              Technologies on `embedded finite model theory' has found limits on the
              expressibility of database queries. Baldwin will continue his educational work
              - primarily focusing on developing innovative and effective ways to prepare
              mathematics teachers.  The educational work is connected with two other NSF
              sponsored programs.

