Title       : Specific Interactions in Polymer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0100818

Award Number: 0100818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Painter pcp1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael M. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The two co-PI's will continue research on the effect of specify interactions on
              the phase behavior of polymer blends.  One part of the proposed work concerns
              the completion of work initiated a few years ago on the effect of chain
              architecture on the number of like and un-like contacts in solutions and blends
              where the components contain functional groups that hydrogen bond to one
              another.  These systems are particularly amenable to study because infrared
              spectroscopy can be used to count the number of contacts in well-chosen
              systems.  Work in progress involves the effect of branching in hyperbranched
              and dendrimer-like polymers, mesh size in cross-linked networks and microphase
              separation in blends involving block copolymers.  The second part of the
              proposed research involves the application of a new technique, a
              two-dimensional Fourier transform infrared/dielectric spectrometer.  Dielectric
              relaxation measurements have been used for many years as a probe of the
              dynamics of polymer chains, through the detection of the transitions and
              relaxations that are a result of various types of coupled or local motions. 
              Infrared spectroscopy provides a probe of molecular level structure and, in
              certain systems, intermolecular interactions.  Clearly, a technique (or, more
              accurately, a hybrid-technique) that can measure the temperature and frequency
              range of various transitions and relaxation's, while simultaneously probing the
              functional groups involved and the degree to which their motions are coupled,
              would be an extremely powerful analytical tool.  It is expected that this
              instrument will open up various new areas of research and undergraduate
              students will be involved in "scouting" experiments as part of their senior
              projects to help explore and establish these.  At the same time, this hybrid
              spectrometer will be used to explore problems associated with the major thrust
              of our research that could not be tackled previously, particularly the dynamics
              of functional groups and polymer chains in associating systems.
%%%
This new
              area of research has considerable potential for enhancing both research
              activities and education.  In terms of the former, the development of the
              technique should allow the functional groups involved in relaxations and
              transitions in various materials, not just polymers, to be explored.  In terms
              of education, through the mechanisms of involving undergraduates in the
              research, seminars on technique development and incorporating this instrument
              into our undergraduate laboratories, the importance of combining methods of
              investigation and techniques in order to tackle complex problems will be taught
              and emphasized.

