Title       : Analytic Number Theory and Multiple Basic Hypergeometric Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0100288

Award Number: 0100288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Milne milne@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will continue his research on analytic number 
theory,
              algebraic combinatorics, and the theory and application of
multiple basic
              hypergeometric series.  The investigator recently
derived many infinite
              families of explicit exact formulas involving
either squares or triangular
              numbers, two of which generalize
Jacobi's (1829) 4 and 8 squares identities to
              4n^2 or 4n(n+1)
squares, respectively, without using cusp forms. He
              similarly
generalized to infinite families all of Jacobi's explicitly stated
              
degree 2, 4, 6, 8 Lambert series expansions of classical theta
functions.
              These results, depending on new expansions for powers of
various products of
              classical theta functions, arise in the setting of
Jacobi elliptic functions,
              continued fractions, Hankel or Turanian
determinants, Lie algebras, and Schur
              functions.  The investigator
first plans to finish his derivation of the
              infinite families of explicit
exact sums of squares identities (excluding
              those above)  for n^2 or
n(n+1) squares, respectively, that he has already
              shown to exist. 
These will include  explicit identities for an odd number of
              squares.
Next, he plans to prove additional Kac--Wakimoto conjectures
              for
triangular numbers.  In the area of algebraic combinatorics, the
              
investigator will develop the combinatorial and number
              theoretic
implications of his new formulas for Ramanujan's tau function
              that
are directly related to the Leech lattice.

The above project utilizes
              explicit combinatorial and analytic 
methods to study the problem of
              representing an integer as a sum of
squares of integers. This problem is one
              of the oldest and most
significant in mathematics. It goes back at least  2000
              years to
Diophantus, and continues more recently with the works of
              Fermat,
Euler, Lagrange, Jacobi, Glaisher, Ramanujan, Hardy,
              Mordell,
Andrews, and others.  Jacobi's  elliptic function approach dates
              from
his epic ``Fundamenta Nova'' of 1829.  He found elegant simple
formulas
              for counting the number of ways that any fixed positive
integer n can be
              written as a sum of  2, 4, 6, or 8 squares. 
Applications of modular forms to
              sums of squares really started in
1917 with Mordell.  This approach provides
              abstract formulas for
any given number of squares as  the Fourier coefficients
              of modular
forms.  In 1965 Rankin proved that any one of these formulas,
              for
more than 8 squares, would be highly non-trivial to compute
explicitly. 
              Since 1829, explicit exact non-trivial formulas have
only been found for up to
              32 squares, with an even number of
squares much easier than an odd number. 
              The investigator used his
combinatorial/elliptic function methods to derive
              infinite families of
expansions of powers of classical theta functions, and
              the
corresponding non-trivial explicit sums of squares formulas. 
              (See
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/math.NT/0008068). This is the first time
that
              infinite families of  non-trivial exact explicit formulas for
sums of squares
              have been found.  All of this work gives a new elegant
extension of the
              classical formulas of Jacobi.  
