Title       : Perturbation Methods for Nonlinear Control of Lagrangian Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0100162

Award Number: 0100162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francesco Bullo bullo@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The principal goal of this proposed work is to develop proper orthogonal
              decomposition (POD) as a viable complementary alternative to conventional
              experimental modal analysis for vibration systems.

Proper orthogonal
              decomposition has been used for obtaining "energy modes," as opposed to normal
              modes, from sensed system outputs.  Proper orthogonal decomposition can indeed
              yield normal modes in lightly damped systems if the mass distribution is known.
              This research aims to overcome the requirement of a known mass distribution,
              estimate modal frequencies and damping factors and associate them with the
              correct mode, expand the applicability to arbitrary excitations, and compare
              the performance of POD with classical experimental modal analysis.  Auxiliary
              objectives are the extension from 1-D distributed-parameter systems to 2-D
              systems, and the application of POD to multi-modal nonlinear responses. The
              research approach will involve theoretical analyses, numerical simulations, and
              experiments.  Simulations and experiments will be used to test theoretical
              developments on simple systems with analytical solutions, and also on systems
              with complicated geometries.  If POD were sufficiently developed, it would
              significantly enhance our ability to extract vibration parameters as a
              complement to traditional modal analysis.  Experimental vibration facilities
              are globally prevalent, geared for industrial problems of noise, performance,
              and safety.  Even if POD were used in a fraction of such laboratories, the
              total POD activity would be quite large.  It will be particularly advantageous
              to systems for which sensed inputs are not available.  The project is geared
              for a doctoral student's research program.  The project will also involve an
              undergraduate researcher for applying POD and conventional modal analysis on
              experimental systems

