Title       : Research Proposal on Arithmetic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0100441

Award Number: 0100441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ching-Li Chai chai@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is in the field of arithmetic algebraic geometry and contains two
              parts: Neron models and the geometry of Shimura varieties.  The focus of the
              first part is a numerical invariant, called the base change conductor, defined
              using the Neron models.  This numerical invariant measures the difference
              between the Neron models of a semiabelian variety before and after making a
              finite base extension so that the semiabelian variety acquires semistable
              reduction.  For an abelian variety over a number field, the base change
              conductor is equal to the decrease of Faltings height under stabilization. 
              Recently E. de Shalit, J.-K. Yu and Chai proved that the base change conductor
              for a torus is equal to one half of the Artin conductor, using a congruence
              property for Neron models they discovered.  This congruence property has been
              extended to abelian varieties by Chai.  The explicit goals of the first project
              include:  (a) Prove that the base change conductor for an abelian variety with
              potentially ordinary reduction is equal to the pairing between two central
              functions on the Galois group: the character of the Galois representation on
              the character group of a formal torus obtained from the Neron model, and a
              specific central function defined for every finite Galois extension.  This
              specific central function has values in some cyclotomic extension of the field
              of p-adic numbers; it can be thought of as a "bisection of the Artin conductor"
              because the sum of this function with its complex conjugate is equal to the
              Artin character.  (b) Prove an additivity property of the base change
              conductor.  (c) Study the elementary divisors of the base change conductor. 
              The second project is centered around the Hecke orbit problem and Oort's
              "foliation structure" for good reductions of Shimura variety.  A notion of
              "Tate-linear" subvarieties of reduction of Shimura varieties with ordinary
              points will be investigated.  (d) Verify in lower-rank cases the conjecture
              that every Tate-linear subvarieties is equal to the reduction of a Shimura
              subvariety.  (e) Prove some cases of Oort's conjecture that the Zariski closure
              of a prime-to-p Hecke orbit is equal to the Zariski closure of a leaf in the
              foliation structure.

This is a proposal in the area of mathematics known to
              as "Arithmetic Geometry."  In this subject the problems and techniques of both
              Algebraic Geometry and Number Theory intermingle, to the benefit of both areas.
               Number theory is the oldest branch of mathematics. In recent years it has
              become an indispensable tools in areas such as communication systems, data
              transmission, and cryptology.  A typical problem in Arithmetic Geometry
              concerns polynommial equations.  For a system of polynomial equations, the
              degree of complexity of drops if one is allowed to use more general numbers,
              because it becomes easier to find solutions.  The first part of this project
              studies a numerical invariant which measures how much the complexity drops. The
              second part of this project studies the of symmetries of a very special class
              of polynomial equations, called Shimura varieties, which are of central
              importance in Number Theory.

