Title       : Mesoscopic Theories in Materials Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0100872

Award Number: 0100872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Markos A. Katsoulakis markos@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the  proposed research  we address  the modeling and analysis of mesoscopic
              equations describing  pattern formation in materials and complex fluids. We
              focus mainly on two paradigms, surface processes and  field-responsive fluids.
              Mesoscopic models are coarse grained PDE or Stochastic PDE, derived directly
              and exactly from microscopic interacting particle systems and include detailed
              atomistic/molecular information. The principal question we attempt to answer 
              is how microscopic intermolecular forces affect  pattern formation and
              evolution at much larger
length scales. The analysis proposed here draws
              techniques from nonlinear PDE, calculus of variations and  stochastic
              processes. In the first  project we study pattern formation  and evolution  in
              surface processes under the influence of multiple and possibly competing
              mechanisms such as surface diffusion, reaction and adsorption/desorption. Here
              we employ Gamma-convergence 
techniques in order to understand patterning at 
              equilibrium, and viscosity solutions and varifolds for their dynamic
              counterparts. In a second project we focus on molecular dynamics and
related
              mesoscopic models describing particle suspensions in fluids and in particular
              on the  derivation and analysis of  mesoscopic PDE for field-responsive fluids.
              Here we employ
mass transport and relative entropy methods combined with Riesz
              Transform  estimates
to show existence of solutions as well as relaxation to
              equilibrium.


Ample experimental evidence indicates that interatomic and
              intermolecular forces dictate macroscopic properties of matter and determine
              formation and selection of  patterns and textures.
Notable examples arise  in
              polymer blends, alloys, catalysis, epitaxial growth of advanced
materials and
              biological media. Molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo algorithms, developed in a
              Quantum/Statistical Mechanics framework, provide detailed, quantitative dynamic
              and equilibrium
descriptions of these phenomena; however they are limited to
              short  space/time length scales, while  experimentally observed morphologies
              involve much larger  scales. This disparity between computations and
              experiments underscores the need to develop models (PDE, Stochastic PDE)
for
              larger scales,  which take in consideration microscopic details. The
              "mesoscopic" models we develop and study numerically and analytically  are
              geared towards this direction, incorporating systematically, (a) microscopic
              interactions, and (b) underresolved microscopic scales fluctuations. The
              developed models and analysis methods can allow for  a more direct
              comprehension of  macroscopic dynamic and equilibrium morphological behaviors 
              and also provide comparisons to experiments which typically involve larger
              length scales than the ones arising in microscopic modeling and simulation.


