Title       : Integrated LC/MS/MS System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0100831

Award Number: 0100831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326275             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Mathews mathews@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hong Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Kaback  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hieronim Jakubowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      New Jersey Medical School, MSB C
	      Newark, NJ  07103    973/972-7090

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to support the purchase of an instrument with combined
              liquid chromatography and advanced time of flight and tandem mass spectrometry
              capabilities.  Recent advances in mass spectrometry have provided unprecedented
              opportunities for the analysis of proteins, such as internal sequencing,
              identification of nature and location of post-translational modifications and
              noncovalent interactions. The system to be purchased will allow the research
              communities at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and
              Rutgers University - Newark to take advantage of this state-of-the-art
              technology in protein research. Currently, there is no instrument available
              that allows researchers at either institute to sequence and elucidate protein
              structures using tandem mass spectrometry. Provision of this technology will
              significantly enhance the quality and productivity of the research on both
              campuses, as well as at others in the Newark area. The instrument will be
              placed in a Mass Spectrometry Core Facility available to researchers at both
              institutions. The projects outlined in this application by the expected major
              users of the instrument entail basic research into the structure and function
              of proteins from a wide-range of organisms - human, yeast, bacteria and plants.
              The types of questions to be addressed will require protein identification and
              sequencing, nuclear protein complex identification, localization of
              protein-ligand interactions, enzyme tertiary structure determination, quality
              control of designer metallo-protein synthesis, internal sequencing of
              N-terminally blocked proteins, and identification of post-translational
              modification of proteins. This equipment will be supervised and maintained by
              an experienced mass spectrometrist who is in charge of the core facility. Three
              committees drawn from both institutions oversee the fiscal and scientific
              management and daily operation of this facility.
