Title       : Operatory Theory and Systems Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0100576

Award Number: 0100576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239072             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. William Helton helton@osiris.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
NONLINEAR OPERATOR THEORY. The goal is to find canonical "nonlinear
              generalizations" 
of analytic function theory and the related parts of linear
              operator theory.  Many 
classical and many new analytic function theorems have
              a statement purely in terms of 
linear operators.  The surprising thing is
              that these theorems about linear operators 
do not actually require linearity,
              and it has become clear that there will be  extensive 
nonlinear
              generalizations of them.  This wide open area is close to control
              theory.
COMPUTER OPERATOR ALGEBRA.  Linear engineering systems theory and
              operator theory are rife with calculations in a noncommutative algebra.
              Helton's group with M. Stankus 
are major providers of software (called
              NCAlgebra) for performing general noncommutative 
calculations in Mathematica.
               One phase of the software is at the level of a very 
powerful `yellow pad',
              and contains numerous algorithms they developed. For example, 
the 
              "noncommutative convexity" algorithm discussed  below will go in.  In another
              phase 
there is  extensive software implementing noncommutative Groebner basis
              algorithms 
due to Mora and algorithms for sorting and "shrinking" the output
              in various ways ( this 
is crucial in the noncommutative case). Since the
              techniques are new, experimentation on 
traditional problems is important.
              
NONCOMMUTATIVE INEQUALITIES.  Recently, Helton and collaborators made
              progress on a 
theory and resulting algorithm which takes a rational function
              F of noncommutative 
variables Z and outputs a family of inequalities which
              determine a domain G of Z on 
which F is "matrix convex".  Decidedly
              non-trivial is showing that the domain G 
determined by the algorithm is  "the
               largest possible" domain of matrix convexity 
for F. This is a first attempt
              at an automatic method for what engineers now do with 
Schur complement tricks
               to convert a design problem to Linear Matrix Inequalities.  
OPTIMIZATION 
              OVER SPACES OF ANALYTIC FUNCTIONS. Qualitative theory, computer algorithms
              based on this theory, analysis of such algorithms.  These are the key
              optimization 
problems which arise in designs of linear systems where there
              are competing constraints, 
or uncertainty in the math model of the physical
              system one is trying to control.

The research is directed at several
              projects in parts of operator theory and functional 
analysis related to
              engineering system theory. Linear operator theory has had a strong 
interplay
              with analytic function theory and engineering for many decades.  Indeed most
              
commercial software (at least in the control engineering community) for
              solving analytic 
function problems is based on this type of interplay between
              functions and matrices.  
One branch of analysis closely related to
              applications is classical Nevanlinna-Pick-
Nehari theory, or equivalently
              commutant lifting theory, a part of the area called 
operator model theory. 
              The early development of this  was done for the purest of 
mathematical
              reasons, but in the mid 1970's  and early 1980's this was shown to be
              
critical to the design of engineering systems where stability of the system
              is the key 
constraint. This motivated much more mathematical development and
              now it is one of the 
areas of functional analysis most closely associated
              with control engineering. For many 
years (since Norbert Wiener) design tools
              optimized mean square performance. The theory 
above ultimately lead to
              (commercially commonplace) tools for optimizing worst case 
frequency domain
              performance. The goal of much of the proposed research is to extend 
this
              theory in several radically new directions and we list the main ones.
HIGHLY
              NONLINEAR GENERALIZATIONS; the goal is to find canonical "nonlinear
              
generalizations" of analytic function theory and the related parts of linear
              
operator theory.  This wide open area is closely related to control theory. 
              Many 
systems which people wish to control are nonlinear (e.g., jet
              engines).
NONCOMMUTATIVE COMPUTER ALGEBRA; if a signal goes into a system A,
              comes out and then goes into B what we get is BA, while if a signal goes into B
              and then A what we 
get is AB.  Seldom does AB  equal BA, thus the design of
              engineering systems
requires (heavy) noncommutative calculations.  Helton's
              group has a broad based 
effort to develop methods and theory for computer
              assistance of such calculations.  
Inequalities with noncommuting elements is
              now a major topic in engineering and 
Helton's group is working out systematic
              methods for treating them.


