Title       : The Development of Nanoelectromechanical Structures for GHz Oscillators and
               Other High Frequency Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0100629

Award Number: 0100629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Superfine rsuper@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian R. Stoner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Falvo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sean Washburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The increasing miniaturization of electronic devices has been the foundation of
              the electronics revolution. Similar trends ate being seen in the field of
              actuating devices. where the acronym MicroElectroMechanical Systems is quickly'
              being replaced at its leading edge by NanoElectroMechanical Systems (NEMS). The
              ultimate scate for such devices will be the atomic scale. Nanoscale engineered
              materials will the building blocks of such devices [I]. Among these materials.
              nanotubes (NTs) provide many of the necessary properties required for NFMS:
              their geometry, extraordinary mechanical properties [2-6] ( which will allow
              GI-Iz mechanical resonance), novel electronic properties (metallic,
              semiconducting) [7-9]. and novel interfacial properties (atomically smooth, low
              friction)110, llj. We have recently discovered the atomic scale features in
              both the motion (friction)[1 I] and electrical properties of nanotube contacts
              [12]. These measured changes in response at the atomic scale in the dynamic
              electrical contact between NTs allow for a host of novel devices. These include
              high frequency devices, where the modulated signal depends on the relative
              velocity of the sliding contact, to atomic scale linear encoders in which the
              relative movement of a system can be measured to within a unit cell spacing. A
              necessary technology in the deployment of NT based NEMS will be a
              batch-fabrication process which includes NT integration. One solution to this
              problem is through NT growth processes. in which catalyst material is patterned
              on a substrate to produce desired integrated NI' NEMS. Specifically, growth
              processes will have to be understood such that NTs of specific crystalline
              orientation, radius, and length can be grown in-plane within an integrated
              silicon based device structure. We propose a plan of research that combines
              both investigations into the basic mechanisms of novel NEMS devices, and growth
              techniques that make strides toward batch-fabrication of NT NEMS. The specific
              NEMS devices we have in mind exploit the atomic scale features of the dynamic
              contact between NT electrical leads, and the mechanical resonance properties of
              NTs. Ln our view, the idea of position and orientation dependence of electrical
              contacts is an aspect of NEMS devices that deserves attention. It is a unique
              property of the nanometer scale and should open up device applications that are
              unique to NEMS. In a micron scale contact, the transport properties are an
              average over many relative crystalline orientations of the contacting surfaces
              as well as defects etc. hi a nanometer scale contact. ncw behavior will be
              observed due to relative perfection and smoothness of the contacting surfaces
              [13] and thc ability to tune precisely the relative orientation of contacting
              atomic lattices. hi this case the atomic structure matters. We propose to
              create:
1.  Voltage to frequency converter. The (M1-lz-GI-Iz) driving signal
              will be convened to a signal with 1- 1000 times the input frequency depending
              on the input amplitude
2.  Gigahertz frequency mixer: Sum and difference
              frequencies will be generated from input M1-Iz signals
3.  Atomic resolution
              linear encoder in an integrated. submicron device.

