Title       : Ergodic Theory, Differential Dynamics and Combinatorial Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0100581

Award Number: 0100581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald S. Ornstein ornstein@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yitzhak Katznelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal contains a number of different problems whose common thread is a
              core approach  combining dynamics, probability theory, and a basic set of
              techniques that were mainly developed in the classical ergodic theoretic
              setting.  These techniques have been very successfully adapted to problems from
              hard analysis and combinatorics, in areas such as:  KAM theory; Ramsey theory
              (in particular  density versions of results previously known for partitions,
              e.g., the density version of the Hales-Jewett theorem); Fractal geometry and
              Haussdorff dimension of sets in Euclidean space; the theory of amenable groups
              and their actions.  These are the main areas that we propose to develop
              further.

Physical systems satisfying the same set of laws exhibit a wide
              variety of behaviors going from the extreme of completely chaotic systems which
              appear to be completely random to systems that exhibit a surprising level of
              stability (for instance, a particle moving in a cyclotron).  Mathematical
              dynamics and ergodic theory explain these different types of behaviors.  The
              same methods turn out to be extremely useful in other areas, in particular in
              combinatorics, information theory, data compression, etc.  Our work is
              developing new methods that give better explanations of these phenomena and
              extend the applicability of the field to a broader class of problems.


