Title       : Random Holomorphic Sections and Complex Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0100474

Award Number: 0100474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349402             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Shiffman bshiffman@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

Bernard Shiffman will continue his research on the statistics of
              random
polynomials in several complex variables and more generally of
              random
sections of powers of positive line bundles on compact complex
              manifolds and
on almost complex symplectic manifolds.  He will investigate the
              "scaling
limit" statistics as the degree of the polynomial or the power of the
              line
bundle goes to infinity when distances are rescaled so that densities
              are
normalized.  He will study spacing of zeros, hole probabilities,
              pair
correlations for local maxima, and other topics. He will also
              study
correlations of critical points of spherical harmonics.  In
              another
direction, he will study the compact singularities of
              equidimensional
meromorphic mappings into compact complex manifolds.  He will
              also look for
new examples of Kobayashi hyperbolic hypersurfaces in complex
              projective
3-space.  Kobayashi hyperbolic spaces do not carry any entire
              holomorphic
curves; simple examples are the Cartesian squares of curves of
              genus greater
than 1 and symmetric squares of generic curves of genus greater
              than 2.  He
will look for low-degree hyperbolic birational images of these
              surfaces in
complex projective 3-space.

This research project is motivated
              by a need to understand complex quantum
mechanical systems.  Quantum mechanics
              is the fundamental theory that
describes the behavior of atoms and molecules
              and their component
particles--protons, neutrons, and electrons.  These
              particles are described
by wave functions, which are solutions of
              Schrodinger's equation.  The zeros
and local maxima of wave functions give
              important information on states of
atoms and molecules; the zeros are known in
              quantum chemistry and physics as
nodal lines.  The behavior of random
              polynomials provide an elementary model
similar to complex quantum systems. 
              Polynomials in several variables
correspond to systems with several degrees of
              freedom, and those polynomials
of high degree correspond to wave functions for
              highly excited states.  The
project includes statistics on symplectic
              manifolds, which serve as the
mathematical models for the states of quantum
              systems.  Another component of
the research involves understanding the
              geometry of complex algebraic
manifolds, which play an important role in
              quantum field theory and provide
models for diverse physical
              phenomena.






