Title       : Full-Scale Static and Dynamic Lateral Pile Group Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0100363

Award Number: 0100363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252159             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyle M. Rollins rollinsk@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Many important buildings and bridges are supported by foundations consisting of
              groups of steel pipes or piles driven into the ground.  The horizontal
              resistance provided by these groups of piles is critical in determining whether
              or not the structures will survive an earthquake without significant damage. 
              Although fairly reliable methods have been developed for predicting the
              horizontal resistance of single piles under slowly applied loads, there is very
              little information to guide engineers in the design of closely spaced pile
              groups, particularly under rapidly applied loads.  Nevertheless, the data from
              these limited field tests indicate that piles in groups will undergo much more
              movement and higher stresses for a given load per pile than will a single
              isolated pile.  These pile group effects are commonly accounted for in design
              by using reduction factors to reduce the resistance provided by the soil on the
              piles in the group, but there is considerable uncertainty regarding appropriate
              reduction factors. 
The proposed research study has the following objectives:
              (1) Evaluate the effect of pile spacing on measured group reduction factors and
              develop a design curve for these factors as a function of pile spacing, (2)
              Determine the validity of the reduction factor concept for a large (5-row) pile
              group and determine if the reduction factors remain constant beyond the third
              row, (3) Determine the effect of repeated loading and gap formation around the
              piles on the measured group reduction factors, (4) Examine the effect of
              loading rate on the resistance provide by the soil around the pile, and (5)
              Provide a well-documented case history for use in evaluating and calibrating
              computer and physical models.
	These objectives will be accomplished by
              conducting a series of horizontal load tests on a full-scale pile and pile
              groups.  These tests will supplement pile group testing already conducted at
              the site with pile spacing of three feet on centers.  First, horizontal load
              testing will be performed on a single 12-inch diameter steel pipe pile for
              comparison purposes.  Load will be applied in 10 increments with 15 cycles per
              increment to simulate the repeated loading from a large earthquake.  Next,
              horizontal load tests will be conducted on a five-row pile group spaced at four
              feet on centers.  The same cyclic loading procedure will be applied and the
              load carried by each pile will be measured.  The load frame will then be moved
              to an adjacent pile group for testing at six feet spacing.  In addition to the
              slowly applied loads, load will be applied rapidly using a rocket sled
              (Statnamic device) which will simulate the speed at which earthquake loads are
              applied.  Following data reduction, the test results will be analyzed using
              available computer models and appropriate pile group reduction factors will be
              determined as a function of pile spacing.  The results of the load tests from
              this and previous work at the site will also be provided to several researchers
              in Japan for detailed analysis using sophisticated 2-D and 3-D computer models.
               These analyses should help quantify the increased resistance seen during
              rapidly applied loads relative to slowly applied loads.  Potential Japanese
              researchers will include Prof. Matsumoto of Kanazawa University, Dr. Susumu Iai
              of the Japanese Port and Harbor Research Institute, and other researchers
              expressing interest in analyzing the results.


