Title       : Ultrafast Optical Word Generator Using Time-Domain Fourier Optics and Long
               Wavelength Modulator Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0100949

Award Number: 0100949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Weiner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this research a novel ultrafast optical word generator, or
              parallel-electronic to serial-optical converter, will be demonstrated. This
              optical word generator functionality may be important for example for
              converting parallel words of computer data into a serial format suitable for
              transmission onto ultrafast time-division multiplexed (TDM) fiber
              interconnection networks. The proposed approach uses the parallel processing
              capabilities of optics to generate data streams consisting of sequences of
              ultrashort optical pulses at rates substantially faster than the speeds of
              individual electronic and optoelectronic devices. This research is expected to
              impact both optical time-division-multiplexed (TDM) data communications systems
              and networks operating at rates of ~100 Gb/s and above, as well as hybrid
              wavelength-division-multiplexed / time-division multiplexed (WDM-TDM)
              transmission, networking, and processing systems working at even higher
              rates.

In order to realize the optical word generator, three main
              technologies will be investigated, as follows:
 
Direct space-to-time pulse
              shapers, which are optical systems capable of converting one-dimensional
              spatial images directly into corresponding ultrafast time-domain data
              sequences.

 Optoelectronic modulator arrays, which provide the spatial image
              needed by the pulse shaper. In particular, optoelectronic modulator arrays
              providing rapid reprogrammability (~Gb/s) for compatibility with the needs of
              modern high-speed packet networks, high on-off contrast, and operation in the
              1.55 micron fiber optic wavelength band will be developed.

Arrayed waveguide
              grating devices, which are integrated optical components commonly used
              forseparation or routing of independent wavelength channels in WDM optical
              communications. In particular, modified arrayed waveguide grating devices will
              be demonstrate that function as integrated direct space-to-time pulse
              shapers.

By combining these technologies, a compact and novel module capable
              of generating sequences of ultrashort pulses (ultrafast optical words) with the
              ability to reprogram at GHz rates will be realized.

