Title       : The Math Works
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0100932

Award Number: 0100932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231203             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Pazdar jpazdar@ccc.commnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Hirschy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Capital Community College
	      401 Flatbush Avenue
	      Hartford, CT  061063757    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is addressing the need to improve the mathematics learning
              environment in two-year colleges by generating increased student enthusiasm in
              the exploration and applications of mathematics and by attracting more students
              to science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) fields of study.
              The overall project goal is to provide faculty with a complete package of
              information and materials for establishing and conducting an interdisciplinary
              course for the study of mathematics. The package includes (a) ten laboratory
              exercises, each having a technology problem, a bibliotechnology research
              exercise, a method to develop the mathematics tools required to solve the
              problem, a model portfolio, and a thesis defense; (b) initiation of a marketing
              plan; and (c) initiation of a management plan. Means to accomplish the project
              objectives involve in-kind support from the American Mathematical Association
              of Two-Year Colleges (AMATYC), Texas Instruments, and Capital Community
              College. Twenty AMATYC faculty members have been selected to produce the ten
              laboratories.

Project outcomes include a laboratory, marketing, and
              management plan, all of which are being compiled into The Math Works Resource
              Book, to be published in hard copy and via the Internet. This project is
              offering a multitude of professional enhancement opportunities to those who
              develop or use the products developed through this project.
	 

