Title       : VIDI: Visual Information Dissemination for Visually Impaired Individuals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0100851

Award Number: 0100851
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen R. Hanson hanson@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three year continuing award. The PI's
              contention is that the field of computer vision has matured to the point where
              a completely portable system capable of finding signs and other textual events
              in the environment in close to real time, and then reading their contents
              aloud, is feasible.  His goal in this project is to provide the visually
              impaired with a way to obtain crucial information from the environment that is
              now totally inaccessible (except through intervention of a sighted person).  
              Running on a wearable computer connected to a gyroscopically referenced head
              mounted camera, the envisaged system will detect text and signs within a
              compact representation of continuous video of the user's surroundings in the
              form of a mosaic.  The sign detection and recognition system will use a set of
              multi-scale features that have been shown to be invariant to changes in viewing
              angle and illumination.   Recognition will be accomplished by building
              multi-resolution spatial networks of distributions of these features and
              matching them against a database of known (customized to locale) signs (e.g.
              international highway signs) using a coarse to fine matching technique that is
              both robust and efficient.  Text will be detected using the same techniques,
              with the aid of a commercial OCR system.   The PI will also examine the OCR's
              intermediate representations, and a word dictionary for tolerance to character
              recognition errors.  He will leverage existing work on image retrieval from
              large databases using image content, face recognition, image indexing using
              color properties, and text detection and recognition in complex images.  The
              work will be performed in three phases roughly corresponding to a year each. 
              System design and evaluation will both be conducted in conjunction with
              Lighthouse International, which specializes in rehabilitation training for the
              visually impaired.  In the first phase of the work, individual components,
              which include camera stabilization, mosaics, text and sign recognition, will be
              developed. In the second phase, a head mounted unit, attitude inference, a
              wearable computer, a camera, speech synthesizer and user interface model will
              be developed.  Additionally, the use of log-polar cameras will be examined for
              fast computation of multi-scale features and for its effectiveness in
              simultaneously addressing the field of view and resolution issues. The third
              and last phase will consist of a series of user and system evaluations and
              refinements.   There is no doubt that, if successful, this research will have a
              tremendous impact on and dramatically improve the lives of visually impaired
              individuals.
