Title       : A Real-Time Sequence Detection System for the Center for Marine Genomic Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0100394

Award Number: 0100394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101496             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Towle dtowle@mdibl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Petzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond P. Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Claiborne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alison Morrison-Shetlar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Desert Island Biol Lab
	      
	      Salsbury Cove, ME  04672    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
This award supports the purchase of instrumentation needed for genomic DNA
              analysis at the Center for Marine Genomic Studies of the Mount Desert Island
              Biological Laboratory. The two instruments to be purchased are a
              second-generation polymerase chain reaction (PCR) thermal cycler with
              four-channel fluorescence microplate reader that permits monitoring of
              reactions in process, and a robotic microplate processor that allows efficient
              set up of the 96-well plates used in the PCR device. The instruments will
              facilitate studies of the expression and function of genes in marine organisms
              with particular emphasis on improving the understanding of physiological
              processes in relation to environmental determinants such as salinity and
              temperature. Four NSF-funded research projects will make major use of the
              requested instruments.  These focus on molecular studies of membrane transport
              proteins and associated enzymes in the gills of euryhaline teleost fish and of
              crustaceans. 

