Title       : Geometry of Groups & Functional Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0100464

Award Number: 0100464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $644393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel D. Higson higson@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Roe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Nigel/Roe
A deepening understanding of the role played by large-scale
              geometry in topology has made it clear that large-scale geometric features of
              groups determine small-scale features of their unitary duals.  The effect is
              easily observed in abelian groups, thanks to Fourier theory and Pontrjagin
              duality, but the situation is more involved for nonabelian groups, whose
              unitary representation theory is too complicated to admit a direct descriptive
              account.  However the perspective on dual spaces provided by Alain Connes'
              noncommutative geometry makes it possible to formulate instances of this
              large-scale to small-scale phenomenon for nonabelian groups.  Moreover the
              tools of algebraic topology, carried over to the noncommutative realm, make it
              possible to elevate the phenomenon to a conjectural reciprocity (formulated by
              Baum and Connes) between the global, homotopy theoretic structures of groups
              and their reduced duals.  The purpose of the research outlined in this proposal
              is to obtain a more accurate and deeper understanding of the Baum-Connes
              conjecture in operator K-theory and of the large-to-small scale phenomenon
              which underlies it.  The proposers will investigate issues related to group
              boundaries, Sobolev theory on the reduced dual of a group, and Hilbert space
              embeddings of groups.  The recent discovery of counterexamples to variants of
              the Baum-Connes conjecture will be analyzed in depth.
Although the tools used
              to investigate it are rather elaborate, the idea behind large scale-geometry is
              very simple: ignore the local, small-scale features of a geometric space and
              concentrate on its large-scale, or long term, structure.  By doing so, trends
              or qualities may become apparent which are obscured by small-scale
              irregularities.  The investigators and others have developed tools to
              distinguish between different sorts of multi-dimensional, large scale behavior
              in geometry.  Somewhat surprisingly, aside from their intrinsic interest, these
              tools have found application in ordinary, small-scale geometry and elsewhere. 
              The present proposal focuses on geometric aspects of group theory which are
              illuminated by large-scale geometry.
The proposers are actively involved in
              training the next generation of mathematical scientists.  They lead Penn
              State's Geometric Functional Analysis group.  They run an active, twice-weekly
              research seminar and between them they have eight doctoral students under their
              direct supervision (a number of other students attend the seminar regularly). 
              They currently serve as mentors to one VIGRE supported postdoctoral fellow, and
              will be recruiting a second fellow to be supported by NSF Focussed Research
              Grant funds this year.  The Geometric Functional Analysis group frequently
              hosts sabbatical visitors as well as visiting graduate students.  Besides the
              seminar, the group runs a continuing program of mini-workshops on research
              subjects of current interest.  The research described in this proposal will be
              supported by, and carried out as part of, the activities of the Geometric
              Functional Analysis group.


