Title       : Combinatorial Commutative Algebra and Integer Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a0100141

Award Number: 0100141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rekha R. Thomas thomas@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program concerns questions at the intersection of
commutative
              algebra, integer programming, and discrete geometry. The
link between these
              fields is made via toric ideals and their Groebner
bases. The first set of
              questions concern the characterization and
construction of toric initial
              ideals without embedded primes. Answers
to these questions will provide new
              structural results in the theory
of integer programming via the classical
              technique of group
relaxations due to Gomory and will extend recent work in
              this area by
Serkan Hosten and the proposer. The second set of questions
              concern 
the toric Hilbert scheme, a parameter space for all polynomial
              ideals
with the same multi-graded Hilbert function as a given toric ideal.
              A
central open question about these schemes is whether they are
connected.
              The proposer will work with Diane Maclagan on this 
connectivity question,
              building on their recent construction of a
graph on the monomial ideals of the
              scheme which is connected if and
only if the scheme is connected. 
    
              
Over the past decade, the proposer has contributed to the development
of
              several new theories in discrete optimization using algebraic
techniques and
              has worked on the application of the resulting,
non-traditional algorithms to
              practical problems.  The research that
has contributed to these theories
              brings tools from algebra,
combinatorics, optimization and discrete geometry
              to bear on problems
from all of these fields.  The application of algebraic
              techniques has
led to new understanding in the field of integer programming, a
              branch
of discrete optimization, but tools and ideas from optimization
              have
also led to new results in algebra. This interplay of ideas
              and
techniques has shed light on questions from each of these areas
              and
promises to lead to greater insight and advancement.  The proposer
works
              with students on some of the computational aspects of the
research and plans
              to involve students in the development of software
that implements these
              algorithms.  The proposer is also interested in
curriculum development in
              subject areas related to this research at
the University of Washington. 
