Title       : Real-variable methods on symmetric spaces and Schrodinger operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0100021

Award Number: 0100021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97017              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandru Ionescu ionescu@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Jerison  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: This project concerns two main topics: harmonic analysis
              on
noncompact semisimple Lie groups and symmetric spaces, and
              unique
continuation problems and absence of positive eigenvalues of
              Schrodinger
operators on Euclidean spaces. The author's goal is to
              develop
real-variable methods that could be used to study boundedness
              properties
of certain natural operators on noncompact semisimple Lie groups
              and
symmetric spaces. Some of the problems to be investigated are
              the
following: sharp estimates related to the Kunze-Stein
              phenomenon,
behaviour of the solution of the wave equation on symmetric spaces
              at
large time, singular integral operators on symmetric spaces,
              transference
principles for operators defined by Fourier multipliers on
              symmetric
spaces, and maximal operators and applications in ergodic theory.
              The
author made progress on these problems in certain special cases,
              mostly
on Lie groups and symmetric spaces of real rank one. The second part
              of
the project is aimed at understanding the absence of positive
              eigenvalues
for Schrodinger operators with potentials in appropriate Lebesgue
              spaces
and with certain decay properties at infinity.

The problem of
              eliminating the possibility of positive eigenvalues for the
Schrodinger
              operator associated to one or many particles comes from
mathematical physics.
              One expects on physical grounds that such positive
energy "bound states"
              cannot exist. This is indeed the case for a large
class of Schrodinger
              operators associated to potentials which satisfy
certain uniform decay
              conditions, such as the Coulomb potential.
These potentials were studied in
              the 60's by T. Kato, S. Agmon, J.
Weidman, B. Simon, and others. In the last
              twenty years there has been
growing interest in extending these classical
              results to more general
potentials in various Lebesgue spaces.




