Title       : Characterization of Nanoscale Defects and Pores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0100009

Award Number: 0100009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Gidley gidley@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert F. Yee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Frieze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1201,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0100009
Gidley

An interdisciplinary research program is proposed that
              combines the well-known void-volume sensitivity of positron annihilation
              lifetime spectroscopy (PALS) with state-of-the-art positron beam technology in
              order to characterize defects and pores in a wide range of engineering
              materials where traditional techniques are not adequate. Porosity control is an
              important aspect of the emerging field of nanoengineering. Introducing and
              engineering porosity in microelectronic "low-K" dielectric films, in thin
              polymeric permeation filters, and in catalytic films is attracting intense
              research interest. On the other hand, preventing interfacial defect porosity is
              a long-standing problem in structural materials such as adhesives,
              encapsulants, and composites. Traditional probes are challenged by the
              amorphous nature of these very thin films and by the nanoscale size of the
              pores/defects. PALS has been demonstrated to be an important new tool in
              characterizing nanoscale porosity in such sub-micron film systems.

As a
              result of the previous NSF-ECS grant beam-PALS is playing an important role in
              helping the microelectronics industry develop next-generation, low-K interlayer
              dielectric films. The sensitivity of PALS to the size and interconnectivity of
              1-100 nanometer pores has been demonstrated. A procedure for extracting pore
              size distributions for closed-pore systems has been developed. PALS is found to
              be sensitive to Cu interdiffusion into the dielectric and the consequently
              required diffusion barrier layer integrity can be tested as well. This proposal
              will expand upon this work. Metal interdiffusion and barrier integrity/thermal
              stability will be studied with particular attention focussed on developing a
              standardized PALS testing procedure as requested by Sematech, a research
              consortium primarily comprised of the major U.S. electronics corporations.
              Cross-calibration experiments with complementary techniques used to
              characterize porosity, such as small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) at NIST
              and solvent absorption ellipsometric porosimetry at IMEC, will be continued.
              Such studies help determine the unique strengths and weaknesses of each
              respective technique.

A second major thrust of this proposal will be the
              study of polymer thin films, surfaces and interfaces. Ibis research builds upon
              previous work in which beam-PALS was used to study the structure and dynamics
              of thin 10 urn polymer films constrained on silicon wafers. Such films were
              found to have a highly immobile "adhesive" layer next to the silicon and an
              unconstrained "liquid" layer at the surface. Particular attention will be
              focussed on the interfacial regions in order to determine the sensitivity of
              the immobile layer to the onset of adhesion failure and delamination. If
              failure is due to the coalescence of precursor nano-voids into larger pores
              due, for example, to fatigue, thermal stress, or corrosion, depth-profiled
              beam-PALS should be a very powerful probe of this pre-failure initiation phase
              that is otherwise invisible. Specifically, the role of defect voids in the
              failure of polymer encapsulants and adhesives used in microelectronic packaging
              will be studied. An ancillary study of the evolution of nanostructure in a
              chemically amplified photo-resist as it develops under UV exposure will also be
              performed.

The proposed research builds upon a strong existing collaboration
              between the University of Michigan Physics Department and the Materials Science
              and Engineering Department. To provide critical guidance and clear focus on
              relevance the PIs have developed strong working collaborations with six
              individual companies, NIST, and with two large industrial consortiums; Sematech
              in the U.S. and IMEC in Europe.









