Title       : New analytic techniques in differential and difference systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0100495

Award Number: 0100495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin D. Kruskal kruskal@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ovidiu Costin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              New methods based on generalized Borel summation and
              trans-asymptotic
expansions are being developed by a number of analysts and
              are emerging
as a new field of study, "analyzability theory". The methods
              enable one
to treat solutions of equations at singularities much more general
              then
usually dealt with and provide a rigorous foundation to
              previously
formal calculations.  The present proposal aims at developing
              and
applying these new techniques.  The PIs will continue their research
              in
the context of ODEs, difference equations and PDEs. Applications
addressed
              include the classification of nonlinear ODEs at irregular
singularities,
              determining their integrability properties as well as
their reducibility to
              simpler systems, study of adiabatic invariance,
and Painleve' analysis for
              difference equations. These techniques will
be used to continue rigorous
              research of the time dependent Schroedinger
problem under periodic
              perturbations of arbitrary strength and also of
resonance theory.


The
              project is a piece in an unfolding enterprise to bridge the gap from
formal
              calculations to rigorous proofs, and in the advance of what
appears to be
              emerging as a general theory of singular behavior.
Countless applications
              exist in mathematics as well as in the study of
physical phenomena.

