Title       : Geometric Langlands Program and Infinite-dimensional Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0100108

Award Number: 0100108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Drinfeld drinfeld@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander A. Beilinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                
The principal investigators
              conduct research in the following areas: 
global geometric Langlands
              correspondence, local Langlands 
correspondence in the de Rham setting,
              conformal field theories 
related to Hecke chiral algebras, families of Tate
              spaces and 
related infinite-dimensional algebraic varieties. They explore
              
analogs of the local Langlands correspondence in the de Rham
setting
              relating representations of Kac-Moody affine algebras 
with de Rham local
              systems for the Langlands dual group on the 
formal punctured disc. They study
              the representation theory of 
chiral Hecke algebras and related global
              non-rational conformal 
field theories in which the correlator D-modules form
              Hecke 
eigensheaves in order to understand the global geometric Langlands
              
correspondence in the de Rham setting. They construct and study the
              
universal family of Langalnds transforms of  GL(2) local systems. 
They
              study the algebraic geometry of infinite-dimensional algebraic 
varieties
              similar to the space of maps from the punctured formal 
disk to a smooth
              algebraic variety.

The subject of the research lies on the intersection of
              several 
domains of modern mathematics and mathematical physics - the
              
Langlands program, geometric representation theory, infinite-
dimensional
              algebraic geometry, and conformal field theory. The 
blend of complementary
              ideas and methods is very fruitful - in 
particular, it leads to construction
              of a geometric version of 
Hecke eigenforms by means of an appropriate quantum
              field theory.

