Title       : Studies in Experimental Nuclear Physics at Indiana University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0100348

Award Number: 0100348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8007003            (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Cameron cameron@iucf.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rex Tayloe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Snow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. Vigdor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hans-Otto Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                            The Indiana nuclear physics group plans  to assume a leading role
              in the
investigation of the following critical questions in nuclear
              physics.
The spin of the proton is an essential property that determines
              the
structure of matter, yet we know that only a small part of the spin
comes
              from the three quarks that form the proton.  The STAR-SPIN group
would
              definitively measure the contribution from the gluons, the
short-lived
              particles that hold the quarks together and which account
for much of its mass
              to see if that is where the missing spin
resides.The measurement of the gluon
              contribution to the proton spin
will be carried out by adding  a special
              detector for high energy  gamma
rays to the STAR detector located at the
              Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider.  The detector is now being built using
              separate NSF
construction funds.
	The force between pairs of neutrons and
              protons cannot, by itself,
account for the strength that binds the nucleus
              together.  New,
three-body forces are needed, but their form is almost
              unknown.  By
manipulating the neutron and proton spins when three of them
              come
together, the PINTEX collaboration would produce a map to guide a
              theory
of such three-body force. .  FY2002 will be the last year of data
              taking
using the intense beams and unique capabilities of the
              Indiana
University Cooler Facility to study these three-body forces.
 	The
              weak force between nucleons, which can change the form of matter, is still     
                                 poorly understood.  By making a measurement accurate to one
              part in a billion on the                           formation of a deuteron from
              a neutron and a proton, the IU neutron group would measure                     
                      the longest-range part of the weak force . The Indiana group would
              support studies of the                               weak force and other
              effects accessible using cold neutrons at NIST and LANSCE and by
providing
              crucial parts of the experimental apparatus.  
 	There is mounting evidence
              that neutrinos, one of the most ubiquitous
particles in the universe, may have
              mass, thus changing our most elegant
theories of matter and how it controls
              the expansion of the universe. 
The neutrino group would check a recent
              observation from LANL of a few
cases where neutrinos, because they have mass,
              spontaneously change from
one neutrino type into another by collecting a large
              enough data sample
to settle this issue.
 	A key component of the Indiana
              program will be the training of students
to become the next generation of
              researchers.  This effort includes the
involvement of post-doctoral associates
              in critical experimental roles,
guiding the research of graduate students,
              involving undergraduates
through the NSF-funded REU summer program and
              part-time employment, and
reaching out to make the community aware of our
              scientific mission.


