Title       : Stochastic and Reliable Matching and Scheduling Algorithms for a Heterogeneous
               Computing Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2001      
File        : a0100633

Award Number: 0100633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97503              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fusun Ozguner ozguner.2@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In heterogeneous distributed computing, a network of dissimilar machines is used
              to
execute a given application in parallel. With the advent of advanced
              network technologies,
the scale at which heterogeneous computing can be
              practicaly applied is growing to a
global scale, thus making it possible to
              collect high performance computers across the
globe into a single
              computational resource. Multiple users will be able to simulataneously
use
              this computational resource to execute a variety of large, parallel
              applications.
However, there are a number of problems to solve before this
              type of computing becomes a
reality.
Therefore this project proposes to
              develop effective matching and scheduling methods to
allow multiple users to
              execute applications in a large, decentralized, failure-prone,
heterogeneous
              computing environment. Due to the dynamic and uncertain nature of
              this
environment, the algorithms that will be developed will use statistical
              techniques to
allocate resources fairly in a highly dynamic system. The
              algorithms will be evaluated by
simulations and also on a small testbed. There
              are three different aspects of this
proposed work:
1. Methods will be
              developed to statistically obtain an estimate of the response time of a
task
              on an arbitrary target machine. This will be accomplished by developing
              separate
techniques to estimate the execution time, machine loads, and network
              loads. A method for
estimating the execution time using data gathered from
              past executions of the task has
already been developed. This method will be
              refined and similar stochastic methods will be
developed for machine and
              network load estimation.
2. A dynamic matching and scheduling method for
              heterogeneous machines will be developed.
This method will allow each
              application to make scheduling decisions without direct
knowledge of the other
              applications executing in the environment. Each application will
have to
              compete for the computational resources of the network. The scheduling
              heuristics
will take into account the uncertainty in the stochastic estimates
              of the execution time
and machine and network loads.
3. Finally, reliable
              scheduling algorithms based on either heuristic cost functions or
evaluation
              of the reliability of applications will be developed. The heuristic
              cost
functions developed will define the impact of a scheduling decision on
              the reliability of
an application in time units. These algorithms will
              consider both the execution time and
failure probability of applications while
              making scheduling decisions, and thus, will be
capable of producing task
              assignments that improve both the performance and reliability of
applications.
              In addition, algorithms which can trade performance for reliability
              of
applications will be designed.
