Title       : Multi-user Confocal Microscopy at Cornell University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0100037

Award Number: 0100037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sondra G. Lazarowitz sgl5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Collmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen R. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald W. Feigenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald M. Harris-Warrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
This award supports the purchase of confocal microscope to be used for
              research in cell and developmental biology by a group of 7 faculty and their
              students.  The equipment will also be available for use by a large number of
              other Cornell faculty and students, irrespective of their departmental
              affiliations. The confocal scanning laser microscope has become a critical and
              essential tool in research because of its ability to non-invasively image
              structures and processes in living cells, and visualize macromolecular
              interactions in real time.   Among the planned uses are studies of: the
              mechanisms that regulate the movement of macromolecules within and between
              plants; the interactions of the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas synringae with
              its host (tomato); the structure and function of biological membranes; the role
              of plastids and mitochondria in the growth and development of plant cells; the
              physiological roles of ion channels; the development of the olfactory system
              using zebrafish as a model; and the action of essential reproductive proteins
              and their effectors in Drosophila. It is expected that these and other studies
              will generate important contributions to our understanding of macromolecular
              interactions, organelle biogenesis and cellular remodeling in plants, animals
              and, as well, microbes.

