Title       : GOALI: Analysis, Design, and Testing of Profiled Hydrostatic Thrust Bearings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0100279

Award Number: 0100279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noah Manring ManringN@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Litherland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harischandra P. Cherukuri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
              provides funding for improving the performance of a hydrostatic thrust bearing.
               It is well known that these bearings undergo both small and large scale
              deformations and that these deformations can significantly reduce the
              load-carrying capacity of the bearing.  What has been less well known is that
              certain types of bearing deformation can actually increase the load-carrying
              capacity!  In this research, these advantageous deformations will be
              investigated using analytical, numerical, and experimental techniques.  The
              objectives of this work will be to develop design guidelines that may be used
              to ensure beneficial deformations while also guaranteeing that harmful
              deformations do not occur.  The fluid-film thickness between the bearing and
              the thrust surface will be optimized based upon sliding speed, structural
              properties of the bearing, fluid conditions, and power source limitations.  A
              method for conducting these investigations will be to study the impact of
              intentionally profiling the bearing surface to achieve optimal bearing
              performance.  The optimized profile geometry, coupled with the expected passive
              deformation of the bearing, will be used to specify the design requirements for
              the advanced bearing design.

If successful, the work of this research will
              be used to significantly enhance the performance of hydrostatic thrust bearings
              that are widely used in mechanical design applications.  The improved
              performance will be demonstrated in higher load-carrying capacities and lower
              power requirements.  A secondary impact will be to reduce wear and increase
              life expectancies by eliminating the potential for metal-to-metal contact
              between the bearing and the thrust surface.  The design guidelines that are
              generated from this work may be used to update the classical textbook theory
              that exists for these widely used machine elements.  By doing this, improved
              machine design practices will be disseminated among the engineering community
              and a significant reduction in waste and an increase in productivity will be
              realized.


