Title       : Variational Problems Arising in Models for Superconductivity, Thin Film
               Blistering and Micromagnetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0100540

Award Number: 0100540
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Sternberg sternber@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, the principal investigator pursues a research program in
              nonlinear partial differential equations, the calculus of variations and
              singular perturbation theory. The research
topics come from three applied
              settings: Ginzburg-Landau type models for superconductivity, von Karman type
              models for thin film blistering, and a model in micromagnetics. In the area of
              superconductivity, the P.I. will focus on the response of samples to large
              magnetic fields, with particular attention paid to the bifurcation from the
              normal state to a superconducting state. In the area of thin film blisters, the
              P.I. will investigate the nature of instabilities of the blistered region
              through the analysis of various dynamical models for blister growth and thin
              film growth. Finally, in the area of micromagnetics, the P.I. will analytically
              explore a model thought to capture a new kind of magnetic wall structure
              associated with a geometric constriction within the sample.


    This
              project concerns the behavior of various materials when subjected to outside
              fields or when forced to take on specific shapes. The energy of these systems
              is generally described through a function, often called an `order parameter,'
              whose values indicate what state is taken on by the material under a given set
              of circumstances (such as geometry, applied fields,
etc.). Through this type
              of study, one hopes to gain an understanding of what shapes are optimal for a
              given sample in order to enhance or diminish various physical effects. For
              example, in the case of a superconductor, one hopes to learn which shapes are
              most conducive to producing a supercurrent that conducts without losses due to
              resistance. The relevant mathematical tools come from the calculus of
              variations and from the  theory of nonlinear partial differential equations, as
              well as from methods of asymptotic analysis as applied to the previou

