Title       : Efficient Computational Methods for Accurate Simulation of Wave Propagation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0100188

Award Number: 0100188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murthy N. Guddati mnguddat@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              : 	The research project is aimed at developing accurate as well as efficient
              computational methods for large-scale simulations involving wave propagation in
              bounded and unbounded domains.  The resulting methods will enable improved
              solution of countless engineering problems encountered in the fields of
              acoustics, nondestructive evaluation, earthquake engineering, medical imaging,
              wireless communications, oil exploration and landmine detection.
	Several
              aspects of the project are significant:
	In the case of modeling wave
              propagation in bounded domains, a new dispersion reducing technique is expected
              to bring down the computational cost of frequency-domain simulations by several
              orders of magnitude without sacrificing any accuracy.  For transient
              (time-domain) analysis, a combination of the dispersion reducing technique and
              some modified time-stepping algorithms could significantly reduce the cost of
              analysis.  The proposed investigation will also include error estimation
              studies to enable adaptive use of these algorithms for further reduction in
              computational cost.
	Since standard numerical methods such as finite element
              methods are limited to bounded domain problems, special methods are necessary
              to model wave propagation in unbounded domains.  Proposed are two new methods -
              one based on space-time discretizations and the other based on continued
              fraction approximations.  Space-time techniques are showing promise in
              obtaining highly accurate methods that are significantly more efficient than
              the existing methods of comparable accuracy.  Preliminary work based on
              continued fraction approximations indicates the possibility of obtaining highly
              economical, yet accurate local absorbing boundary conditions.  Other aspects of
              this research include devising efficient and stable schemes to couple unbounded
              domain methods with bounded domain methods.
	It is expected that the
              computational cost reduction from the proposed methods will enable accurate and
              detailed simulation of several important physical processes involving wave
              propagation.

