Title       : Function Theory on Symmetric Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0100459

Award Number: 0100459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Koranyi adam@alpha.lehman.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Koranyi

The proposal is concerned with several lines of
              investigation,  The first one of these is the mapping problem of domains in
              several complex variables with the aid of symplectic quasiconformal maps (with
              respect to the Bergman metric).  It has already been proved that bounded simply
              connected smooth strongly pseudoconvex domains can always be mapped onto
each
              other by such maps.  The present project is concerned with developing geometric
              methods for computing or estimating the minimal qusiconformal distortion.  The
              second line of investigation has to do with Poisson transforms of sections of
              vector bundles.  Such Poisson transforms have
been used to extend
              infinitesimally quasiconformal maps from the complex unit ball to the interior.
               They are now to be further investigated for their injectivity properties and
              for pairs of differential operators intertwined by them.  Here the machinery of
              semisimple Lie groups will be used to its full capacity.  A further subject to
              be studied is generalized conformal maps of generalized flag manifolds; it is
              expected that Liouville's classic theorem will extend to this situation.  (This
              question is related to the preceding one through the notion of parabolic
              geometry.)  In addition, three further, more or less related problems will be
              investigated; these concern analysis on two-step nilpotent groups, harmonic
              functions on spaces with negative curvature, and an application
of the theory
              of reflection groups to statistics.

The main goal of the proposal is to
              discover new mathematical facts in the field of analysis of functions.  The
              theory of functions of one complex variable has been the most central field of
              mathematics in the last 150 years.  It has innumerable applications to physics
              and other
sciences.  The theory of functions of several complex variables has
              had important successes but has not up to now matched in perfection and
              applicability the one-variable theory.  The first goal of the proposal is to
              try to improve on this situation by studying the so-called mapping properties
              of functions of several complex variables.  It will also be investigated to
              what extent the fundamental notions and facts of this theory can be extended to
              more general situations.  The project also includes the investigation of some
              further related problems, one of these concerns an application to statistics. 
              A secondary goal of the proposal is to understand more clearly the connections
              between certain already known facts in the main subject.  This should make them
              easier to learn; in this way a contribution to mathematical education is
              expected to be made.

