Title       : The Formation and Climatological Distribution of Tornadoes within Quasi-Linear
               Convective Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0100016

Award Number: 0100016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175204             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Trapp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Approximately 1000 tornadoes are observed within the U.S. annually.  These
              tornadoes are spawned from a variety of parent storm types, including supercell
              thunderstorms and quasi-linear convective systems (QLCSs) such as squall lines
              and bow echoes.

The horizontal extent of viable tornado-breeding sites is an
              order of magnitude larger in QLCSs than in individual supercells.  QLCS
              tornadoes can be strong and produce extensive damage.  Also, QLCS
              tornadogenesis appears to occur, on average, more rapidly than does supercell
              tornadogenesis from the perspective of Doppler radar.  The geographical,
              seasonal, and diurnal distributions of QLCS tornadoes are unknown.

A
              significant amount of research effort has been devoted to the study of
              supercell tornadogenesis, but no published research addresses specifically QLCS
              tornadogenesis.  Owing to the related lack of fundamental knowledge of QLCS
              tornadogenesis/tornado climatology, it may be argued that operational
              meteorologists are generally unable to assess the potential risk of tornadic
              winds in QLCSs and, hence, properly alert the public to this danger.  

The
              Principal Investigator will undertake a complementary two-part study.  The
              objectives are to: 

1. Estimate the climatological distributions of
              QLCS-spawned tornadoes; characterize the environmental conditions under which
              they occur; determine radar-based attributes of tornadic versus non-tornadic
              QLCS.
2. Gain an understanding of tornadic versus non-tornadic QLCS morphology
              and evolution.

Successful completion of this research will increase
              fundamental knowledge of QLCS tornadoes and will have applications in severe
              weather forecasting and warning operations.


