Title       : Galois Representations and Modular Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0100090

Award Number: 0100090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Taylor rtaylor@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A big theme in number theory in the last 50 years has been the
              relationship
between automorphic forms, Galois representations and objects
              from algebraic
geometry. There is an extensive web of extraordinary
              conjectures (for instance
the Artin conjecture, the Shimura-Taniyama
              conjecture, Langlands' conjectures,
Serre's conjecture and the Fontaine-Mazur
              conjecture) linking these three
seemingly very different subjects (which
              relate to analysis, algebra and
geometry respectively). Progress on these
              conjectures is currently very
exciting. Under his previous NSF grant the PI
              proved (with Michael Harris) the
local Langlands conjecture for GL(n) of a
              p-adic field; completed (with
Christophe Breuil, Brian Conrad and Fred
              Diamond) the proof of the 
Shimura-Taniyama conjecture; found (with Kevin
              Buzzard, Mark Dickinson and
Nick Shepherd-Barron) the first infinite families
              of non-soluble irreducible
Artin representations for which one could prove the
              Artin conjecture; and
established the meromorphic continuation and functional
              equation of the
L-functions of all abelian varieties ``of GL(2)-type''. The PI
              will
continue to work on related problems. In particular he will work with
              Michael
Harris to generalise the work of Wiles and of Wiles and the PI from
              GL(2) to
GL(n). There seems to be just one significant problem remaining in
              the way of
a really useful result. If this problem can be overcome the PI will
              work with
Michael Harris and Nick Shepherd-Barron on applications to the
              arithmetic of
elliptic curves. The PI will also look for generalisations of
              his work with
Michael Harris on the local Langlands conjecture for GL(n) to
              other
reductive groups.

This circle of ideas is the one that led to Andrew
              Wiles' celebrated proof of
Fermat's last theorem after over 300 years. They
              fall into the general area of
arithmetic geometry - a subject that blends two
              of the oldest areas of
mathematics: number theory and geometry. This
              combination has proved
extraordinarily fruitful. Among its many consequences
              are new error correcting
codes. Such codes are essential for both modern
              computers (hard disks) and
compact disks. 

