Title       : A Core Equipment Facility for Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0100311

Award Number: 0100311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances B. Lefcort lefcort@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Paden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. Pierce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger S. Bradley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valerie Copie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for purchase of equipment to be used to establish a
              multi-user, integrated core equipment facility for cellular and molecular
              biological research. The equipment includes centrifuges, a microinjection
              apparatus, a spectrophotomer and an inverted microscope.  The facility will be
              shared by faculty in two departments: a newly formed Department of Cell Biology
              and Neuroscience and an existing Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry. A
              shared focus of all these investigators is the elucidation of the cellular and
              molecular mechanisms underlying neural development and/or nerve regeneration.
              All are now physically located in adjacent labs, and given the overlap in their
              research methodologies, will be able to share the equipment supported through
              this award.. Some of the major equipment items requested would replace existing
              items that are close to 25 years old and in serious disrepair, while others
              will provide new or expanded capabilities. All major users are members of the
              NSF sponsored IGERT doctoral training program at the University. This program
              in Complex Biological Systems is designed to train graduate students to
              approach biological problems from a multitude of levels, from the molecular to
              the systems level, using a variety of approaches drawn from cellular and
              molecular biology, structural biology, computational biology and systems
              neuroscience.  Thus the IGERT trainees will benefit considerably from access to
              the equipment which will be used in both course work and in thesis research. 
              The equipment will also be available for use by a number of undergraduate
              students who undertake independent research projects as part of their
              education.

