Title       : GOALI/Collaborative Research: Scheduling Methodogies for Electronics and
               Hardware Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0100327

Award Number: 0100327
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chelliah Sriskandarajah chelliah@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Wallner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
              supports the development of a framework, comprised of models and efficient
              solution algorithms, for two different problem domains.  One that is
              characterized as multi-stage, sequence-dependent group scheduling problem with
              carry-over setups, and the other with no carry-over setups.  Applications of
              the former exist in printed circuit board (PCB) assembly, while the latter is
              applicable in hardware (discrete parts) manufacturing such as those supported
              by cellular manufacturing.  The emphasis is on the development of scheduling
              models that truly reflect real operational constraints.  In a two-stage PCB
              assembly process, these include performing the setup required on either stage
              based on a surrogate board group representing all board types, and performing
              the setup on the second stage in anticipation of the arriving board group.  The
              impact of carry-over sequence dependency is assessed by recognizing that the
              setup time required of a surrogate board group on either stage is dependent
              upon the entire set of preceding surrogate board groups that have so far been
              processed.  A variety of performance measures including the minimization of
              total completion time, mean flow time, and weighted tardiness will be
              considered in order for the producer to be highly responsive to a variety of
              customer needs.  Recognizing that both problems belong to a class of
              notoriously difficult 'NP-hard' combinatorial optimization problems, the
              structure of the problems will be exploited to develop efficient lower bounds. 
              For the minimization of mean flow time, special cases will be investigated to
              identify those that can be optimally solved in polynomial time.  For completely
              solving problem instances that have industrial merit, computationally efficient
              solution techniques that combine the underlying concepts of branch-and-bound
              aided by filtered-beam search, and tabu search will be developed and tested. 
              The lower-bounding mechanisms will be embedded in these techniques to not only
              seek solutions with guaranteed quality, but also use them advantageously to
              terminate the search to enhance computational efficiency.  For the total
              completion time minimization problem with no carry-over setups, an approach
              based on an equivalent formulation of the asymmetric generalized traveling
              salesman problem will be investigated.  Finally, the solution techniques
              developed will be tested with data obtained from industrial collaborators to
              validate their computational efficiency and ability to obtain solutions with
              guaranteed quality.  

The successful completion of this project will provide
              both electronics and hardware manufacturing companies with methodological
              frameworks for rapidly generating schedules with guaranteed quantifiable
              performance.  The insightful research findings so obtained will also enhance
              the existing graduate courses in scheduling at Oregon State University and
              University of Texas at Dallas.       

