Title       : Local Composition Control in Solid Freeform Fabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0100194

Award Number: 0100194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emanuel M. Sachs sachs@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wonjoon Cho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Cima  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas M. Patrikalakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,1468,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project addresses the central impediment to the wide-spread
              exploration of the potential of  Local Composition Control (LCC) - the
              information pathway required for the representation and design of composition
              within a component and its realization by Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF).  It
              is hoped that the development of an information pathway to support Local
              Composition Control will provide designers with the access they need to fully
              explore this intriguing capability.   One of the great potential benefits of
              SFF technology is the ability to control the internal composition of
              components, a capability not shared by conventional mechanical manufacturing
              processes.  While several compelling applications such as Drug Delivery Devices
              and Lenses which function by local control of the index of refraction, are
              under development, it is likely that the potential is largely untapped. 

The
              proposed work envisions a suite of Composition Design Features which the
              designer can use singly or in combination, to specify the composition of
              complex components.  Each composition design feature will relate directly to
              the geometry of the design, often relying on user interaction to specify
              critical aspects of the geometry.  For example, features can specify the
              composition of sub-volumes or the transition of composition between
              sub-volumes.  The representations underlying the composition design features
              will be analytic and therefore concise.  Wherever possible, the work on this
              project will be kept generically applicable to SFF technologies.  Where a
              specific process must be chosen to focus the work, Three Dimensional Printing
              will be used as the prototypical SFF technology.  3D Printing is well suited to
              local composition control as multiple materials may be printed through multiple
              inkjet nozzles, thereby achieving true 3-D composition control.  



