Title       : A Laboratory For the Study of Objective Measurement of Visual Acuity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0100820

Award Number: 0100820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74607              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos E. Davila cd@engr.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0100820
Davila
Visual acuity (VA) is a measure of how well the visual system
              can resolve closely spaced objects.  The Snellen eye chart is the most common
              method of measuring VA in adults however it is useless when measuring VA in
              infants and other non-verbal patients.  Preferential looking, optokinetic
              nystagmus, and photoscreening have been used to assess VA in infants, however
              all of these methods have been found to have their shortcomings.  Diseases such
              as amblyopia, which occurs in 2-3% of the population, if not diagnosed by age 6
              can lead to permanent visual loss, and this can lead to learning and behavioral
              difficulties.  Standard pre-school visual screening programs can fail to
              diagnose ocular disease in as any as 2% of the population.  The visual evoked
              potential (VEP), an electrical potential generated in the visual cortex of the
              brain in response to a visual stimulus, has been used to measure VA in infants.
               This is done by determining the maximum spatial frequency in the stimulus
              which elicits a detectable VEP.  However, this method does not yield very
              repeatable measures and has a higher variability than psychophysical measures
              of VA.  The PI's group has developed VEP detectors which are capable of
              detecting very low-level VEP's at much higher stimulus spatial frequencies than
              other detectors; nevertheless, long measurement times are still required.  The
              goal of this proposal is to obtain the laboratory equipment necessary to study
              objective measurement of visual acuity based on a new model of the visual
              system.  This model, if validated, will enable VA to be measured using the VEP
              by simply computing its temporal frequency spectrum (which is much faster than
              existing swept spatial frequency methods).  The spacing of photoreceptors in
              the eye is not a good predictor of limits on spatial resolution.  The average
              spacing of cones on the foveal of the retina would actually predict a much
              higher visual resolution limit than the often quoted value of 60 cycles/deg. 
              The proposed model is based on the premise that the eyes are constantly in
              motion and hence the luminance falling on any given photoreceptor in the retina
              is constantly changing with time.  The main hypothesizes is that resolution in
              foveal vision is determined entirely by the temporal dynamics of the visual
              system.  The model for VA consists of a photoreceptor, a ban of temporal
              bandpass filters, and a detector at the output of the filter bank.  The
              temporal bandpass filters have the same effect as the spatial frequency filters
              which have been used to model the visual system.  A second hypothesis
              associates the temporal filter-based model for VA with the VEP.  A number of
              psychophysical and electrophysiologic experiments are proposed which are
              designed to validate the two hypotheses.  One experiment is based on the
              classical psychophysical adaptation experiments of Blakemore and Campbell but
              rather than adapting to a constant spatial frequency, we propose to adapt to a
              constant temporal frequency.  This will be done by stabilizing the drift rate
              of the stimulus grating with respect to eye motion.  By measuring the contrast
              sensitivity function (CSF) at two different drift rates and a fixed spatial
              frequency, the temporal filter model would predict a result which the spatial
              frequency channel model would completely fail to explain.  Experiments co
              paring psychophysical and electrophysiologic spatiotemporal CSF's will also be
              performed which are designed to insure that the psychophysical results carry
              over to the electrophysiologic domain.  The equipment needed for this research
              consists of a high accuracy dual Perkinje image eye tracker, an optical image
              stabilizer, a high scan rate, fast phosphor video monitor, and a psychophysical
              graphics generation system.  The PI's institution has agreed to cost-share 30%
              of total project costs.  This research will have important theoretical
              ramifications in understanding the basic processes in human vision.  In
              addition, it will also impact the quality of health care by enabling an
              accurate method of electrophysiologically measuring VA in infants and
              non-verbal patients.


