Title       : The Electro-Optic Effect in Charge-Density-Wave Conductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a0100572

Award Number: 0100572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306286             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Brill jwbrill@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award funds a project to thoroughly investigate a
              new electro-optic effect in quasi-one-dimensional charge-density-wave (CDW)
              conductors.  The effect is caused by deformation of the CDW by an applied
              electric field and is unusual in that it occurs at very small fields (0.1V/cm)
              and over a very wide infrared spectral range (0-1200 cm-1).  This project
              involves the use of modulation spectroscopy with tunable infrared diode lasers 
              The project is to extend previous measurements of the PI's group, which were
              for transmittance of infrared light polarized transversely to the conducting
              chains in the CDW compound K0.3MoO3, to other polarizations, optical constants
              (e.g. reflectivity), and materials.  The research will investigate the
              fundamental physics of CDW materials, some of the most unusual conductors
              known, including how the CDW deforms in a field, what new states are associated
              with CDW motion, and how phonons are affected by this motion.  At the same
              time, the research will probe the utility of CDW materials for electro-optic
              devices and also represents the first application of tunable infrared diode
              lasers to solid state spectroscopy.  The PI's group will work closely with the
              laser manufacturer (Laser Components Instrument Group) in interfacing the
              lasers with an infrared microscope for these studies.  The skills the students
              learn in building equipment, as well as carrying out and interpreting the
              experiments will aid their future careers, whether they go into industry,
              academia, or government research.  In addition the industrial connection will
              give the students a direct insight into industrial research.
%%%
The periodic
              modulation of the electron density in a crystal is known as a charge density
              wave (CDW).  Under certain conditions, such as an applied electric field, the
              CDW is able to move, or slide, as a coherent entity through the material. 
              Materials with sliding CDWs exhibit some of the most unusual electronic
              properties ever observed.  Recently, the principal investigator's group
              discovered that the response of a material to radiation in the infrared range
              is also affected by CDW sliding.  This gives rise to an electro-optic response
              at much smaller electric fields and over a much wider spectral range than for
              conventional electro-optic materials.  This individual investigator project
              will extend the previous investigations of the electro-optic response of CDW
              materials, with the goals of i) improving our knowledge of how the CDW moves
              and interacts with the crystal, ii) studying how the effect might be utilized
              in devices, and iii) extending the application of tunable infrared diode lasers
              to solid state spectroscopy.  The manufacturer of the laser (Laser Components
              Instrument Group) will work closely with the principal investigator's group to
              optimize this application.  The skills the students learn in building
              equipment, as well as carrying out and interpreting the experiments will aid
              their future careers, whether they go onto industrial or academic research.  In
              addition the industrial connection will give the students a direct insight into
              industrial research.
***


