Title       : Quantitative and Subsequence Ergodic Theorems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a0100577

Award Number: 0100577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78858              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mate Wierdl mwierdl@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal for research concerns questions of almost everywhere and mean
              convergence in ergodic theory, and their connections with harmonic analysis and
              probability theory. The first group of questions on convergence which will be
              addressed concerns the mean convergence of averages of measurements made on a
              stochastic process at a random sequence of times that is chosen in advance.
              Other questions concern randomly generated times which yield to sampling along
              sequences with big gaps. The second group of questions concerns subsequence
              ergodic theorems for subsequences coming from members of Hardy fields, Results
              obtained by the PI in the previous grant periods suggest that in the context of
              Hardy fields, a meaningful characterization of the ``good'' sequences of
              measurements is possible.  Indeed, due to a significant advance in the previous
              grant period, a complete characterization of good sequences of measurements is
              at reach.  This work for one dimensional averages gives us confidence to start
              exploring possible higher dimensional results, therefore extending the work of
              Stein and Weinger. The third group of questions concerns upcrossings and
              related oscillatory behavior of the ergodic averages. This line of research was
              initiated by Bishop, Bourgain, Kalikow, B. Weiss and others. Wierdl and his
              collaborators discovered a fundamental connection between Ergodic Theory and
              martingales.  This discovery---which often manifests itself as a bounded
              squarefunction of the difference between
ergodic averages and certain
              martingales---allows one to translate many of the results of Martingale Theory,
              such as squarefunction, large deviation or jump inequalities, to ergodic
              theoretical and harmonic analytical results. Part of the proposed work is to
              extend the investigations on upcrossings to other operators such as higher
              dimensional singular integrals and averages over various sequences of domains
              with an eye on possible extensions to group actions.  These investigations will
              reveal deep connections between ergodic theory, harmonic analysis and
              probability theory. Ergodic theory grew out of statistical mechanics, the
              statistical description of matter. This latter means, for example, that instead
              of describing the behavior of each individual water-molecule in a cup
              of
water, one is satisfied with finding the average speed, energy etc. of the
              molecules. But then the fundamental question arises: how can we measure the
              average speed or energy. It is clearly impossible to measure the speed of each
              individual molecule and then take the mean of the data. The ergodic theorem
              says that it is enough to select a single molecule, measure its speed in each
              second, and if we make enough measurements and take the average of the data,
              the number will be basically the average speed of all the molecules in the cup
              of water. This amazing theorem has one drawback: it requires that the
              measurements are taken exactly at every second.  But in practice, the
              measurements might be made at, say, 1, 3, 4, 6, 11,... seconds or, even worse,
              at 1.1, 2.4, 2.9, 4.3,...  seconds instead of at 1, 2, 3,... seconds. 
              Obviously, we would like to know whether we still can compute accurately the
              average speed from the measured data. The proposed research addresses two basic
              questions about measurements: 1) What more practical sequence of times (other
              than 1, 2, 3,...) for measurements will still yield the average speed, energy,
              etc.? 2) How many measurements one has to make to get a useful approximation to
              the average speed, energy, etc.?  Note that the ergodic theorem just says "if
              you make enough measurements, you get useful information about average speed,
              energy, etc.", but it does not say in any way how many is "enough"?



