Title       : Enumeration in Graded Posets and Polytopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a0100323

Award Number: 0100323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis J. Billera billera@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research on this project involves the use of algebraic, geometric and
              combinatorial methods to attack fundamental questions involving enumeration in
              convex polytopes and certain graded partially ordered sets.  Questions
              considered involve enumerative properties of general polytopes and arrangements
              of hyperplanes, properties of related families of partially ordered sets, and
              connections of all of these structures to fundamental algebraic structures
              involving permutations.  Recent connections between subalgebras of
              quasisymmetric functions and enumerative properties of families of partially
              ordered sets have made it likely that significant progress can be achieved on
              these questions.  A major focus is to move closer to a characterization of the
              numbers of faces and chains of faces in polytopes and arrangements.  In
              addition, the investigator and his colleagues will continue their work on the
              study of the geometry of the space of phylogenetic trees.  An initial goal will
              be to determine an efficient scheme to compute distances between trees in this
              space.

The type of enumerative information being sought here is of use in
              the design of geometric algorithms for problems in robotics and motion
              planning, and recently has come into play in the analysis of randomization
              schemes for the management of data.  The associated permutation questions
              relate to questions arising when one studies efficient schemes for sorting
              large amounts of data.  The questions involving phylogenetic trees bear on the
              development of statistical methods to deal with trees derived from DNA data. 
              Such methods are of great interest to biologists studying the genetic
              relationship between different species or different diseases.

