Title       : Collaborative Research in Operator Theory on Holomorphic Function Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0100290

Award Number: 0100290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Drasin                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55312              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Bourdon pbourdon@wlu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington & Lee Univ
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    540/458-8400

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT.   Professor Bourdon and his collaborator Joel Shapiro of
Michigan
              State University will investigate problems arising from the
interaction
              between the modern theory of linear operators and the
classical theory of
              analytic functions. The problems to be studied involve
norms, decomposability,
              and numerical ranges of composition operators as
well as the chaotic behavior
              of both composition operators and operators
commuting with backward shifts.
              Insights and tools developed during the
course of the project will be applied
              to other classes of linear operators
on Hilbert and Banach spaces.

   Many
              of the differential and integral equations that physicists and
engineers use
              to model physical processes may be viewed as linear
operators on spaces of
              functions. This viewpoint, pioneered by David
Hilbert, led to the development
              of function-theoretic operator theory,
which is the branch of mathematics
              inspiring the problems that are the
focus of Bourdon and Shapiro's project. A
              number of these problems concern
the notion of numerical range of a linear
              operator, an object that has
relevance to quantum physics and that has proven
              useful to engineers in
determining the stability of certain control systems.
              Other problems
relate to the chaotic behavior of linear operators. That linear
              operators
can give rise to chaotic systems is a relatively recent discovery
              which 
has led to unexpected connections between operator theory and
              dynamical
systems. The idea of decomposability--the study of how to break
              a
complicated linear system up into simpler ones--has been shown to
              have
surprising connections with such chaotic behavior. The final group
              of
problems involves norm calculations for composition operators. The norm
of
              an operator measures how much the operator can stretch the unit ball of
the
              space on which it acts. Computer experimentation should yield
insights and
              intuition concerning both composition-operator norms and
numerical ranges.
              Through such experimentation, undergraduate students at
Washington and Lee
              University will be given an opportunity to participate
in the project. The
              training and research experience provided to these
students by the project
              contribute to its human-resources impact.



