Title       : SGER: Development of a Soft Magnetic Material with Enhanced High Temperature
               Strength
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0100621

Award Number: 0100621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susil K. Putatunda sputa@chem1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0100621
Putatunda

The focus of the SGER grant is on a new, super-soft
              magnetic material with high creep strength at elevated temperatures. The alloy,
              iron with 10-20% aluminum, will use an innovative powder metallurgy processing
              route by simultaneous hot pressing and sintering.  The iron-aluminum phase
              diagram indicates that iron with more than ten percent Al will not undergo the
              austenite to ferrite phase transformation. Furthermore, the addition of
              aluminum to iron allows for significant grain growth during sintering. Thus, it
              should be possible to produce a large grain size (grain diameters in excess of
              1500 mm) in a super-soft magnetic material with extremely low coercivity, very
              high saturated magnetic induction, and very high permeability. Furthermore, the
              phase diagram indicates that in iron-aluminum alloys with 10-20% aluminum there
              is a likelihood of Fe3Al-type precipitates. These precipitates should provide
              barriers to magnetic domain wall movement, as well as obstacles to dislocation
              movement, resulting in a material with high creep strength at elevated
              temperatures. Iron and aluminum powders will be mixed in the requisite
              proportion and compacted. After compaction, the green product will be sintered
              at different temperatures and time periods to determine optimum processing
              conditions for a fully dense product. The magnetic and mechanical properties of
              the alloy will be characterized and compared with commercially available
              iron-silicon alloys and iron-phosphorus alloys. The influence of aluminum on
              grain growth and magnetic properties will be considered. Fine scale
              precipitates of Fe3Al will be produced in the matrix by a judicious mixture of
              cold working and annealing and subsequent quenching and aging processes.
              Successful processing will generate a new super soft magnetic material with
              excellent high temperature mechanical properties at low cost with very
              efficient magnetic performance and energy savings. 
%%%
Soft magnetic
              materials are important engineering materials needed in power generation
              devices. These materials must have high magnetic permeability, low coercivity
              and high saturated magnetic induction. Moreover, they must have a narrow
              hysteresis loop. The soft magnetic materials generally have poor mechanical
              properties at elevated temperatures.  Many industrial applications (e.g.,
              rotors in high-speed generators, magnetic bearings in engines, auxiliary power
              units, etc.) require soft magnetic materials, which not only can retain their
              soft magnetism at high temperature but also can withstand high stress at
              elevated temperatures. 
***

