Title       : Control Development and Modelling for Enhanced Crystal Growth: Application to
               Novel New Technologies and Extenstion of Conventional Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0100310

Award Number: 0100310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Gevelber gevelber@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Characterizing these in terms of the control gain can be misleading. The idea of
              using feedforward of known effects to assist the feedback control is good, but
              well known. Micro-level material objectives have been indirectly incorporated
              in the design of controllers for years. However, the idea of explicitly
              incorporating the effects of heat flow is a good example of the use of modeling
              to help determine the controller explicitly. Although adaptive control is
              proposed as an integral part of both the feedback control and the feedforward
              control, very little is said about adaptive control per se.

I have a few
              comments on the interpretations of the graphs. The text in Figure 11 states
              that the oscillation in diameter indicates the need for adaptive control.
              However, without knowing the measurements that determine both the pull rate and
              the heater power, and the system dynamics, it is not apparent that adaptive
              control is required. Certainly, Figure 11 by itself is insufficient. Figure 19
              shows oscillations of the boule diameter, which is one indication of nonminimum
              phase behavior. However, the anomaly near the end of the graph appears to be
              due to a nonlinear effect (or a time variation). This graph, if the anomalous
              behavior is not uncommon, would present a good argument for the use of adaptive
              control.

The modeling of the CZ and EMCZ appears to be appropriate.
              Experimentation to validate the models is reasonable, and I expect that it can
              be conducted on the available puller.

In summary, I think the primary
              contribution of the proposed effort will be the development of models for the
              CZ and EMCZ processes. There will be no new contribution to control theory (and
              the proposal doesn't claim any). Although the proposal states that controllers
              for these processes will be developed, the analysis of the control issues is
              weak.

