Title       : Quantum-Mechanical Matter Interacting with the Quantized Radiation Field
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a0100160

Award Number: 0100160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64039              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcel J. Griesemer marcel@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Within the standard model of non-relativistic quantum mechanical matter
              interacting with the quantized radiation field methods are developed to show
              that an isolated atom or molecule prepared in a, possibly highly exited, bound
              state is unstable and eventually relaxes to its ground state by emitting
              photons. Similarly, the exited states of a free charged particle are not
              stable. It is shown that photons which are not bound to the electron escape
              ballisticly while the particle relaxes to a state of minimal energy followed by
              a cloud of soft photons (dressed one-electron state) in which it propagates
              according to a reduced dynamics. The key problem in the case of an atom is to
              show that no infrared problem occurs. For a free charged particle an infrared
              problem does occure and one has to deal with nonequivalent representations of
              the CCR. - The proofs require as an ingredient good control over the spectral
              properties of the Hamilton operator and, in addition, asymptotic completeness
              of Rayleigh scattering and Compton scattering of the respective system. These
              prerequisites are established by methods and techniques inspired by similar
              methods and techniques in the spectral and scattering theory of $N$-particle
              Schr\"odinger operators, such as Mourre theory, propagationestimates, the
              construction of suitable propagation observables and others. In addition ideas
              and methods from constructive
quantum field theory (soft photon bounds, Rosen
              estimates, renormalization group analysis) are employed.

This research leads
              to a mathematically rigorous understanding of physical phenomena such as the
              radiative decay of atoms, the photo effect, and Compton scattering. These are
              phenomena which are at the heart of many technical devices and which determine
              our visual impression of the world. Furthermore the phenomenon of radiative
              decay (or the relaxation to the ground state) and the similar phenomenon of
              return to equilibrium at positive temperature play key roles in attempts to
              understand dissipative, irreversible behavior in the quantum theory of open
              systems. The mathematical methods which are developed apply equally to other
              physical systems such a particle in a crystal interacting with quantized
              lattice vibrations (phonons), and find currently application in the study of
              return to equilibrium of matter interacting with radiation at positive
              temperature.

