Title       : Adaptive Synchronization Framework Supporting Device-independent Mobile
               Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a0100770

Award Number: 0100770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abdelsalam A. Helal helal@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joachim Hammer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recent technological advances in wireless networks and portable information
              appliances have engendered the new paradigm of mobile computing, enabling users
              carrying portable devices to access and update data regardless of their
              physical location or movement behavior.  However, the use of this technology
              will remain limited unless we develop the necessary concepts, theory and
              infrastructure that can seamlessly integrate mobility and disconnection into
              everyday networked computing.  Extensive research is needed in order for mobile
              computing to become pervasive.  
Current research efforts do not support
              sufficient automation and management of mobile data access and update. 
              Assumptions are usually made regarding the application, the source of mobile
              data, or the particularities of the mobile device.  Ubiquitous data access is
              lacking due to the tight coupling between the mobile device and the mobile
              data.  Users are therefore not allowed to switch mobile devices without
              spending a lot of effort on copying and re-hoarding.  Additionally, current
              solutions do not support mobile access and hoarding from heterogeneous sources
              of data such as file systems, database servers, web servers, etc.  Current
              research is also limited to basic synchronization schemes that do not take into
              consideration the variable and individual needs of consistency and
              up-to-dateness of mobile data.  Finally, current mobile transaction models are
              not efficient in terms of successful commit rate, especially under prolonged
              periods of disconnection. 
This proposal is based on ongoing research on
              mobile computing, operating systems and data warehousing.  The overall goal is
              to make mobile computing available to a broader range of users and applications
              by automating the hoarding of a wide variety of data from multiple
              heterogeneous sources into mobile devices, and to facilitate sophisticated
              synchronization between the mobile devices and the fixed networks where the
              sources reside.  The specific goals are:
Develop and evaluate a three-tiered
              architecture based on the Coda file system that provides independence between
              the mobile data and the mobile devices via a data warehouse for storing the
              user's working set. 
Develop algorithms for automatically and incrementally
              hoarding data on mobile devices and for synchronizing the contents of the
              mobile device with the working set in the warehouse and the original
              sources.
Develop new synchronization techniques for maintaining the user's
              working set, based on programmable and conditional consistency specifications
              of mobile data items.  Different data items may have different consistency
              requirements, and must therefore be synchronized differently.
Develop a new
              model of mobile transactions that can guarantee that transactional updates
              performed during disconnection are highly likely to be committed  upon
              reconnection.
Our goal is to build upon existing results to develop the
              architecture and algorithms to make smart hoarding and synchronization in
              mobile environments a reality.  We see the realization of such a framework as
              an important and necessary step towards making mobile computing a viable
              practice for a broad audience; a step that some day may lead us to the
              realization of ubiquitous computing.  In our vision, users should be allowed to
              switch to any mobile device to connect to the fixed network and carry the
              necessary data with them, without having to worry about hoarding,
              synchronization, and other low-level burdens.  Given our prior experience and
              research results in the areas of mobile computing, distributed systems, and
              data warehousing, we believe that we can successfully apply data warehousing
              technology to manage important user data as well as support the incremental
              maintenance of this data in light of frequent updates.

