Title       : Geometric and Analytic Problems in Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0100330

Award Number: 0100330
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda P. Rothschild lrothschild@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Salah Baouendi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the basic geometric and analytic problems in several complex 
variables
              is to determine when two real submanifolds in 
multidimensional complex space
              are locally biholomorphically 
equivalent. That is, when is it possible to
              find a local invertible 
holomorphic transformation sending one submanifold
              onto the other? 
This problem has attracted the attention of many
              mathematicians since 
the beginning of the twentieth century, starting with
              the work of 
Poincare and continuing with the major contributions of E.
              Cartan, 
Tanaka, Chern, Moser and others. The principal investigators will
              
continue their research on several aspects of this problem. In 
particular,
              they will focus on determining when it is possible to 
reduce the
              biholomorphic equivalence problem to solving systems of 
polynomial equations
              with complex coefficients. They also plan to 
determine when a formal mapping
              sending a real submanifold into 
another is necessarily convergent. In
              addition, they will attempt to 
categorize those submanifolds for which such
              mappings are determined 
by finitely many derivatives at a given point. They
              expect that this 
study will lead to the discovery of new geometric, analytic,
              as well 
as algebraic invariants of these submanifolds.

The Principal
              Investigators will continue their study of fundamental 
properties of analytic
              and geometric objects, such as surfaces and 
curves, in multidimensional
              complex spaces. A complete classification 
of these mathematical objects can
              have important implications for a 
number of other questions in mathematical
              science.  In fact, this 
study is motivated by the rich interplay between
              several areas of 
mathematics and physics, including control theory, string
              theory, and 
other areas of mathematical physics. Progress on the problems
              
proposed by the Principal Investigators will likely have impact on 
the
              above-mentioned areas as well.


