Title       : SGER - Atomic Force Microscopy System with Single Molecule Fluorescence
               Capabilites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0100828

Award Number: 0100828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99756              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuri L. Lyubchenko yuri.lyubchenko@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Single molecule studies can provide unique information on the structure and
              dynamics of
biological molecules and cellular complexes that is impossible to
              obtain using traditional
structural techniques. These studies, to be performed
              at conditions close to physiological
environments, open the way for looking
              directly at the function of individual biological
molecules and their
              complexes. Scanning probe microscopy and atomic force microscope
(AFM) in
              particular has proven to be a very useful technique permitting static and
              dynamic
studies of molecules at nanometer range resolution. However, the
              requirement for the sample to
be bound to the surface restricts considerably
              the dynamical studies. A breakthrough has
recently been made in the real-time
              observation of dynamics of molecular complexes at the
single-molecule level
              using single-photon sensitive fluorescence microscopes. However,
              the
resolution of this technique is limited by the wavelength of the light and
              does not reveal
structural details of molecules. The combination of AFM and a
              single molecule fluorescence
(SMF) microscope into one instrument would enable
              us to identify structural details of
biological systems at the molecular level
              by AFM and to use the SMF microscope to observe
directly the dynamics of an
              experimental system at a the single molecule level. Importantly, the
dynamics
              can be performed on molecular systems structurally characterized by AFM
              and
localized on a comparatively large surface area. Therefore, the major
              objective of this proposal
is to build AFM/SMF system based on the currently
              available Bioscope AFM/fluorescence
microscope instrument. The sensitivity of
              the fluorescent system will be tested using specially
designed samples. In
              addition, potential pitfalls of integrated AFM will be identified and
analyzed
              for solutions.
