Title       : Families p-Modular Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a0100744

Award Number: 0100744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96051              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Coleman coleman@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Starting with the work of Katz and Serre and developed by Hida one has seen that
              modular forms naturally live in families and that this point of view has vast
              arithmetic applications.  In particular, these ideas have been applied by Wiles
              and Taylor toward a proof Fermat's Last Theorem and by Buzzard and Taylor
              toward new cases of Artin's conjecture.  They instigated Mazur's theory of 
              deformation spaces of residual representations which was pivotal in the
              aforementioned work of Taylor-Wiles.   We have shown with Mazur that there is a
              natural curve called the eigencurve of finite slope  forms whose properties
              have already shed light on some of the previous topics.  This curve maps into
              the above deformation space but its image is still very mysterious.  With
              William Stein we have shown that some  points in the deformation space
              associated to modular forms of infinite slope are in the topological closure of
              the image of the eigencurve and some are not.  Our research is directed at a
              better understanding of the image of the eigencurve.

This is a proposal in
              the area of mathematics called arithmetic algebraic geometry; this is where the
              techniques and questions of number theory merge with the techniques and
              questions of algebraic geometry.  The main focus of this research is to better
              understand a particular special kind of algebraic geometric curve, called the
              "eigencurve," which is intimately and directly connected with a continuously
              varying collection of deep and important number theoretic data.  Understanding
              the link between the eigencurve and its corresponding number theoretic data
              will advance the field of number theory, which in turn provides the
              underpinning for most of modern cryptography and digital security.

