Title       : Studying Cognition via Information Search in Game Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0100072

Award Number: 0100072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent Crawford vcrawfor@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many unresolved questions about strategic behavior concern strategic
              sophistication, the extent to which players analyze their environment as a
              game, taking its structure and others' incentives into account. Sophistication
              is the main difference between the behavioral assumptions of traditional game
              theory, which take it to be unlimited, and adaptive learning models, which take
              it to be nonexistent or severely limited. It is also the main difference
              between the leading kinds of learning models, beliefs-based and reinforcement.
              Even when convergence to equilibrium is assured, sophistication can affect
              limiting outcomes through players' initial beliefs and the structure of their
              learning rules. The influence of sophistication on convergence, equilibrium
              selection, and the nature and timing of responses to changes in the environment
              give it a leading role in applications of game theory to economic, political,
              and social interactions.

This project concerns experiments designed and
              conducted with Faculty Associate Miguel Costa-Gomes of the University of York,
              UK. Experiments allow the control needed to test theories of behavior in games,
              which are sensitive to environmental details. Experiments also allow us to
              study sophistication and other aspects of cognition more directly, by
              monitoring subjects' searches for hidden information. Under plausible
              assumptions about cognition and information search, leading theories of initial
              decisions and of learning both have sharply separated implications for search.
              Interpreting subjects' searches in the light of the cognitive implications of
              alternative theories of behavior help to understand their strategic thinking
              and predict their behavior.

Some experiments adapt the MouseLab design used
              to study subjects' initial responses to two-person matrix games to two-person
              guessing games  in which subjects have hidden, independently variable payoff
              parameters, monitoring their searches for their own and their partners'
              parameters. This new design better separates decision rules; and searching for
              payoff parameters within a known structure is a very different cognitive task
              than searching directly for payoffs in matrix games, which expands our view of
              subjects' strategic thinking. Another set of MouseLab experiments adapts our
              previous design to study initial responses to two-person matrix games with
              multiple equilibria mixed with other games designed to separate boundedly
              rational decision rules. The main goal is to separate traditional theories of
              equilibrium selection that apply notions like risk- or payoff-dominance to the
              set of equilibria from the view that responses to games with multiple
              equilibria are a by-product of the same kinds of boundedly rational rules that
              appear to predominate in other games. A third set of experiments monitor
              subjects' searches for hidden payoff parameters and the history of decisions
              and realized payoffs in repeated play of normal-form games with a variety of
              structures. The goal is to exploit sharp separation of information requirements
              to distinguish reinforcement and beliefs-based learning and hybrids such as 
              experience-weighted attraction learning. These experiments require the
              development of a new interface with expanded search capabilities. 

