Title       : GOALI: Fundamentals of Fabrication of Nanofiber Assemblies by Electrospinning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a0100354

Award Number: 0100354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuris A. Dzenis ydzenis@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Young Chung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell H. Reneker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1467,1504,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
              (GOALI) research project is to continue the comprehensive experimental and
              theoretical study of electrospinning of polymer nanofibers with the emphasis
              now on the fabrication of nanofiber assemblies and the evaluation of their
              microstructure and properties.  Electrospinning is an emerging technology
              producing polymer fibers in the diameter range from a few microns down to three
              nanometers.  Previous collaborative research by the principal investigators has
              advanced the understanding of the process in a single jet regime, including a
              recent discovery and analysis of a hierarchical bending instability as a major
              mechanism of production of small diameter fibers.  Potential industrial
              applications of the process require further development of methods of nanofiber
              placement and fabrication of nanofiber assemblies with controlled geometry,
              orientation, and properties.  This research will provide a body of knowledge
              necessary for the development of robust, industrially relevant methods and
              devices for flexible and reproducible fabrication of large nanofiber assemblies
              with controlled geometry and microstructure.  Development of better methods of
              fabrication of nanofibers and their useful assemblies will produce a
              considerable impact in the general area of nanostructured materials.

In
              order to establish new technologies for the control of nanofiber placement, the
              research tasks will include experimental and theoretical analysis of the
              density distribution of jets in the cloud region of the process envelope. 
              Under normal conditions, non-woven sheets with random fiber orientation are
              being produced.  By taking into account the interactions of the segments of the
              jet with themselves and with the external field, electromechanical methods of
              placement of the nanofibers into controlled oriented and gradient assemblies
              will be explored.  Microstructure and properties of these assemblies will be
              characterized and correlated with the process parameters.  The research will be
              performed in close collaboration with the Donaldson Company, Lucent
              Technologies Bell Laboratories, NIST, and SUNY Stony Brook/Brookhaven National
              Laboratory.
