Title       : Three-dimensional Study of Gravels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a0100518

Award Number: 0100518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro Arduino parduino@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Gravels and gravelly soils are engineering materials commonly used in many civil
              engineering applications such as structural fills and pavement subgrades. The
              geotechnical engineering community has long known that gravels have engineering
              properties that are both similar and non-similar to sands. Sands have been
              researched extensively, for both static and dynamic loading conditions, and
              their behavior is comparatively well understood. In contrast, gravels have been
              researched and tested to a much lesser extent due to the need for large
              specimen sizes and physical difficulties of handling such specimens.
              Consequently, the engineering properties of gravels have been commonly obtained
              by means of correlations based on experimental tests on sands. 

In addition,
              granular material behavior understanding is primarily based on conventional
              triaxial tests where specimens are tested under axisymmetric principal stress
              conditions. These particular stress conditions apply only for special
              situations in engineering practice, such as soil lying directly below and on
              the axis of a circular load. Often, conditions exist where none of the
              principal stresses are equal. It is then necessary to take into consideration
              the influence of the intermediate principal stress on the stress-strain and
              strength characteristics of the material. During the last three decades, much
              research has been conducted on the behavior of sands under multiaxial, or true,
              states of stress. Cubical triaxial devices, that allow the intermediate
              principal stress to vary from the minor to the major principal stress, have
              facilitated research on the behavior of sands, clays, rock and concrete in
              three-dimensional principal stress space. Missing from the literature is any
              comprehensive study focusing on multiaxial testing of gravel-sized
              particles.

In an effort to address this gap in fundamental understanding of
              gravelly soils, an extensive study of several gravels under three-dimensional
              stress paths is proposed. Based on a systematic experimental program using a
              flexible boundary true triaxial device, the three-dimensional behavior of
              gravels will be ascertained. The effects of grain size, particle shape, and
              fines content on the mechanical response of gravels will be evaluated. The
              device boundary effects will be evaluated using new instrumentation that will
              be developed as part of the project. A constitutive model for gravels will be
              developed and calibrated from preliminary experimental data and verified
              against further test results. The calibrated model may enable successful
              numerical modeling and performance prediction of Civil Engineering geotechnical
              structures and foundations.


