Title       : Fundamental and Technological Aspects of Finishing Balls of Advanced Ceramics,
               Glasses, and Silicon Using Magnetic Field Assisted Polishing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0100300

Award Number: 0100300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranga Komanduri ranga@ceat.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhen Bing Hou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is on the finishing of balls of advanced ceramics, glasses, and
              semiconductor material using the magnetic float polishing technology. 
              Conventional finishing of advanced ceramics and glasses by grinding, polishing,
              lapping generally leads to several defects including large scratches, formation
              of pits due to the dislodgment of grains, viscous flow of the glassy phase in
              the case of glass, and surface and subsurface microcracks.  These defects
              affect the properties and performance of these materials and are traditionally
              removed by subsequent diamond polishing. To address this difficult problem, a
              "gentle" finishing technology, called the magnetic float polishing was
              developed (in a recently completed investigation supported by NSF) without the
              need to use diamond abrasives.  Surface finish on the order of 4 nm Ra and 40
              nm Rmax with sphericity in the range of 0.25 micrometers were accomplished on
              Si3N4 balls with a total polishing time of ~ 20 hours.  A better understanding
              of the mechanical and chemo-mechanical actions involved in the polishing of
              Si3N4 balls has resulted. In this project, the investigators intend to
              generalize this work to cover other advanced ceramics (balls of different size
              and number per batch), various glasses, and silicon.  Advanced ceramics, such
              as Si3N4, SiC, Zr02, and Al2O3 are increasing being considered for structural
              applications of which Si3N4, in specific, is chosen for hybrid ball and roller
              bearing applications.  

Similarly, various types of glasses are used for
              optical applications, such as lenses and recently spherical silicon balls are
              being considered for micro-electronic applications (instead of silicon wafers).
               This research would be the first of its kind on the finishing of silicon balls
              (instead of wafers) by magnetic float polishing. Thus, the finishing technology
              proposed is expected to address structural, optical, and electronic
              applications that can have a significant impact on the manufacture of balls for
              various advanced technology applications.

