Title       : Symmetric Functions and Macdonald Polynomials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0100179

Award Number: 0100179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Morse morsej@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Morse is working on a project involving a filtration for 
the space of
              symmetric functions that depends on a positive 
integer k.  In earlier work,
              Lapointe, Lascoux, and Morse 
introduced new families of polynomials that lie
              in these subspaces,
and they made a number of assertions relying on their
              characterization 
of these elements.  Among these conjectures is one stating
              
that their elements form a basis for the k-subspaces of the symmetric
              
function space and that the Macdonald polynomials expand positively on 
this
              new basis.  More generally, their claims lead to a family of 
positivity
              conjectures which will provide a natural refinement for 
many fundamental
              concepts in symmetric function theory.  For example, 
their elements appear to
              play a role in the k-subspaces analogous to 
the important role that the Schur
              functions play for the symmetric 
function space.  Morse is working on proving
              these conjectures and is also 
investigating the possible representation
              theoretic interpretation 
for these polynomials.

The theory of symmetric
              functions is a classical part of 
mathematics with a wide variety of
              applications in fields
including physics, engineering, and computer
              science.
Recent development in the study of symmetric functions
was made with
              the introduction in 1988 of a new family of
symmetric functions called the
              Macdonald polynomials.
Remarkably, these polynomials have also been found to
              play an
important role in areas such as geometry, representation 
theory, and
              many-body physics.  The successful completion of 
this project would prove
              important properties of the Macdonald 
polynomials and more generally, would
              provide a natural refinement 
for the fundamental concepts in symmetric
              function theory.
