Title       : Entire and Meromorphic Functions in Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0100486

Award Number: 0100486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75896              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bao Qin Li libaoqin@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is directed at topics in several complex variables
              on
entire holomorphic maps, interpolation problems, and value distribution
              theory.
The principle investigator proposes to continue his study on the
              well-known
transcendental Bezout problem about the growth of the volume of
              entire analytic
sets and find sharp estimates on the counting functions of
              zeros of entire
holomorphic maps. He also proposes to study interpolation
              problems for weighted spaces of entire functions, one of fundamental and
              central problems in several complex variables. In particular, he wishes to
              characterize interpolating
varieties geometrically, which is closely tied with
              his study on the Bezout
problem. In the third direction, he would like to
              continue his research on value
distribution theory with a special attention
              given to the refined  Nevanlinna
second fundamental theorem for slowly moving
              targets and its relations to other
problems such as uniqueness problems of
              meromorphic functions and meromorphic solutions of partial differential
              equations.

The above problems are important not just from the point of view
              of several
complex variables, but also from their relations and applications
              to other
subjects such as harmonic analysis, transcendental number theory,
              systems theory and engineering. For instance, many important problems like
              finding and
representing solutions to partial differential equations or
              systems of
convolution equations arising in signal processing, image
              compression, materials
testing, etc. are equivalent to interpolation problems
              for entire functions in
weighted spaces. The proposed research aims at
              developing and advancing both
theories and applications for the above areas in
              several complex variables.


