Title       : FRG: Model Theory and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0100979

Award Number: 0100979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $901769             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Ward Henson henson@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anand Pillay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lou van den Dries  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is on the application of model theory (a branch of
              mathematical logic) within mathematics.  Model theory comes into the picture in
              two ways: (a) it provides a new set of tools; (b) it provides a new language
              within which to formulate results and problems.  Recent successes demonstrate
              that these can provide powerful new methods for many areas of mathematics and
              can be the basis for breakthroughs on critical problems.  This project focuses,
              therefore, on a well defined and coherent research direction, made timely by
              recent advances, not on a single mathematical problem.

Model-theoretic
              methods typically involve identifying and axiomatizing the first order theories
              of classes of structures, studying their nonstandard models, identifying the
              class of definable sets in a structure (quantifier-elimination), and making use
              of the compactness theorem to work within rich nonstandard models. There is a
              sophisticated machinery available (via Shelah and others) for understanding
              definable sets in certain general classes of structures. For example, once a
              concrete structure is identified as being stable, this machinery comes into
              play.

The research problems to be emphasized in this project involve
              potential application of model theoretic ideas and tools within symbolic
              dynamics and algebraic geometry, the algebraic theory of differential
              equations, analysis, and geometry.

One of the goals of this project to find
              new and effective ways to help mathematicians learn how to use model theory. 
              In particular, the researchers selected for support by this project will often
              be mathematicians who work outside model theory, and who are interested in
              finding ways to use it in their own work.

