Title       : Entrainment Processes at the Top of the Stable Marine Atmospheric Boundary Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0100685

Award Number: 0100685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clive E. Dorman cdorman@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian M. Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, conducted with the collaboration of co-investigator Ian M. Brooks,
              is motivated by the need for a better understanding of mixing processes at the
              top of the marine boundary layer.  During the summer months, the West Coast of
              the United States is a region of widespread and persistent stratocumulus
              clouds.  The distribution of the clouds is highly variable and difficult to
              forecast accurately because of the extreme sensitivity of the predicted
              cloudiness to changes in the boundary conditions at cloud top.  The clouds are
              limited in vertical development by a temperature inversion.  Whether they
              persist or dissipate is determined in part by the rate of entrainment of dry
              air from above the inversion into the cloudy air.  The purpose of the project
              is to investigate the mixing process using existing remote-sensing and in-situ
              data.  In the summer of 1996, the C-130 research aircraft operated by the
              National Center for Atmospheric Research flew a series of eleven research
              flights off the coast of northern California and Oregon.  Measurements included
              high-resolution, downward-pointing lidar observations of the boundary layer
              structure and aircraft traverses through the boundary layer, measuring the
              atmospheric stability, wind, and turbulence.  This study goes beyond the
              original intention of the experiment by focusing on the effects of wind shear
              at the inversion level on the turbulence and mixing processes.  The result will
              improve insight on the relative importance of shear and stability on
              entrainment.
