Title       : Case Studies and Tsunami Community Model for Underwater Landslide Tsunamis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0100223

Award Number: 0100223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephan T. Grilli grilli@oce.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Watts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Underwater landslides have generated several local tsunamis reaching at least 30
              meters in elevation this century -- most recently on Flores Island, Indonesia
              in 1992.  In addition, these events typically occur close to shore and offer
              very little time for warning, and can be devastating to nearby coastal
              development.  Underwater landslides often pose the greatest local tsunami
              hazard.

Tsunamis generated by underwater landslides are governed by at least
              six fundamental parameters, which are functions of landslide geometry and
              kinematics.  In addition, nonlinear interactions may occur between waves,
              shoreline, and landslide.  Consequently, predicting landslide tsunami
              amplitudes requires sophisticated numerical methods.

The PIs have developed
              an accurate and efficient model of inviscid, irrotational, fluid dynamics
              during tsunami generation, based on a Boundary Element Method (BEM).  A
              three-dimensional (3D) version, the ''Tsunami Open and Progressive Initial
              Conditions System'' (TOPICS) is an analytical tool that provides estimates of
              tsunami features and initial conditions.  The source code is distributed freely
              to academic, nonprofit, and government researchers, in order to facilitate
              tsunami hazard assessment within the tsunami community (see:
              www.tsunamicommunity.org).

This action is to support research to refine the
              effects of landslide shape, motion, and deformation, on tsunami generation,
              describing three-dimensional effects during tsunami generation, coupling
              tsunami generation and propagation models, validating these numerical methods
              with experiments and actual case studies, and producing more accurate versions
              of TOPICS for the tsunami community.  The fundamental goal is to predict
              accurate tsunami source features.

