Title       : Fourier Analysis and Dispersive Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a0100375

Award Number: 0100375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gigliola Staffilani gigliola@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The questions the proposer addresses in her research are the following: given a
              dispersive equation, how much regularity does one have to assume for the
              initial profile (initial data) in order to be able to insure existence and
              uniqueness of the wave solution at later times? What are the conditions on the
              initial profile that guarantee ``a long life'' for the wave? And if the wave 
              does ``live'' for a long time, which of its initial properties are preserved? A
              satisfactory analysis of these phenomena requires answering questions on long
              time existence and uniqueness for the solution of the associated Cauchy
              problem, as well as regularity properties of the solution. It requires also
              analyzing continuity with respect to the initial profiles, possible blow-up of
              some energies in finite time, and rate of blow-up. A mathematically rigorous
              approach to the questions of long time existence and blow-up is very difficult.
              Certainly  numerical methods provide a guide for theoretical results. But it is
               believed that the analytic techniques available at the moment are not  fine
              enough to recover the predictions of the numerical work. The techniques that
              proposer uses are purely analytical. The tools that she employs have been
              recently developed in the general area of Fourier Analysis and Harmonic
              Analysis. As the tools are new, the investigation is more
likely to produce
              truly novel results.  These methods may bring new insights into well studied
              theoretical and empirical issues.

The proposer  main field of interest is
              Partial Differential Equations. In particular, she concentrates her research on
              Dispersive nonlinear PDEs, so called because their solutions tend to be waves
              which spread out spatially. Two well known equations belong to this class: the
              Schrodinger equation and the Korteweg-de-Vries equation. These equations and
              their combinations with the wave equation, have been proposed as models for
              many basic wave phenomena in Physics. Examples of these phenomena are: the
              propagations of signals in optic fibers, nonlinear ionic-sonic waves in plasma
              in magnetic field and long waves in plasma.

