Title       : Intersection Theory and Commutative Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0100604

Award Number: 0100604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Roberts roberts@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Around forty years ago Serre proposed an algebraic definition of intersection
              multiplicities which satisfied many of the properties required of such a
              definition but left several unanswered questions.  These problems concern,
              among other things, whether the intersection multiplicities are always greater
              than or equal to zero (nonnegativity) and precise conditions for them to vanish
              (vanishing) or to be greater than zero (positivity).  These problems have
              become known as Serre's conjectures for intersection multiplicities.  This
              proposal has two parts.  The first part is a continuation of research of the
              principal investigator on the positivity conjecture that uses recent advances
              on the resolution of singularities which have led to a solution of the
              nonnegativity conjecture.  This investigation will also study relations between
              these ideas and other questions on multiplicities in commutative algebra.  The
              second part concerns modules of finite projective dimension over nonregular
              rings.  It will use a recent result of the principal investigator and V.
              Srinivas to study intersection properties of modules of finite length and
              finite projective dimension and extend these results to study the vanishing
              conjecture for two modules of finite projective dimension.

In this proposal
              the principal investigator studies some fundamental questions in the relations
              between Algebra and Geometry.  Geometric sets are often defined as sets of
              solutions to polynomial equations. In studying the behaviour of these
              solutions, one has to define  multiplicities, which give the number of times a
              solution should be counted.  This concept generalizes the multiplicity of a
              root of a polynomial, which is crucial to most applications of polynomials. 
              The investigation of these ideas has led to several fundamental questions in
              Algebra.  One of these questions is the problem of determining when these
              multiplicities are positive. Another group of questions concerns modules of
              finite projective dimension, which are modules which can be described by a
              finite resolution; the finiteness of this description is used, for example, in
              computer algebra for computing invariants.  The principal investigator will
              study properties of these modules and their relation to questions on
              multiplicities as well as to other branches of Algebra.

