Title       : Laboratory Equipment for Post-Genomic Studies in Environmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0100193

Award Number: 0100193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198895             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell L. Sogin sogin@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Hobbie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca J. Gast  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas P. Teske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth M. Halanych  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for purchase of equipment to establish an integrated
              laboratory for high-throughput processing of DNA samples in environmental
              research. Establishment of the laboratory will give scientists at the Marine
              Biological Laboratory (MBL) and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI)
              access to high-throughput capabilities that are typically restricted to
              biomedical or industrialized genomic research centers. Equipment to be
              purchased include several robotic workstations, a real-time quantitative
              polymerase chain reaction device and a pulsed field gel electrophoresis)
              system. This new equipment will permit scientists at both institutions to
              achieve optimum use of an existing high capacity DNA sequencing and microarray
              facility. This robotic equipment will completely automate management and
              processing of DNA samples, and thus enable scientists to sample genetic
              diversity in the environment at a level previously unimaginable. Research
              questions to be pursued address issues in  genome evolution, biodiversity, and
              environmental influences on gene expression. The equipment will allow precise
              measurement of changes in gene expression in response to external factors (e.g.
              toxins, other chemicals) and as a result of symbiosis, and will also be used to
              measure specific DNA sequences in uncultivable environmental populations. The
              new high-throughput capabilities will also directly impact the training and
              education of visiting and year-round scientists, students, and postdoctoral
              fellows at the two institutions in Woods Hole, MA. 
