Title       : Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER): Smart Rotating Machinery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0100238

Award Number: 0100238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherif T. Noah snoah@mengr.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander G. Parlos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suhada Jayasuriya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

PIs: Sherif Noah, Alexander G. Parlos, Suhada Jayasuriya, Texas A&M
              University, Department of Mechanical Engineering, College Station, Texas
              77843

Proposal Number: 0100238

Proposal Title: Smart Rotating
              Machinery

Project Abstract:

This exploratory research project addresses
              the development of smart rotating machinery. Unplanned machinery downtime and
              poor machinery performance impact negatively both industrial productivity and
              safety at an annual level of $1 trillion. It is therefore timely to develop
              smart rotating machinery that are highly adaptive to uncertain dynamic
              environments while maintaining high level of performance. Such machinery must
              incorporate new and innovative breakthroughs rooted in new information
              technologies that enable them to exhibit memory, learn from experience and use
              this learning ability to improve their adaptability while performing in an
              optimal manner.

The technical approach of the proposed research relies on
              health monitoring, condition assessment and early fault diagnosis through a
              combination of physics-based nonlinear rotordynamics models and empirical
              models developed through real-time sensor data. Closed-loop early incipient
              fault diagnosis is achieved through the use of computational intelligence
              tools, e.g. neural networks, fuzzy logic, and genetic algorithms, and other
              advanced signal processing methods, such as wavelet analysis. Towards making
              smart rotating machinery a reality, an initial framework will be explored for a
              methodology that will enable embedding certain elements of intelligent behavior
              into rotating machinery. The proposed limited effort is considered high-risk
              because it constitutes a pioneering study in smart systems with the perceived
              difficulties in developing an effective methodology. Furthermore, this research
              will lead to the experimental demonstrations of early diagnosis algorithms for
              controlled rotating machinery, a subject that has yet to be addressed in the
              literature. Such algorithms will control and mitigate impending failures of
              critical rotating machinery, reducing the probability of unplanned downtime,
              emergency shutdowns and catastrophic accidents.

