Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Responses of Gully Erosion and Sedimentation to
               Environmental Change in the Upper Republican River Basin, Nebraska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a0100859

Award Number: 0100859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Knox knox@geography.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1325,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many fluvial systems of the central Great Plains have flashy discharge regimes
              and high sediment yields.  As a result, their sedimentary processes are
              extremely sensitive to changing hydrologic conditions.  Evidence in the form of
              cut-and-fill terraces and alluvial stratigraphy with high resolution
              depositional units suggests that both hydrologic and sedimentologic adjustments
              have taken place throughout the Holocene.  Morphologic properties of currently
              active gullies and valley fills also indicate that contemporary gully erosion
              rates are sensitive to changes in modern environmental conditions.  This
              general objective of this doctoral dissertation research project is to quantify
              gully erosion and valley aggradation rates in the upper Republican River basin
              of western Nebraska and to determine how these rates have varied in response to
              environmental change.  This research will examine how gully systems have (1)
              activated and stabilized on decadal time scales in the late 20th century; (2)
              incised and aggraded in response to climate changes of the Holocene; and (3)
              extended headward to shape watershed morphology during late Quaternary.  This
              research will integrate field, laboratory, and GIS analyses.  Historical gully
              erosion will be documented by examining aerial photographs to determine the
              magnitude of headward gully migration on a decadal time scale since the 1950s. 
              The spatial distribution of gully-derived sediment downstream from active
              headcuts will be established using a 137-Cs sediment tracing technique. 
              Holocene valley aggradation rates will be estimated on the basis of radiocarbon
              age determinations of organic matter within alluvial fills and terraces. 
              Sedimentologic and pedologic analyses of these same fills will permit
              interpretation of the depositional and soil-forming processes active during
              aggradation.  Extension of drainage networks will be investigated by using
              soil-stratigraphic and morpho-stratigraphic evidence to infer the headward
              limits of networks at various times throughout the late Quaternary.  These
              limits can define network planforms that will be analyzed in a GIS environment
              to determine changes in hydrologically significant drainage network parameters
              over millennial time- scales.

Results of this research will help document
              the response of semi-arid fluvial systems to environmental change.  As
              scientific concern mounts over the potential impact of future climate change in
              sensitive semi-arid regions like the Great Plains, realistic appraisals of past
              hydrologic variability become increasingly necessary.  This research will
              improve understanding of that variability by examining its impact on gully
              erosion and valley aggradation.  By investigating these processes over temporal
              scales ranging from decades to millennia, the project will establish a better
              understanding of the complete range of potential process rates, and will
              document the many factors that may govern changes in these rates.  As a
              Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
              support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

