Title       : Applications of Krein space operator theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0100437

Award Number: 0100437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35880              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Rovnyak jlr5m@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

The proposal is concerned with operator theory and function
              theory
involving the generalized Schur and Nevanlinna classes
              and
two-isometries on Pontryagin spaces.  A generalization of
              Nudelman's
problem in interpolation theory will be studied.  In the
              classical
case, existence criteria were given by M. Rosenblum and the PI
              using
the commutant lifting theorem.  The criteria imply a series
              of
classical interpolation results with both interior and boundary data.
The
              Ball and Helton generalization of the commutant lifting theorem
yields an
              extension of Nudelman's problem to the generalized Schur
class which has
              similar applications.  New problems for boundary
interpolation and Hilbert
              transforms arise in the indefinite case and
will be studied in joint work with
              T. Constantinescu and A. Dijksma.
D. Z. Arov and the PI will study Darlington
              synthesis for
J-contractive matrix-valued functions in the unit disk.  State
              spaces
now are Pontryagin spaces.  The approach follows previous work by
              Arov
and also uses the factorization theory for pseudo-continuable
functions
              by Rosenblum and the PI.  L. A. Sakhnovich and the PI will
study indefinite
              cases of direct and inverse problems for canonical
differential and difference
              equations by the method of operator
identities.  A recent Ph.D. dissertation
              by C. Hellings obtains a
generalization of Richter's theorem on analytic
              two-isometries on
Pontryagin spaces.  This area is new and includes a number
              of open
questions and possibilities for further developments.

The proposal
              is concerned with problems in areas of mathematics which
have traditional
              connections with engineering and control theory and
especially the design of
              stabilizing feedback controllers and passive
networks.  The main problem of
              interpolation theory is to reconstruct
a function from partial information
              such as given values of the
function at specified points.  Usually the data of
              a problem satisfy a
positivity condition depending on the class of functions
              under
consideration.  The proposal will study a unified method to deal
              with
one class of such problems in which the positivity conditions
              are
replaced by weaker assumptions.  The inverse problem of spectral
theory,
              which asks to reconstruct an operator from observed spectral
properties, is
              related to interpolation theory, and the effect of
weakening positivity will
              again be considered.  Other problems are
related to the embedding of a passive
              system into a conservative
system: extensions will be considered in which
              systems contain active
as well as passive elements.  Conservative systems
              correspond in some
sense to isometric operators, and another group of problems
              explores
generalizations of isometric operators in the absence of
              positivity.
The projects are in collaboration with colleagues in the U.S.
              and
Europe.  Funding of the project will also provide support for
              an
undergraduate research program in the Mathematics Department of
              the
University of Virginia that matches students one-on-one with
mathematics
              professors for projects of approximately eight weeks in


