Title       : Stability and Finiteness Problems in Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a0100410

Award Number: 0100410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Sturm   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The first question motivating the subject of our project is the
following: Let
              f be a holomorphic function in a neighborhood of the
origin of affine n-space.
              Can the singularities of f(z)=0 get "worse"
under small perturbations of the
              function f? By "get worse" we mean:
Can the critical exponent of f get
              smaller, where the critical
exponent is the supremum of all exponents d for
              which the absolute
value of f raised to the power -d is locally integrable. 
              This
question, and its effective counterpart, play an important role
              in
proving the existence of Kahler-Einstein metrics on certain Fano
manifolds
              (as has been recently demonstrated by Demailly and Kollar).
We plan to apply
              our method of "algebraic estimates" to this
problem. A related question which
              we will pursue is the following: Let
R be a rational function with complex
              coefficients. How do we decide
if R is in L^p?  To what extent is the L^p norm
              of R a continuous
function of its coefficients? The third motivating question
              concerns
decay rates of oscillatory integral operators is one which
              has
attracted much aattention is recent years: What is the best decay rate
of
              such operators? We have been able to attack this problem in the
multilinear
              one-dimensional case when the phase function is a
polynomial, and have
              succeeded in finding the best decay rate (modulo
logarithimic terms). Our
              method employs in an improved version of the
curved trapezoid technique
              developed by Phong-Stein. We plan to apply
this method to the higher
              dimensional case and in the case of damped
operators.
 
The main themes of
              this proposal - oscillatory and singular integrals
and the method of
              stationary phase - are central to the field of
classical analysis, with
              foundational results dating back to the
nineteenth century: Harmonic Analysis
              plays a critical role in the
solution of wide spectrum of problems in physics
              and applied
mathematics - solving the heat equation, wave equation,
              Laplace
equation, Schrodinger equation all make use of the Fourier
              analysis
technique.  The use of harmonic analysis in X-ray diffraction
              is
indispensible to determining the structure of large molecules (such
              as
DNA), and the Fourier transform method in signal processing is at the
core
              of much of the modern technology involving the transfer of
information by
              electronic means.  In modern applications to a variety
of questions,
              traditional techniques do not suffice and the need for a
more general theory
              has arisen. In particular, the issues of bounds
and stability for oscillatory
              integrals and operators, and the related
problem of regularity of Radon
              transforms have been the focus of much
recent work.  The principal
              investigator, working with D.H. Phong
(Columbia University) and Elias M. Stein
              (Princeton University), plans
to continue investigating this circle of
              problems using the tools from
geometry and analysis which were recently
              developed in our joint work.







