Title       : Research and Development to Support MECO Experiment in RSVP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0100566

Award Number: 0100566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James J. Whitmore                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1498565            (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Molzon wmolzon@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for Research and Development of the beamline and
              particle detector systems for MECO, one of the two experiments that comprise
              the RSVP initiative.  The MECO (for Muon to Electron Conversion) experiment
              will search for the coherent conversion of muons into electrons in the field of
              an atomic nucleus.  This is a process that violates muon and lepton number,
              commonly referred to as lepton flavor violation.  MECO proposes to search for
              coherent muon conversion at a sensitivity a factor of 10000 times that of
              current experiments.
The MECO experiment will be mounted at the Brookhaven
              National Laboratory, using the Alternate Gradient Synchrotron proton
              accelerator as a driver for a new, extremely intense muon beam.  The muon beam
              uses a new technique involving producing muons in the bore of a superconducting
              solenoid and transporting them in a second solenoid to the region of a target
              in a third solenoid, in which they are stopped by a thin target.  The
              conversion electrons are momentum analyzed in a set of particle detectors, also
              located in the bore of the third solenoid.
While neither the beamline
              components nor the particle detectors are beyond the state of the art in their
              respective technologies, significant development and detailed design work are
              required before construction.  The MECO experiment has been approved by the
              National Science Board to be included in the President's budget as an MRE
              project for FY 2002.  This proposal is to support design work in five areas:
              superconducting solenoids, particle tracking detector and associated
              electronics, calorimetric electron detector and associated electronics, active
              cosmic ray shield, and modifications to the proton beam line.  The work will be
              done by the MECO collaboration and by subcontract to an organization with
              expertise in the design and construction of large superconducting magnets.

