Title       : Norm Varieties and Cohomological Invariants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0100163

Award Number: 0100163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96138              (Estimated)
Investigator: Markus Rost rost@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator continues his work on the Bloch-Kato conjecture (bijectivity of
              the norm residue homomorphism) and on Galois-cohomological invariants for
              linear algebraic groups.  Norm varieties form the basic examples of an intimate
              link between Galois cohomology and cobordism theory which lead in recent years
              to considerable progress on the Bloch-Kato conjecture.  The main goal of the
              project is the construction of norm varieties for arbitrary weights and primes,
              the computation of some of their characteristic numbers and of some of their
              K-cohomology groups.  Cohomological invariants are characteristic classes for
              G-torsors over a field.  Classical examples are the discriminant and the
              Hasse-Witt invariant for quadratic forms.  There is a huge variety of known
              cohomological invariants for various linear algebraic groups.  One objective of
              this project is to get a better systematic understanding of cohomological
              invariants, but also to investigate certain particular cases.  Some of the
              invariants (for the special linear group and for some exceptional groups) are
              closely related with norm varieties.

A basic problem of algebra, number
              theory and algebraic geometry is to find solutions to polynomial equations.  A
              mathematical "law" provides a means for solving a huge class of equations,
              rather than just finding a solution to a single equation.  Thus the
              mathematician's goal is to find and verify useful mathematical laws.  One
              potentially very powerful but as yet unverified law is called the "Bloch-Kato
              conjecture."  With the goal of demonstrating that the Bloch-Kato conjecture is
              valid in general, the investigator studies in depth the properties of certain
              very special systems of equations, called "norm varieties."

