Title       : Multi-User and Multi-Disciplinary Ion and Element Analyzers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0100133

Award Number: 0100133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63618              (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes M. Knops jknops2@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Wedin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Zera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony Joern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherilyn C. Fritz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for purchase of analytical equipment to be
              shared by six faculty and by student researchers, all of whom are participating
              in a multi-disciplinary Initiative in Ecology and Evolution program at the
              University.   The equipment includes an elemental analyzer and autoanalyzer, a
              digestion block and two computers to control and acquire the data from the
              auto- and element analyzer.  These will be used to analyze plant tissues,
              soils, soil extracts and water samples for total nitrogen, phosphorus, carbon
              and soil nitrate, ammonium, phosphate and silica.  Research enabled by
              availability of the equipment include studies of ecosystem-level nutrient
              cycling, carbon sequestration, impacts of herbivory on plants, stoichiometry in
              terrestrial ecosystems, limnology, paleoclimatology, and validation of remotely
              sensed biomass indexes. In addition to its use by this group, the equipment
              will be available to other researchers and graduate students working on various
              topics within the School of Biological Sciences, Geology and the School of
              Natural Resources and will be a key component of a new focus on ecology within
              the University of Nebraska at Lincoln.
