Title       : Activation - Driving Force Relationships in Radical Ion Rearrangements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  2000    
File        : a9732490

Award Number: 9732490
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Tanko jtanko@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on elucidating the chemistry of organic radical   anions
              and cations that are considered to be key intermediates in a   number of
              chemical and biochemical transformations.   The rates of decay   of these
              transient intermediates, generated  chemically,   electrochemically, or
              photochemically from selected precursors, will be   measured as functions of
              precursor structure, solvent polarity and   counter ion.   Corresponding
              thermodynamic data, principally the free   energy change associated with the
              ring opening of cyclic radical anions   and cations, will be determined
              electrochemically by means of appropriate   thermochemical cycles.   Using
              selected precursors that have been or will   be synthesized during the course
              of the experiments, and correlating the   kinetic and thermodynamic data
              obtained for the corresponding radical   anion or cation, structure-reactivity
              relationships of these short-lived   intermediates will be developed.      With
              this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program   supports the
              research and educational activities of Professor James Tanko   of the Chemistry
              Department at Virginia Polytechnic University.      Professor Tanko's research
              will focus on elucidating the   structure-reactivity relationships that define
              the chemistry of reactive   cationic and anionic radical intermediates.  
              Although well known as   intermediates in a number of organic transformations,
              these   highly-reactive, short-lived intermediates are now thought to be  
              intermediates in a number of pharmacological and enzymatic   transformations.  
              Professor Tanko's educational activities involve the   education and training
              of postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate   students.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
