Title       : REU Site: Summer Research Experiences in Materials and Manufacturing Engineering
               for Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9732046

Award Number: 9732046
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Theresa Maldonado                       
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397848             (Estimated)
Investigator: Omar S. Es-Said oessaid@lmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Callinan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rafiqul I. Noorani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Marymount Univ
	      One LMU Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  90045    213/642-2700

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 7915,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9732046  PI:  Es-Said  University: Loyola Marymount University   
              ABSTRACT      The purpose of establishing a REU Site at Loyola Marymount
              University is to involve in research undergraduate students who might not
              otherwise have that opportunity.  Community college students from Los Angeles
              will constitute the target group.  A further intention is to make every effort
              to identify and select students from groups which are traditionally
              underrepresented in the engineering profession.  The research component will
              focus on investigating the effect of varying the cold rolling modes on the
              crystallographic texture and mechanical properties of aluminum-lithium alloys
              and rhenium metal, factors affecting warpage profiles of 7050 aluminum alloy,
              developing a personal computer-based approach to computer-aided design and
              manufacturing and determining shrink compensation factors for Rapid Prototyping
              machines.    * Twenty-four students will be organized into four teams during
              three consecutive summers for a ten-week session each year.  Using the
              Materials and Manufacturing Engineering Laboratories, each team will conduct
              extensive research using state-of-the-art equipment.    * The research
              equipment includes an NSF-funded x-ray diffractometer with a pole figure
              attachment, a rolling mill, metal cutting equipment, microhardness machinery,
              density apparatus, two universal mechanical testing machines, furnaces, two
              light-optical microscopes, rapid prototyping and computer-aided manufacturing
              laboratories that will enable students to engage in higher level research.    *
              The faculty and project staff will train students in the safe use of the
              research equipment in the University's state-of-the-art Materials and
              Manufacturing Research Laboratories.    * Local industrial laboratories have
              agreed to invite students to tour their research facilities.    * The ethics of
              Materials/N4anufacturing Research practices and procedures for professional
              engineers will be the focus of weekly workshops for studen ts.    The faculty
              at LMU have extensive experience in engaging undergraduate students in research
              with significant numbers of students continuing to graduate studies.  Joint
              faculty student research often results in presentations for national and
              international scholarly conferences and publications in scholarly journals.
