Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Natural History of a West Indian
               Herpetofauna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a9732257

Award Number: 9732257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146414             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Powell powellr@mail.avila.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen J. Censky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Parmerlee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Avila College
	      11901 Wornall Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641451698    816/501-3730

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 9900000     DATA NOT AVAILABLE                    
Program Ref : 5926,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                            Avila College proposes a series of exciting summer programs
              annually  providing nine undergraduates with research experiences in tropical 
              studies. Participants will learn and develop skills by interacting with 
              faculty as they work on projects dealing with herpetological communities on 
              Hispaniola. To foster student development, a 3-phase program is planned: 
              orientation -- introducing students to research methodology and ecological 
              studies in the West Indies; apprenticeship- developing skills; and  individual
              research -- resulting in publication-quality reports. Seminars  on research and
              graduate studies are included to facilitate applications of  acquired knowledge
              and skills to participants' future academic pursuits.  Presentations will be
              made by scientists in both the United States and  Dominican Republic.
              Evaluation will be by participants, their academic  advisors, and one outside
              faculty member not involved directly with the  program.    This program is
              designed to induce participants to favorably consider  graduate studies and to
              increase the likelihood of their choosing careers  in science. The faculty will
              "coach" students, instilling a vision of  research by explaining the rules and
              delivering a feeling of the excitement  that comes with addressing
              hypothesis-driven questions with conceptual  orientations.    A focus on frog
              and lizard communities provides opportunities to apply  theories and methods
              widely used in ecological research while working with  organisms that are
              abundant, accessible, and remarkably well and visibly  adapted to their
              environment. Investigations will address aspects of niche  dimensions and/or
              conservation issues. Students may choose projects within  these topics or
              develop investigations of their own, including, but not  limited to,
              physiological or ethological studies of selected taxa.
