Title       : Automated Deduction and Computational Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9732041

Award Number: 9732041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phokion G. Kolaitis kolaitis@cse.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates several different computational aspects  of equational
              matching and unification with emphasis on the  equational theory AC of
              commutative semigroups and its  extensions.  The investigation is carried out
              in a three-pronged  plan.  First, a study of counting problems in equational 
              unification will attempt to identify the exact complexity of  computing the
              number of minimal complete unifiers modulo an  equational theory.  This
              counting problem reflects more  accurately the computational difficulties of
              equational  unification than the corresponding decision problem does; 
              moreover, it brings out certain differences between equational  matching and
              unification that are masked, when only decision  problems are considered.  In
              the second part of the  Investigation will be a systematic investigation of
              efficient  listing algorithms in equational unification; these algorithms 
              should enumerate all minimal complete unifiers of two given  terms, but should
              also satisfy certain desirable performance  guarantees, such as a reasonably
              bounded delay in listing any two  consecutive unifiers.  Progress in the area
              may lead to the  discovery of novel unification algorithms and to the
              development  of a rigorous methodology for comparing such algorithms.  Finally,
              there will be an experimental investigation of  associative-commutative
              matching problems; the main aim is to  identify hard random instances of such
              problems and possibly to  unveil threshold or phase-transition phenomena in
              associative-  commutative matching.  This investigation may also produce new 
              benchmarks for the experimental evaluation of matching and  unification
              algorithms.
