Title       : REG: Surface Analytical Instrumentation for Research on Guest-Host Association
               Between Self-Assembled Monolayers andOrganic Adsorbates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1998       
File        : a9732691

Award Number: 9732691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65161              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vinay K. Gupta vgupta@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9732691  Vinay Gupta/U. of Ill.    Funds are sought for the
              purchase of surface analytical instrumentation for research on guest-host
              association between self-assembled surfaces and organic adsorbates.  The
              research proposed aims to address fundamental questions regarding the function
              of receptor molecules immobilized at solid surfaces, and to understand how the
              molecular organization of receptor layers supported on solid substrates can be
              manipulated to enhance guest-host interaction with organic adsorbates?  Towards
              this goal, macrocyclic organosulfide molecules containing a receptor cavity
              will be synthesized for immobilization within self-assembled monolayers (SAMs).
               Guest-host association will be investigated in solution, and two types of
              selective interactions will be the focus of the proposed research:  one wherein
              the inclusion of apolar adsorbates is driven by steric complementarity with the
              receptor cavity; and another wherein polar interactions such as hydrogen
              bonding aide steric matching.  Using mixed SAMs formed by coadsorption of the
              macrocyclic receptor molecules and n-alkanethiols, the microscopic structure of
              the immobilized receptor layers will be manipulated.  Role of surface density
              of receptor molecules and steric barriers in accessing the receptor cavity will
              be explored.  To investigate the influence of molecular flexibility, the length
              and rigidity of alkyl chains that tether receptor molecules to solid surfaces
              will be varied.  For characterization of the structural changes within the SAMs
              when in contact with solutions, a commercial Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
              spectrophotometer will be modified to perform polarization-modulation
              reflection-adsorption spectroscopy  (PM-FTIRRAS).  To monitor the rate and the
              magnitude of  guest-host complex formation, an apparatus to perform surface 
              plasmon resonance (SPR) spectroscopy will be designed and set-up.  Tangible
              outcomes of the research proposed are design principles for supramolecular
              assemblies with ef fective chemical and biosensing functions.  ***
