Title       : Conference: New Directions in Theoretical Public Economics, June 1998,
               Tuscaloosa, Alabama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9732060

Award Number: 9732060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank H. Page fpage@cba.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Project Abstract  This award supports a conference, New Directions in
              Theoretical Public Finance, held at the University of Alabama in Spring, 1998. 
              The aim of the conference is to bring together leading researchers in emerging
              areas of theoretical public economics to address via research presentations and
              discussions the new problems in public economics identified below.  Many of the
              new paradigms and insights in public economics are the result of applications
              of modern game theory (e.g., evolutionary games) and general equilibrium
              methods to problems in public economics.  This conference furthers the trend
              toward the application of modern methods to public economics by bringing
              together more experienced researchers in public economics with younger game
              theorist and mathematical economists interested in emerging problems in public
              economics.  Competitive markets have proved to be effective institutions for
              allocating scarce resources in complex societies. Globally, market-based
              economies have flourished, while economies based on other forms of economic
              organization have not. In an economy based on free markets and private
              property, what role should government play in economic activity? The
              traditional view holds that government has two main functions: (i) to rectify
              market failures and ensure that markets are well-functioning (via, for example,
              regulation and maintaining a system of courts and laws protecting private
              property and ensuring enforcement of contracts); and (ii) to provide public
              goods, such as national defense, education, roads (via taxation and
              expenditure). That branch of economics which focuses on government and its role
              in the economy activity is called public economics.  With the emergence of a
              global economy, the traditional roles played by national governments in
              economic activity (i.e., preventing and tending to market failures and
              providing public goods) have become more problematic, and the policy issues
              related to these traditional governmental activities have become more subtle
              and complex. Important global environmental issues of public economics have
              recently become prominent (e.g., Montreal, Rio de Janeiro, and later this year
              Kyoto) and some of those issues, often highly controversial, already are (and
              must be) dealt with at the global level. Simultaneously with the movement
              toward a global economy, there has been in the US a gradual realization that
              big government brings with it many problems which may interfere with the
              efficient functioning of markets as well as with the development and
              implementation of effective government policies. In the US Economy the
              increasing demand for government programs and services brought by an expanding
              and aging population together with the already high level of government
              indebtedness have led economist to begin rethinking how traditional
              governmental activities can best be carried out - and more importantly, to
              question whether or not some traditionally governmental activities should be
              left to the market. To what extent can the provision of public goods be
              decentralized via market-like institutions? Can the financing, design and
              implementation of programs to support health, education, welfare, and the
              environment be efficiently delegated to smaller jurisdictions such as state and
              local governments? In what areas and under what circumstances do national
              governments have a comparative advantage in implementing such programs? What
              impact will the movement toward decentralization and small government have upon
              a market economy. How can one design an efficient, budget-balancing fiscal
              system that safeguards legitimate public interests? What impact would such a
              fiscal system have on overall economic activity? These are some of the pressing
              issues in public economics.  New theoretical paradigms which will provide a
              deeper understanding of the interactions of governments and economies have
              begun to emerge in public economics. Ultimately these paradigms will lead to
              new scientific approaches to complex policy questions in public economics, some
              of which were touched on above.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
