Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Advanced Engineered Wood Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9732218

Award Number: 9732218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Theresa Maldonado                       
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148401             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric N. Landis landis@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Habib J. Dagher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9732218  PI:   Landis  University: U of Maine      ABSTRACT    
              The aim of this program is interdisciplinary research experience for
              undergraduate science and engineering students.  The focal point is the
              development of the next generation of engineered wood composites for
              construction applications.  The disciplines involved include structural
              engineering, mechanics, composite materials, and wood science.  The educational
              paradigm will be one of combining hands-on laboratory work with training in
              fundamental science and engineering principles.  Previous experience with REU
              sites indicates that many students become interested in graduate research when
              they are able to see the fruits of their work used in some application.  Thus
              the basis of this REU site is to provide students with projects and a research
              environment where they may, with reasonable diligence, complete a small
              research project that is a clearly defined piece of the greater research and
              development program.  Ten students will work at U Maine for a ten-week period
              during the summer.  Prior to arrival on site, the advisors will contact their
              students to discuss the nature of their projects and to provide written
              background material.  During the summer, each student will be involved in four
              types of activities: their own individual project, work with others in their
              sub discipline, weekly group seminars, and group field trips.  Faculty will
              work closely with their students, especially during the early part of the
              summer.  Weekly seminars will include discussions of research techniques,
              ethics, graduate schools, as well as three presentations made by the students. 
              Group field trips include trips to major field test sites, government agencies,
              industries, and social events.  Follow-through after the students leave the
              site will consist of advisors working with their students on a technical paper
              based on the research and on applying to graduate school.
