Title       : Engineering Sciences for Modeling and Simulation-Based Life-Cycle Engineering:
               An Engineering Design Framework Integrating Robust Optimization and Structured
               Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9732173

Award Number: 9732173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chun-Hung Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Donohue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                    This grant provides initiation funding for research on engineering design
              decision making under conditions of risk and uncertainty.  Specifically, the
              research will focus on design assessment and optimization methodologies for
              design decision-making processes in the face of design preferences,
              environmental uncertainty, risk, and incomplete data.  The proposed methods
              will integrate the notion of design theory, robust optimization, ordinal
              optimization, and a control-theoretic approach to simulation experiments.  As
              an initial attempt toward the research endeavors, the PIs will examine critical
              issues in design performance and design utility, establish formal
              characterization of design uncertainty and risk, and develop design
              optimization modules.  With rapidly increasing computational capability,
              simulation-based approaches have become feasible for large-scale complex
              systems.  The current set of solution methodologies will be expanded to include
              a hybrid procedure that combines the benefits of traditional optimization
              routines with the flexibility of computer simulation.  An
              optimal-simulation-budget-allocation algorithm will be developed, which can
              dynamically determine the best simulation lengths for different scenarios under
              conditions of uncertainty/risk and thus significantly reduce the total
              computational cost.  The theoretic results will be further strengthened through
              a detailed study of design cases in both mechanical component design and
              large-scale system design.      If successful, the framework will provide a
              theoretic foundation for engineering design, which will allow further
              development in design valuation, performance assessment, and design
              optimization.  The assessment and optimization methodologies will provide
              design engineers with critical tools that capture key design factors, analyze
              the effects of uncertainty, and optimize the design over its life cycle. The
              new simulation methodologies will offer an evaluative, confidence-seeking
              mechanism for design evaluation, which will also contribute to the
              computational tools and methodologies available for general simulation
              problems.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
