Title       : Balloon-Borne Measurements of Vertical Profiles of Aerosols, Condensation
               Nuclei, and CloudCondensation Nuclei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9732547

Award Number: 9732547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $554560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Deshler deshler@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on continuing and extending vertical aerosol profile
              measurements at Laramie, Wyoming (41?N, 105?W). The stratospheric measurements
              are important to assess the level at which stratospheric aerosol concentrations
              are maintained during volcanically quiescent, or background, periods, and thus
              to understand if the stratospheric aerosol level has been perturbed by
              anthropogenic (or natural) influences over the past 30 years. In particular,
              the impact of increasing air traffic is a concern. Direct effects of air
              traffic on aerosol concentration will be studied by looking for intersections
              of the balloon-borne measurements with the wakes of air traffic in the region.
              Characterizing the direct effects of tropospheric aerosol and the indirect
              effects of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) in global climate models is a large
              source of uncertainty in our understanding of the global heat balance, which
              can be reduced through more refined measurements of tropospheric aerosol and
              CCN.
The continuing measurements will consist of condensation nuclei (CN) and
              optically detectable aerosol (with a radius between 0.15 and 2.0 um), from the
              surface to 30 km, and CCN from the surface to about 13 km. The balloon flight
              frequency will be about once per month as it has been in the past. In addition
              to measurements in Laramie, yearly measurements from Lauder, New Zealand (45?S)
              will be continued. Two CCN counters and a new multi-angle aerosol instrument
              will be deployed, providing vertical profiles of CCN spectra for the first
              time. The second CCN counter will be built under this project. The two CCN
              instruments will allow CCN measurements at two supersaturations, thus providing
              CCN spectra. The multi-angle aerosol instrument, which is being developed under
              other support, will be used in studies of the index of refraction of
              tropospheric aerosol particles. To supplement these measurements,
              collaborations with two other investigators are planned. Dr. Darin Toohey,
              University of California at Irvine, will make approximately seasonal profile
              measurements of ClO/BrO from Laramie in conjunction with these aerosol
              measurements, in order to study mid latitude heterogeneous processing of
              ClO/BrO. An Italian colleague plans to participate with a balloon-borne laser
              scatterometer to investigate the index of refraction of tropospheric
              particles.

