Title       : Unsaturated, Multifunctional Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9732729

Award Number: 9732729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Caulton caulton@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program provides continued support to Dr. Kenneth G. Caulton of the   Chemistry
              Department, Indiana University, for synthesis and reaction   studies of
              unsaturated organometallic compounds.  Theoretical work will   be carried out
              in collaboration with Dr. Odile Eisenstein of the   Universite de Montpellier,
              France.  The goal of the research is to   determine reactivity patterns for
              compounds having several different   functional ligands attached to the same
              metal atom.   The compounds   synthesized will contain a mixture of ligands
              such as hydride, halide,   alkyl, and carbene.  Relative reactivity of various
              ligands will be   determined directly and complex reactions such as alkyl
              migration and   intramolecular reduction elimination in the same molecule will
              be   monitored.  Multifunctional metal complexes may also deliver more than  
              one functional group to another molecule.  The target compounds will be  
              selected because of their ability to undergo nucleophilic or oxidation  
              reactions at low temperature.  Studying reactivity under these conditions  
              improves the possibility of identifying primary reaction products and  
              maximizes the selectivity of reactions.  Thermodynamic parameters will be  
              determined.  Specific reactions to be investigated include reductive  
              elimination of benzene from osmium carbonyls, removal of halide from  
              16-electron species to form 14-electron compounds, and reaction of  
              trifluoromethyl ligands to form difluoromethyl ligands.  Unusual reactions of a
              wide range of organometallic compounds will be   studied, including C-H and C-F
              bond activation and reactivity of   coordinatively unsaturated compounds. 
              Reactions of this kind are   important to obtaining a basic understanding the
              behavior of homogeneous   catalysts.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
