Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Biomedical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9732245

Award Number: 9732245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Solomon R. Eisenberg sre@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert F. Voigt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 7915,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9732245  PI:  Eisenberg  University: Boston U      ABSTRACT    The
              proposed REU Site program will provide mentored research experiences for twelve
              undergraduate interns within the context of ongoing research programs in the
              Department of Biomedical Engineering at Boston University.  Undergraduate
              students will be recruited nationally for participation in the REU program. 
              The REU interns will work on their individual projects as members of research
              teams in the laboratories of the participating investigators.  The research
              projects span a wide range of research activities representative of Biomedical
              Engineering and include both modeling/simulation and experimental work.  All
              interns will be exposed to the entire spectrum of research activities included
              in this proposal through joint weekly meetings in which the interns discuss
              their work with each other.  These sessions will also be used to provide a
              forum for presentations and group discussions about a variety of topics
              intended to supplement the research experiences and encourage the interns to
              pursue graduate training in Biomedical Engineering.  Additional group sessions
              will be devoted to ethical issues in science and engineering in general, and
              biomedical engineering in particular.  An orientation at the beginning of the
              program will introduce the interns to the undergraduate research experiences
              and help familiarize the participants with the process of initiating
              independent inquiry in which there are a number of degrees of freedom in the
              methods chosen and the outcomes obtained.  Oral and written technical
              communication skills will also be introduced.  The goal of the REU Site program
              in Biomedical Engineering is to create an environment and culture to encourage
              the undergraduate participants to pursue research careers in Biomedical
              Engineering by exposing them to the intellectual challenge and excitement of
              independent inquiry.
