Title       : CAREER: Chiral Molecules, Structures and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  2000    
File        : a9732963

Award Number: 9732963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall D. Kamien kamien@dept.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9732963  Kamien  This is a CAREER award to conduct theoretical research and  to
              develop associated education activities.  In particular,  the principal
              investigator will study chiral molecular  systems, both in the dilute limit by
              studying single chiral  polymers, such as DNA, as well as in the semi-dilute
              limit  where they form chiral liquid crystals.  In the dilute limit  a
              generalization of the exact mapping between self-avoiding  random walks and the
              n-component Ising model, as n  approaches zero, can be used to study chiral
              random walks.  Just as the theory of a single self-avoiding walk can be  used
              to study a semi-dilute melt of polymers, this extension  can be used to study a
              semi-dilute melt of topologically  linked polymers.  The plan is to pursue this
              in connection  with a number of experiments and to augment analytical  theory
              with comparison to numerics.    In the more concentrated regime, chiral
              polymers can form  liquid crystalline phases such as the polymer cholesteric 
              phase and the columnar hexagonal phase.  Often, the chiral  interactions are
              frustrated by the liquid crystalline  packing of the molecules.  Recent
              experiments on DNA appear  to find a frustrated phase in which chirality is
              absent  although theory suggests there is no frustration.  An  extensive
              analysis of the effect of the crystalline or  liquid-crystalline order on the
              chiral interaction will be  pursued as a possible explanation of the weaker
              than  expected chirality in the observed phase.    Integrated with the research
              program, a course will be  developed aimed at first-year students on the
              subject of  chiral symmetry in nature.  Through both historic and  scientific
              exposition the instructor will describe chirality  as a way of introducing the
              idea of symmetry.  Since  chirality is a central notion in much of science and 
              engineering, the course will thread through history touching  on the use and
              discovery of chirality in different contexts.  This discourse will include
              Pasteur's discovery of  chirality,  the structure of proteins and DNA as well
              as the  discovery of parity violation in elementary particle  physics. 
              Lectures will be supplemented with simple  demonstrations, such as rotation of
              the polarization of  light in corn syrup and quartz.  Finally, a discussion of 
              left-right asymmetry in the Universe, i.e., baryon  asymmetry, will be
              presented.  %%%  This is a CAREER award which integrates research and 
              education.  In this particular case, theoretical research  will be conducted on
              the chiral molecular systems.  Chirality is the property of systems in nature
              which  distinguishes between left and right symmetry.  Chiral  polymers, such
              as DNA, will be studied as well as more  concentrated solutions which form
              chiral liquid crystal  phases.    Integrated with the research program, a
              course will be  developed aimed at first-year students on the subject of 
              chiral symmetry in nature.  Through both historic and  scientific exposition
              the instructor will describe chirality  as a way of introducing the idea of
              symmetry.  Since  chirality is a central notion in much of science and 
              engineering, the course will thread through history touching  on the use and
              discovery of chirality in different contexts.  This discourse will include
              Pasteur's discovery of  chirality, the structure of proteins and DNA as well as
              the  discovery of parity violation in elementary particle  physics.  Lectures
              will be supplemented with simple  demonstrations, such as rotation of the
              polarization of  light in corn syrup and quartz.  Finally, a discussion of 
              left-right asymmetry in the Universe, i.e., baryon  asymmetry, will be
              presented.  ***
