Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry at the University of
               Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9732161

Award Number: 9732161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stevens                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph S. Duran duran@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin T. Vala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brij M. Moudgil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen A. Cerqua-Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1986      UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMS IN CHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5918,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Division, the Division of International  
              Programs, and the Directorate of Engineering provides support for a   Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in the Chemistry   Department,
              University of Florida, directed by Dr. Randolph S. Duran.  A   total of ten
              students will participate over the next three years in an   summer research
              program with an international dimension.  The program   will focus on
              recruiting American students who have successfully   completed an existing REU
              program at one of three Florida sites.  These   participants will spend the
              summer working on a research problem in   France at well-known groups in either
              a university, `Grande Ecole,` or   CNRS Laboratory.  Through separate French
              funding an equivalent number of   French undergraduate students will be sent
              into the three Florida REU   sites, which will share program elements. 
              Participants will be exposed   to research topics in a number of important
              research areas in chemistry,   physics, biosciences, and engineering.  One
              French and one American   exchange scientist will act as a local coordinator
              during the beginning   of each summer, providing extra support from the home
              country.  A senior   scientist from the home country will also advise
              participants how to best   profit from interactions with their host research
              group.  Students will   be required to prepare a written research report that
              will be evaluated   by their faculty advisor.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
