Title       : A Practical Approach to Nonlinear Robust Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a9732917

Award Number: 9732917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155212             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randal W. Beard beard@ee.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9732917
Beard
Linear H-infinity  control is a technique for designing control
              laws that are robust with respect to bounded variations in system parameters
              and bounded external disturbances.  In recent years, linear H-infinity
              techniques have been extended to nonlinear system.  The nonlinear H-infinity
              control problem is solved by two first order nonlinear partial differential
              equations called Hamilton-Jacobi-Isaacs equations.  These equations are
              extremely difficult to solve except in very special cases and they are
              difficult to approximate by standard techniques except for low order systems. 
              The inability to solve these equations has lead to a failure to realize the
              potential of nonlinear H-infinity control techniques.
This proposal outlines a
              plan to investigate innovative and computationally practical techniques for
              approximating closed-loop nonlinear H-infinity optimal control laws.  The
              approach is to approximate the Hamilton-Jacobi-Isaacs equation in a two step
              procedure.  First, an iteration in policy space is used to reduce the nonlinear
              partial differential equation to an infinite sequence of linear partial
              differential equations.  The second step uses the Galerkin spectral method to
              approximate each linear partial differential equation.  The result of this
              process is a feedback control law, with a well defined region of attraction,
              that converges to the nonlinear H-infinity solution as the order of
              approximation increases.  The two step process outlined above suffers from
              Bellman's "curse of dimensionality," i.e., the required computations and memory
              increase exponentially with the order of the system.  This "curse of
              dimensionality" is overcome by exploiting the structure in the problem for a
              fairly general class of nonlinear systems.
The proposed research will advance
              the state of the art by supplying a practical method for approximating
              nonlinear H-infinity control laws.  This result will be helpful to researchers
              working in the area, allowing them to test their ideas on real world problems,
              and to practicing engineers who wish to implement the latest developments in
              control theory research.  The proposed research also advances the state of
              knowledge by illustrating how to mitigate the "curse of dimensionality" by
              exploiting the structure of optimal control for a certain class of nonlinear
              systems.  
***  

