Title       : Studies of Localized Impurities in Quantum Dots using Synchrotron Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9732660

Award Number: 9732660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi-Han Kao yhk@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9732660  Kao    This University/Industry collaborative GOALI project focuses
              on  preparation and characterization of doped quantum dots to  identify and
              gain understanding of mechanisms responsible for  their unusual properties. New
              types of doped quantum dots will be  designed, prepared, and characterized
              using synchrotron radiation  at the National Synchrotron Light Source at
              Brookhaven National  Laboratory. Various doped quantum dots, especially
              rare-earth  doped oxides, as well as thin films and nano-channel grids, will 
              be prepared and studied. Synchrotron radiation experiments will  include x-ray
              excited luminescence (XEL), extended x-ray  absorption fine structure (EXAFS),
              response time of doped quantum  dots to x-ray pulses, geometrical resonance,
              and studies of  coherent light emission in nanowires and nanodots. The XEL and 
              EXAFS measurements are expected to be particularly useful for  probing the
              local environment surrounding impurity atoms and for  understanding
              impurity-host interactions. The project is co-  supported by the DMR Electronic
              Materials Program and the MPS  OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities). 
              %%%  Basic research issues in a topical area of materials science  having
              strong technological relevance are addressed by this  project. The basic
              knowledge and understanding gained from the  research is expected to contribute
              to improving the performance  of advanced materials by providing a fundamental
              understanding  and a basis for designing and producing improved nanostructures.
               An important feature of the program is the integration of  research and
              education by providing an important educational  opportunity through the GOALI
              aspect of the project for students  to experience both academic and industrial
              research approaches  and environments.  ***
