Title       : Diffusion Studies and Defect Spectroscopy with Isotopically Controlled
               Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9732707

Award Number: 9732707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene E. Haller eehaller@lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                           9732707  Haller    This condensed matter physics project uses
              separated isotopes to  investigate self-diffusion under equilibrium and
              non-equilibrium  conditions. In addition, local vibrational mode spectroscopy
              will be  used to investigate low atomic mass impurities. The self-diffusion 
              constants of (a) gallium in aluminum-gallium-arsenic heterostructures,  (b)
              silicon in silicon epilayers, and (c) gallium and antimony in  gallium
              antimonide heterostructures will be derived from secondary ion  mass
              spectroscopy profiles. The temperature, alloy composition and  doping
              dependencies of the diffusion constants will be investigated.  These data are
              critical for the basic understanding of fundamental mass  transport in solids
              and for development of a comprehensive model of  diffusion in semiconductors.
              Future device processing models are  expected to profit directly from these
              quantitative results. The  vibrational mode spectroscopy experiments are
              designed to provide  information about defect structures, lattice dynamics and
              atomic  arrangements at defect sites in semiconductors. The work provides a 
              valuable arena for training graduate students in both advanced  technology and
              fundamental physics.  %%%  This condensed matter physics project uses separated
              isotopes to  investigate self-diffusion under equilibrium and non-equilibrium 
              conditions. In addition, local vibrational mode spectroscopy will be  used to
              investigate low atomic mass impurities. The self-diffusion  constants of (1)
              gallium in aluminum-gallium-arsenic heterostructures,  (2) silicon in silicon
              epilayers, and (3) gallium and antimony in  gallium antimonide heterostructures
              will be derived from secondary ion  mass spectroscopy profiles. The
              temperature, alloy composition and  doping dependencies of the diffusion
              constants will be investigated.  These data are critical for the basic
              understanding of fundamental mass  transport in solids and for development of a
              comprehensive model of  diffusion in semiconductors. Future  device processing
              models are  expected to profit directly from these quantitative results. The 
              vibrational mode spectroscopy experiments are designed to provide  information
              about defect structures, lattice dynamics and atomic  arrangements at defect
              sites in semiconductors. The work provides a  valuable arena for training
              graduate students in both advanced  technology and fundamental physics.  ***
