Title       : Numerical Linear Algebra and Eigenvalue Computations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1998       
File        : a9732671

Award Number: 9732671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph Byers byers@math.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate numerical algorithms for solving  moderate to
              large scale eigenvalue and generalized eigenvalue  problems.  A variant QR
              algorithm is being developed for solving  the algebraic eigenvalue problem. 
              The new algorithm avoids the  phenomenon of shift blurring that dramatically
              slows the rate of  convergence of the conventional multi-shift QR algorithm. 
              The  new approach shows promise of being able to use nearly any number  of
              simultaneous shifts without substantial adverse affect on the  converge rate. 
              It should achieve "BLAS-3 71 speeds on  computers with advanced architectures
              including hierarchical  cache storage and instruction pipelining.  In addition,
              the  variant algorithm will use an early deflation procedure that  promises to
              substantially reduce the number of Hessenberg QR  steps needed.    A
              generalized algebra of relations is being used to analyze and  modify
              algorithms for moderately large scale eigenvalue problems.  These include the
              inverse free spectral divide and conquer  algorithm and other generalizations
              of the matrix sign function.    The location/verification problem for the large
              scale eigenvalue  problem will also be attacked.  The initial approach will use
              a  rational function approximation to the trace of a spectral  projection in
              order to count eigenvalues inside a target region.  The computational work
              required by this approach is expected not  to be closely related to the number
              of eigenvalues in the region.  This may make it attractive for locating
              eigenvalue clusters.  In  the verification setting, many eigenvalues in  the
              target region have already been located by some other  numerical method, e.g.,
              a Krylov subspace method.  In this case,  the approximate trace of the spectral
              projector determines  whether there are unlocated eigenvalues in the target
              region.
