Title       : Acquisition of Specialized Instrumentation for Research & Development of
               Materials, Devices, and Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1999   
File        : a9732697

Award Number: 9732697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Durgamadhab Misra dmisra@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Poate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth S. Sohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dentcho V. Ivanov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marek Sosnowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9732697  Misra    It is proposed by New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT)
              under the National Science Foundation Research Equipment program to acquire an
              BP 4156A Precision Semiconductor Parameter Analyzer and a Cascade Microtech
              (Summit 10552) low noise probe station.  The HP 4156A with ultra-low leakage
              SMUs can measure up to 1fA and I(V, automatically extract process parameters,
              perform AC/DC device characterization.  The low noise probe station will have
              femtoguard noise level with a micro-chamber that will accommodate wafers up to
              6-inch diameter.  The instrumentation will support a unified research effort
              across many undergraduate and graduate areas including physics, electrical
              engineering, materials science, environmental engineering and manufacturing.  A
              strong body of research is currently in place at NJIT to support this
              instrumentation, with faculty expertise covering the range from wafer level
              testing, characterization of thin films and SOI, to individual device design,
              fabrication and testing, ultimately to the development of integrated systems
              for applications in manufacturing and industry.  Research areas include new
              device design, plasma charging damage to thin gate oxides, large molecular ion
              implantation to silicon, tunneling through thin dielectrics, optical waveguides
              on silicon, Hall effect devices etc.  This body of research is directly
              affiliated with NJIT's one-of-a-kind to a university, class 10, 6-inch capable
              cleanroom for silicon-based microprocessing that provides access to advanced
              state-of-the-art process methods and equipment to perform complex design,
              modeling, simulation, process characterization and prototype development, and
              generates synergy between industry and NJIT students, faculty and staff,
              leading to joint research opportunities and efficient technology transfer.  NSF
              funding will help the undergraduate and graduate students to have hands on
              experience of the advanced characterization systems.  Since NJIT has a
              significant presence of minority and w omen (-40% and -19% respectively)
              students it is expected that some of these students will have the opportunity
              to work on the state-of-the-art characterization system.    The proposed
              instrumentation provides a unifying theme combining individual research and
              problems of emerging importance in the light of device scaling.  Novel
              electronic, magnetic and optical devices can be designed and evaluated using
              the proposed sensitive measurement system.  ***
