Title       : Theory of Chemical Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9732758

Award Number: 9732758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $621000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Miller miller@neon.cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              William Miller, University of California Berkeley, is supported by a   grant
              from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to   continue his
              research on theoretical gas-phase chemical dynamics.  He   will develop
              rigorous quantum methods for reaction rate constant   calculations and
              semiclassical methods for simulations of complex   dynamical processes.  The
              quantum methodology will employ direct   techniques that result in rate
              constants without all of the   state-to-state details.  Miller also will
              develop the semiclassical   initial-value-representation method as a
              potentially universal treatment   of molecular dynamics, including quantum
              effects, tunneling, and   electronically non-adiabatic effects.  Novel
              applications of these new   methods will also be performed, e.g., resonance
              tunneling in the   vinylidene/acetylene rearrangement.  The goal of this
              research is to develop the theoretical concepts and   methodologies that can
              provide a quantitative description of chemical   dynamics, a kind of ab initio
              chemical dynamics akin to the ab initio   quantum chemistry of electronic
              structure theory.   This research is   directed at the most fundamental level
              of chemistry, i.e., the chemical   reaction taking place in the gas phase
              between two colliding molecules.   This very basic, yet highly complex, process
              is the simplest chemical   reaction to which theory can be rigorously applied,
              and forms the basis   for understanding all other more complex chemical
              processes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
