Title       : Chaotic Dynamics, Attractors and Repellers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1998       
File        : a9732728

Award Number: 9732728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66398              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolai Chernov chernov@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Chernov
     
The project is devoted to mathematical problems in
              equilibrium and 
nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, focusing on the ergodic
              and 
statistical properties of deterministic chaotic dynamical systems.
              
Specific models include Lorentz gases in external fields, viscous 
gases of
              hard balls, open Hamiltonian systems with escape holes. We 
are going to study
              rigorously several laws of physics (including 
Ohm's law, Green-Kubo formula
              and Einstein relation) for 
multiparticle Lorentz gases in external fields
              with discrete and 
continuous times. We expect to prove exponential decay of
              
correlations, Bernoulli property and various probabilistic limit 
theorems.
              The ergodic properties and entropy of hard ball gases will 
also be studied.
              Another direction of research is to investigate 
conditionally invariant
              measures, escape-rate formalism, and fractal 
structure of chaotic repellers
              in open systems (with escape holes). 
     
The mathematical theory  of chaos
              and  dynamical systems has grown 
dramatically over the past 40 years. It
              started with foundations of 
statistical physics created by Boltzmann and
              Maxwell. It has covered 
basic biological models (dynamics of population),
              various problems 
in engineering, earthquake prediction, traffic control,
              neural 
networks for computer data processing, optimization of manufacturing
              
and management tasks, and has countless other applications where 
long-time
              behavior of complex systems is in question. Universal 
features of chaos
              exhibited by various processes in nature and 
society make it possible to
              describe and predict such phenomena 
by the means of one theory. In
              particular, the concepts of 
attractors and repellers (as structures or
              patterns determining 
long-time evolution of complex systems) are basic
              categories in 
the theory of chaos. Mathematical theory of chaotic attractors
              
and repellers is still relatively young and quite different from 
the old,
              classical mathematics. 

