Title       : Applications of Morse Theory and Catastrophe Theory to Computer Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9732379

Award Number: 9732379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220541             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Hart   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Morse theory and catastrophe theory provide powerful models of  the neighborhood
              of a critical point of a real function. Under  suitable conditions these models
              are in fact capable of  discerning the topological type of the domain of the
              function.  This project extends software that finds and tracks critical  points
              to guarantee the topological type of an implicit surface  polygonization, and
              applies it to other areas of computer  graphics. These techniques can solve a
              variety of currently  open problems of computer graphics.    The most immediate
              application is a topologically-correct  implicit curve parameterization. The
              techniques can aid in the  visualization of complicated manifold immersions by
              providing the  ability to switch between surface renderings and 2-D slices on 
              and between Morse critical values of a height function. The  techniques can
              maintain the topological type of a shape during  transformation, such that for
              example the intermediate shapes in  the transformation of a donut into a coffee
              cup all consist of a  single component with one hole. Modeling the neighborhood
              of a  critical point should also aid in maintaining a consistent  texture
              mapping across a change of genus.  Incorporating critical  points in a data
              compression algorithm yields a data  compression that avoids errors that alter
              the topological type of  the reconstructed data. Similar techniques can insure
              that the  simplification of complex geometry for faster display does not 
              sacrifice the qualitative nature of its topological type.  Finally, the
              application of catastrophe theory to global  illumination will yield a faster
              algorithm for determining  regions of caustic reflection.
