Title       : Spectroscopy of Diatomic Molecules at Long Range
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9732467

Award Number: 9732467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438948             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Stwalley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip L. Gould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry and the Atomic, Molecular and Optical 
              Physics Programs support William C. Stwalley of the Physics Department at  the
              University of Connecticut in his continuing spectroscopic studies of  diatomic
              molecules at long range.  In this effort, Prof. Stwalley will  collaborate with
              Prof. Phillip L. Gould, an expert in collisions of  ultracold atoms.  They will
              investigate the high-resolution  photoassociative spectroscopy of ultracold
              alkali atoms using all optical  multiple resonance spectroscopies.  Emphasis
              will be on highly excited  states of alkali metal diatomics (e.g., potassium or
              cesium dimers), but  Stwalley and Gould will also attempt to observe
              photoassociation of  atom-molecules such as Cs-H2.   Molecules at long range
              are molecules in which the atoms are separated by   very large distances, yet
              attractive forces are still strong enough to  maintain a `molecular` nature. 
              Such molecules are of great current   interest,  partly because new effects
              show up which will extend our   knowledge of molecular potential curves, partly
              because of their   relevance to the work in laser cooling and trapping and
              Bose-Einstein   condensation.  The studies that will be carried out in this new
                collaborative effort will greatly increase our understanding of chemical  
              bonding by revealing the subtle forces that act to attract and `congeal`  
              atoms separated by large internuclear distances.  Successful completion   of
              these studies will furnish highly detailed information on interatomic   forces
              which, in turn, are of fundamental importance to our understanding   of atomic
              collisions and the assembly of atoms into higher states of   aggregation
              ranging from molecules, to clusters, and on to condensed   phases.
