Title       : CAREER: Near-Optimum Low-Complexity Soft Decision Decoding of Linear Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a9732959

Award Number: 9732959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc P. C. Fossorier marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Error control coding has become an integral part of almost every  digital
              communication system . The objective of this proposal is  to investigate
              several important problems in coding and to  establish teaching plans to
              develop competent engineers and  scientists for the fast changing area of
              digital communications.    The proposed research includes three inter-related
              areas: (1)  soft-decision decoding of linear codes; (2) turbo decoding; and 
              (3) coded modulation for unequal error protection (UEP)  applications. The
              first research area is composed of two parts.  In the first part, a new unified
              analytical approach which lets  us tightly bound the error performance of many
              reliability-based  algorithms at practical SNR is to be investigated. Although 
              numerous such algorithms have been proposed for more than 30  years, no such
              bound exists yet. In the second part of (1),it is  proposed to devise efficient
              soft decision decoding schemes for  long powerful block codes with reduced
              decoding complexity. No  existing algorithm can decode such codes without a
              tremendous  computational effort. In area (2), it is proposed to reduce the 
              delay associated with turbo decoding. This long decoding delay  prevents the
              use of turbo-codes in real time communication  systems despite their
              astonishing error performance at very low  SNR values. Finally, it is proposed
              to devise coded modulation  schemes with UEP applications based on conventional
              signal  constellations. Very few such schemes have been proposed despite  the
              increasing demand of coding schemes able to adapt to  different channel
              conditions, such as satellite broadcasting for  HDTV.    The second part of
              this proposal concerns the teaching plans of  the PI.  Based on the principle
              that students are the primary  reason most electrical engineering programs
              exist in  universities, the PI's teaching main goal is to develop students 
              into engineers and scientists who will be able to make  significant
              contributions to the development of data  communicatio n systems. Also, the
              particular geographical and  cultural situations of the University of Hawaii
              with respect to  other US-mainland universities are considered.
