Title       : Investigation of Pairing Symmetry and Normal State Properties of Electron-Doped
               Copper Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9732736

Award Number: 9732736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Greene rgreene@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9732736 
              Greene    This experimental research project is concerned with the electron- 
              doped  cuprate  superconductors, with emphasis on  their  pairing  symmetry   
              and    normal   state   behavior.   Electron    doped  superconductors   in  
              the   family   R(2-x)Ce(x)CuO(4-y),   with  R=Nd,Pr,Sm,Eu, will be prepared in
              single crystal and  thin  film  forms.  The  objectives  of  this  project  are
               to  produce  and  characterize the highest quality single crystals and  thin 
              films  of  the  electron-doped  materials, and to perform  comprehensive 
              physical   property  measurements  which  can  provide   reliable  experimental
               constraints on theories for  the  superconductivity  and  for  the  anomalous
              normal state in all the  copper  oxides.  Emphasis  will be given to
              measurements to definitively determine  the pairing symmetry of the
              superconducting state of the electron  doped materials and to search for more
              definitive evidence for  a  "pseudogap".  It  is expected that a detailed
              comparison  of  the  properties  of these materials with their hole-doped
              counterparts  will be quite important in advancing the overall understanding of
               the copper oxides. This research program is interdisciplinary  in  nature  and
               involves  one  or  more  postdoctoral  and  graduate  students  in its
              activities. These involvements provide excellent  preparation  of these young
              researchers for careers in  industry,  government laboratories or academia. 
              %%%  This   experimental  research  project  is  concerned  with   the 
              "electron-doped"  varieties  of  the  cuprate   high   transition  temperature
              superconductor family. In chemical terms,  these  can  be  described by the
              formula R(2-x)Ce(x)CuO(4-y). Here the symbol  R   stands   for  one  of  the 
              rare  earth  elements  Neodymium,  Praseodymium,  Samarium, or Europium;  while
               Ce  is  Cerium,  Cu  copper,   and  O  oxygen.  In  these  materials  the  
              electrical  conduction  is  believed  to be "n-type" or by  electrons,  rather 
              than  "p-type"  or  by  positive holes, as  in  the  conventional  cuprates 
              such as YBaCuO. These materials are of fundamental  and  applied  interest.The 
              researchers  will  grow  samples  of  such  materials as single crystals and as
              thin films. The objectives of  this  project are to produce and characterize
              the highest quality  single  crystals and thin films of the electron-doped 
              materials,  and to perform comprehensive physical property measurements which 
              can provide reliable experimental constraints on theories for the 
              superconductivity and for the anomalous normal state in  all  the  copper 
              oxides.  Emphasis  will  be  given  to  measurements   to  definitively   
              determine   the   pairing   symmetry    of    the  superconducting  state  of
              the electron doped  materials  and  to  search  for  more  definitive evidence
              for a "pseudogap".  It  is  expected  that a detailed comparison of the
              properties  of  these  materials  with  their  hole-doped  counterparts  will 
              be  quite  important  in advancing the overall understanding of  the  copper 
              oxides.This research program is interdisciplinary in  nature  and  involves 
              one or more postdoctoral and graduate students  in  its  activities.  These
              involvements provide excellent preparation  of  these  young  researchers  for
              careers  in  industry,  government  laboratories or academia.  ***
