Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Description and Analysis of Mekens, a Tupi
               Language of Brazil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1999  
File        : a9732031

Award Number: 9732031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18108              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy Dahlstrom a-dahlstrom@chicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The principal task of this project is to provide a detailed description  and
              analysis of the language of the Mekens people. They collectively  refer to
              themselves and to their language as Sakurabiat (sakirabiat)  nowadays. Mekens
              is one of the five surviving languages of the Tupari  linguistic family (Tupi
              stock), and it is spoken in the state of  Rondonia, Northwest of Brazil, by
              about 23 speakers. Due to its small  number of speakers and to the fact that
              only two children are currently  learning it, Mekens figures among the most
              endangered languages of the  world. It is also, together with the majority of
              Brazilian languages,  one for which very little information is known.
              Therefore, this research  will enrich linguistic knowledge by gathering and
              analyzing primary  linguistic data of an endangered language that has never
              been studied  before, and for which very little material is available. Except
              for an  article describing its phonological segments (Hanke et. al. 1958), the 
              only other materials are the results of the researcher's own preliminary  work
              with the language. The specific goals of the project are (i) to  proceed with
              the documentation of the language, through the collection  of a wide range of
              linguistic data, both through elicitation and through  the recording of natural
              speech, such as conversation, and narratives,  (ii) to provide a description
              and analysis of the language, in terms of  its morphological and syntactic
              properties, (iii) to continue the  implementation of the literacy project,
              which was started in Summer  1996, (iv) in the long term, to contribute to a
              Tupi comparative project  currently in development by linguists associated to
              the Museum Emilio  Goeldi (Brazil). Field research will be conducted in the
              Mekens  settlement in Rondonia (Brazil) for a period of twelve months. This 
              research project aims to provide the basis for the researcher's doctoral 
              dissertation, in which an analytic-descriptive grammar of Mekens will be 
              presented, providing a coherent accou nt of the many interesting 
              morphosyntactic phenomena found in the language, such as the  switch-reference
              system in verbal person marking, and the system of  auxiliaries which marks
              person and position of the verb S/A arguments  and tense/aspect of the clause,
              adding to the current understanding of  these and other phenomena in natural
              languages.
