Title       : Deformable Volumetric Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9732297

Award Number: 9732297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shiaofen Fang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Voxel-based volumetric objects normally have much more complex  physical
              properties and spatial structures than surface-based  geometric models.  Thus,
              traditional physically-based deformation  modeling techniques are often
              ineffective and costly in the  volumetric domain. This project will focus on
              developing  efficient and accurate modeling techniques, computational methods 
              and visualization algorithms for deformable volumetric objects.    A new
              landmark-based volume deformation model and related  rendering algorithms will
              be developed. In this model, a volume  deformation is represented by a
              relatively small set of landmark  points defined in a volume space.
              Three-dimensional scattered  data interpolation methods will be applied to
              generate smooth  deformation functions over the volume space. Landmark points
              and  their movements can be used for both the interactive deformation 
              manipulations and the deformation pattern representations of  specific types of
              deformable objects. Instead of directly  modeling the object's physical or
              biological properties, this  approach employs an inverse method to derive the
              deformation  pattern of a given class of objects, using a parameterized spring 
              model, directly from existing or experimental data. Fast  deformable volume
              rendering algorithms will also be developed to  support the visualization of
              the volume deformation process. To  avoid unnecessary deformation computation
              and multiple volume  resampling, the deformation computation will be integrated
              into  the rendering process without explicit volume reconstruction. For 
              region-specific deformations of different sub-structures in a  complex and
              hierarchical volumetric environment, deformation  operations can also be
              applied to a Volumetric-CSG model to  support deformable volumetric object
              manipulation. Several  applications of this research will be pursued, including
               craniofacial growth, volume morphing, medical object modeling and  interactive
              volumetric animation.
