Title       : Recognition Theorems of Group Theory and Various Inverse Galois Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9732592

Award Number: 9732592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shreeram Abhyankar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          9732592  Abhyankar    Various Recognition Theorems of Group Theory
              provide powerful tools for  computing Galois groups. They also provide
              suggestive guidelines for  constructing explicit equations with assigned Galois
              groups, i.e., for solving  various Inverse Galois Problems. It is proposed to
              continue using this method to get information on the algebraic fundamental
              groups of algebraic and  arithmetical varieties. Some of these Recognition
              Theorems are based on the Classification of Finite Simple Groups. Some others
              use the Classification of Polar Spaces. Still some others use the older
              techniques of finding Limits of Transitivity. Another fertile application area
              for these Recognition Theorems is in Hilbert's Thirteenth Problem about
              composite functions. Yet another such application area lies in the direction of
              Permutation Polynomials and Exceptional Polynomials.        This research is in
              the combination of the fields of algebraic geometry and group theory. Although
              they are amongst the oldest parts of modern  mathematics, both these fields
              have had a revolutionary flowering in the past  fifty years. In its origin,
              algebraic geometry treated figures that could be  defined in the plane by the
              simplest equations, namely polynomials. Likewise. group theory had its origin
              in the study of symmetries. Nowadays, both these fields make use of methods not
              only from algebra, but from analysis and  topology, and conversely they are
              finding applications in those fields as well  as in physics, theoretical
              computer science and robotics.  Moreover, an interplay between algebraic
              geometry and group theory continues to enrich both these disciplines.
