Title       : Efficient and Reliable Competitive Market for Electric Power: Integrating
               Electrical Engineering and Experimental Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9732845

Award Number: 9732845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282665             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Thomas rjt1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy D. Mount  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Schuler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Schulze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9732845  Thomas    This project is designed to settle specific economic and
              engineering questions arising from the restructuring of the electric power
              industry.  Of specific interest are those questions related to the introduction
              of competitive markets for the generation of electricity.  We note that there
              are unique physical aspects associated wit h the supply of electricity (e.g.,
              instantaneous matching of supply and demand, unintended congestion of parallel
              transmission routes and maintenance of system stability in response to
              disturbances).  Others include the prospect of localized market power.  Because
              of these and other aspects of  reliable electric power supply, traditional
              theories of efficient markets and auction structures developed for other
              commodities through years of experience may not be efficient if applied without
              alteration to markets for electricity.  Conversely, current utility rules of
              operation developed for a centrally-planned regime may not be ideal in terms of
              providing economically efficient or reliable operating practices in a
              competitive environment.  The objective of this research is to determine a new
              balance between ideal economic market mechanisms and traditional utility
              operating practices that will provide inexpensive energy for consumers and
              maintain system stability.  Computer simulations of electricity networks along
              with laboratory markets that combine human-subject behavior and power systems
              behavior are the tools we propose to develop and use.  The group of researchers
              assembled consists of theoretical and experimental economists and power/control
              systems engineers who are uniquely qualified to address issues of market
              structure, auction mechanisms and rules, and the viability of continuing to use
              computer programs such as large scale optimal power flow models (OPF), unit
              commitment (UC) and security constrained dispatch that have been used
              historically to guide operations.
