Title       : CAREER: SILICON MICROMACHINED FIBER OPTIC CROSSBAR SWITCH
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9732953

Award Number: 9732953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olav Solgaard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9732953  Solgaard    This proposal describes research on a new type of
              fiber-optic switch for wavelength-division-multiplexed
              transparent-optical-networks.  The switch architecture is based on free-space
              separation of the wavelength channels using bulk lenses and gratings and on
              spatial switching using silicon micromachined mirror arrays.  Optical modeling
              of the switch predicts low insertion loss, low cross talk, flat pass band, and
              low polarization sensitivity.  Existing WDM crossbar switches are limited to
              two input and two output ports, while the proposed switch is scaleable to large
              port numbers providing dramatically enhanced flexibility in configuring complex
              network topologies owing to numerous switched path options obtainable in a
              single switching package.  The proposed switch is fabricated using silicon
              integrated circuit technology and it can be miniaturized for easy packaging. 
              These traits leads to potentially low-cost production and installation.    The
              design space for the proposed switch is investigated using Gaussian beam
              propagation.  Based on this investigation, a design of a 3x3 switch using
              standard optics and standard micromachining technology is developed.  This
              design will be built as a proof-of-principle demonstration. The analysis of the
              diffractive characteristics of the proposed switch shows that switches with
              larger number of ports require micromirrors with large and
              continuously-controllable angular deflection.  Development of such mirrors
              using a combination of analytical, numerical and experimental tools is
              proposed.  Finally it is shown that the proposed switch can be miniaturized and
              integrated on a silicon chip.  The integration technology will be developed and
              an integrated WDM crossbar switch will be created.    The educational aspects
              of this proposal are focused on course development and on the establishment of
              an industrially sponsored undergraduate research program.  The first course
              that is under development is an undergraduate optoelectronics laboratory 
              course, and the second is a graduate course on MEMS device physics and design. 
              The objective of these courses is to build a foundation for an experimentally
              oriented program in optoetectronic integration and fabrication.  To further
              integrate teaching and research in electrooptics, the establishment of an
              undergraduate research program is proposed.  The objectives and requirements of
              the research projects will be defined by industrial sponsors.  The research
              will be carried out by a team of undergraduate researchers under the guidance
              of a faculty member in close collaboration with industrial partners.  Funds for
              a start-up period for this program is requested.  The program will become
              selfsustaining by the end of the proposal period.  ***
