Title       : Algorithmic Studies in Applied Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9732220

Award Number: 9732220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. B. Mitchell jsbm@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Held  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Esther M. Arkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The methodologies of computational geometry will be applied to  design, analyze,
              implement, and test algorithms for problems that  arise in application areas
              such as manufacturing, computer-aided  design, graphics and visualization,
              robotics, cartography, and  air traffic control.  An important aspect of the
              work is to  conduct technology dissemination to industry, helping to transfer 
              algorithms into practice.  This will be done through pursuit of  new industrial
              collaborations, while building on the several  industrial partnerships that
              have already been developed.  In  order to find applications of computational
              geometry to meet the  needs of industry, companies will be visited in order to
              discuss  their geometric computing needs, and  formulate their most critical
              problems as instances of  algorithmic questions.  Further, as solutions are
              proposed and  developed, the industrial partners will be assisted with the 
              implementation and integration phases of the projects.    The specific
              repertoire of problems includes: (a) manufacturing  process planning (NC
              verification, tool path generation,  deposition, cutting, bending) and virtual
              manufacturing  (collision detection, assembly planning); (b) computer graphics 
              and visualization (rendering large polygonal models, volume  visualization,
              visibility preprocessing, texture mapping); (c)  Geographic Information Systems
              (GIS), including map  generalization and optimal route planning in geometric 
              environments under a variety of constraints and objectives  (air traffic
              management, transshipment, mobile robotics, military  mission planning).
