Title       : Flowing Afterglow-Guided Ion Beam Studies of Reactive Organic Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a9732696

Award Number: 9732696
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilkka I. Kenttamaa   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Squires  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Squires will focus his research on the characterization of   carbene
              and carbyne intermediates.   Flowing afterglow ion beam studies   focusing on
              the spectral and chemical characterization of these reactive   intermediates
              will be augmented by theoretical studies correlating   structure-property
              relationships.    New methods for the preparation of   unusual carbene and
              carbyne intermediates will be developed, as well as a   new flowing afterglow
              apparatus that will provide higher resolution data.     Educational activities
              include training postdoctoral and graduate   students in the synthesis of
              reactive intermediates, and flowing   afterglow techniques.     With this
              award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program   supports the research
              and educational activities of Professor Robert   Squires of the Department of
              Chemistry at Purdue University.   Professor   Squires' research focuses on the
              synthesis and characterization of   reactive, electron-deficient organic
              intermediates.    These species,   referred to as carbenes or carbynes
              depending on the extent of the   electron deficiency,  are of fundamental
              interest because they are   thought to be involved in bioorganic chemistry,
              drug design, material   science, and combustion and interstellar chemistry.  
              Professor Squires'   educational activities include the training of graduate
              and postdoctoral   students in chemical synthesis of reactive intermediates,
              and instrument   design and construction.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
