Title       : Artificially Structured Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9732763

Award Number: 9732763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chia-Ling Chien clc@pha.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9732763  Chien  This   project  deals  with  artificially  structured 
              materials, primarily  quasi  two-dimensional multilayers and  one-dimensional
              nanowire arrays. Such materials exhibit  novel properties  due  to their
              geometry, the interplay  between constituent materials,  and the  degrees of
              freedom  in their fabrication. The multilayer work will  address  key 
              questions  in ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic  (FM/AF)exchange coupling   and  
               magnetic/superconducting  multilayers.  Thus, the materials fabrication work 
              will  address the question of whether FM/AF coupling can be  established
              between transition  metal and rare earth  moments. A further topic  to  be
              investigated  in  detail is  the spatial variation  of  the  FM/AF coupling  as
              the  individual layers in the multilayer  arrays  are traversed.  The 
              magnetic/superconducting  multilayers  employing  ferromagnetic   and 
              antiferromagnetic  constituents   offer  an excellent  opportunity to
              investigate the pair-breaking  mechanism arising  in
              antiferromagnetic/superconducting  planer interfaces, and superconducting
              ground state  properties expressed in junction interfaces.  Novel  fabrication
              techniques have been developed  to produce  bismuth nanowire arrays that have
              been found to  exhibit  very  large  magnetoresistance. The origins of this 
              and  related electrical  transport  properties  remain  obscure  and  will  be
              further investigated. The research involves  graduate students  in a  range  of
               fundamental projects  that also have  potential  for major  impact on 
              technological areas such as information  storage technology  and the
              microelectronics industry.  %%%  This project deals with artificially
              structured materials  such as quasi  two-dimensional  multilayers and one- 
              dimensional  nanowire arrays.  Such  materials exhibit novel  properties  due 
              to  their geometry,  the interplay between  constituent materials,  and  the
              degrees of freedom in their  fabrication. These materials  are  of interest 
              from  fundamental   viewpoints,  but  additionally  have important 
              technological applications in magnetic recording  readheads,  wide-range 
              magnetic  field sensing  devises,  and  field  emitters  for  flat  panel 
              displays.  The  magnetic  interaction between  multilayers  leads  to a
              phenomenon  known  as  exchange biasing.  This  exchange  biasing is at  the 
              heart  of  the  new generation of high performance  magnetic recording heads. 
              Several key  questions  in the  nature and mechanism of exchange  biasing, and 
              materials  synthesis aspects of exchange  biasing,  will  be explored. 
              Nanowire  arrays of bismuth will  be  investigated  to  understand  origins  of
              magnetoresistance in  this  semi-  metallic material.  The  arrays  show
              promise for  applications  for  field sensing devices. The mechanism of  the
              large magnetoresistance  is poorly  understood  and the  influence of
              fabrication  methods  on this transport  property will be systematically
              investigated.  The research  involves  graduate students in a range  of 
              fundamental  projects that   also  have  potential  for  major   impact  on
              technological  areas such as information storage  technology  and the
              microelectronics industry.  ***
