Title       : PPD/DP: USING SPACE SCIENCE TO ENHANCE SCIENCE, MATHEMATICS, TECHNOLOGY SKILLS
               AND SELF-ESTEEM IN SPECIAL NEEDS STUDENTS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9732913

Award Number: 9732913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Kersjes kersjes@iserv.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert C. Rudman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn Bondurant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Space is Special Inc
	      2645 Johnathan NE
	      Grand Rapids, MI      616/361-9225

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Space is Special has been collaborating for several years with  NASA and
              Space Camp to provide some students with disabilities  exposure to hands-on
              science experiences along side students who do  not have disabilities.  This
              project will expand the project to  reach many more students, their parents,
              and teachers.  The  following are goals to expand past efforts beyond West
              Michigan to  encourage more communities and school districts to improve the 
              mathematics, science, engineering, and technology education of  students with
              disabilities.  Space is Special (SIS) will:  (1) Use  science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology education to  enhance the self esteem of special
              education students.  (2) Create  opportunities for these students to work at a
              high level of  proficiency in science and mathematics.  (3) Provide more venues
               for mainstreaming these students by demonstrating their ability to  be
              mainstreamed at Space Camp.  (4) Give parents the experience of  success for
              their children and provide an avenue for building on  abilities rather than
              disabilities.  (5) Help change the attitudes  of students with disabilities to
              reach for higher goals, to enroll  in more advanced courses, and to insist that
              they be given the  right to take normal course loads in mathematics, science,
              and  technology.  (6) Give students with disabilities the opportunity to  live,
              learn, and work in a team setting.  (7) Encourage special  education students
              to go on to higher education and pursue careers  in technical fields.  (8)
              Create a full set of educational  materials--including slides, video tapes, and
              written lesson plans  and experiments--so that teachers of special education
              students can  increase their effectiveness at giving these students
              opportunities  to demonstrate their skills in these fields.       To achieve
              these goals, SIS proposes a three-year pilot  project to demonstrate the
              effectiveness of specific activities and  materials on a state-wide basis in
              Michigan. If successful, the  pro ject can become the foundation for similar
              efforts elsewhere.  The project will develop a curriculum and establish a Web
              page for  the project that will include inputs from current and past SIS 
              participants that can be used as an educational resource by special  education
              classes anywhere.  The project will focus on involving  special education
              teachers directly in the project.  Teachers will  be selected who will observe
              project teaching methods and will  attend Space Camp with a group of students
              from their districts.   The concept of "master teacher" will be implemented
              with the first  group of teachers.  These teachers then later can be used to
              train  more special education teachers in the SIS concepts and demonstrate 
              student success in science, mathematics, engineering and  technology.  A Space
              Camp summer teachers institute will encompass  a week-long training session at
              camp with special attention to  taking lessons from the experience back to the
              classroom.
