Title       : Iterative Substructuring Methods for Elliptic Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9732208

Award Number: 9732208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261814             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olof B. Widlund widlund@cs.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The development of numerical methods for large algebraic systems  is central in
              the development of efficient codes for  computational fluid dynamics,
              elasticity, and other core problems  of continuum mechanics.  Many other tasks
              in such codes  parallelize relatively easily.  The importance of the algebraic 
              system solvers is therefore increasing with the appearance of  parallel and
              distributed computing systems, with a substantial  number of fast processors,
              each with relatively large memory.  A  very desirable feature of iterative
              substructuring and other  domain decomposition algorithms is that they respect
              the memory  hierarchy of modern parallel and distributed computing systems, 
              which is essential for approaching peak floating point  performance.  The
              development of improved methods is, together  with more powerful computer
              systems, making it possible to carry  out simulations in three dimensions, with
              quite high resolution,  relatively easily.  This work is now supported by high
              quality  software systems, such as Argonne's PETSC library, which will 
              facilitate code development as well as the access to a variety of  parallel and
              distributed computer systems.  Work willcontinue in  developing iterative
              substructuring and other domain  decomposition methods for increasingly
              difficult partial  differential equations.  Domain decomposition algorithms are
               iterative methods, often of preconditioned conjugate gradient  type, for the
              parallel solution of the large linear, or  nonlinear, systems of algebraic
              equations that arise when partial  differential equations are discretized by
              finite elements, finite  differences, or spectral methods.  In each iteration
              step, local  problems representing the restriction of the original problem to 
              a potentially large number of subregions are solved  approximately.  The
              subregions, which can be allocated to  individual processors of a parallel
              computer, form a  decomposition of the entire domain of the problem.  In
              addition,  the inclusion of a coarse proble m often substantially increases 
              the efficiency of the preconditioner.  This study will combine mathematical
              analysis with the design and  numerical testing of algorithms.  A special
              emphasis will be  placed on the study of spectral elements and other high order
               finite element methods, as well as on nonconforming methods such  as the
              mortar and Nedelec finite element methods.  The latter  have been developed for
              Maxwell's equation.  There will also be a  focus on the often very
              ill-conditioned problems which arise in  finite element approximations of
              elasticity.  Iterative methods  and production codes will also be developed for
              Helmholtz's  equation and other time-harmonic models arising, e.g., from 
              Maxwell's equations.  These problems pose very real challenges  for the
              development of iterative solvers and are also of great  importance in a number
              of engineering applications.
