Title       : Testing and Modeling of Saturated Interfaces in Soil- Structure Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9732811

Award Number: 9732811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandra S. Desai csdesai@email.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1037,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The behavior at interfaces and joints in geomechanical problems such as
              structure-soil foundation, and structure-rock foundation systems plays a vital
              role in their response under static and dynamic loads.   Although laboratory
              testing and modeling for the interface response, mostly under dry conditions,
              have been performed in the past, the important issue of the effect of pore
              water pressures at interfaces on the soil-structure response has not been fully
              investigated before.    The response of saturated interfaces is influenced
              significantly by the pore pressure development and its resulting effect on
              deformations, failure, and load carrying capacities of the structure-foundation
              systems is important for safe and economical design.  This research will use a
              newly developed shear test device that allows static and dynamic loading and
              pore water pressures with inclusion of factors such as roughness, normal
              stress, density, simple and direct shear conditions and large-sized specimens. 
              As interfaces between sand and concrete can provide a general condition, a
              series of quasistatic and cyclic tests on dry and saturated Ottawa
              sand-concrete interfaces will be performed.    Another main objective of the
              research is to develop the unified disturbed state concept (DSC) which allows
              elastic and plastic deformations, hardening, softening and degradation, and
              modeling of liquefaction if indicated in the test results.  The model will be
              calibrated based on the test data, and validated with respect to independent
              tests.  An optimization procedure will permit systematic simplification and
              reduction in parameters, toward practical analysis and design.  Finally,
              guidelines for application of the model, including through nonlinear finite
              element procedures, will be developed.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
