Title       : Real-Time Scheduling of Demand Responsive Transportation Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a9732878

Award Number: 9732878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph W. Hall rwhall@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maged M. Dessouky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9732878  Hall       This grant provides funding to develop methods for routing
              pickup and delivery vehicles in real-time. The project will begin with the
              development of statistical models for pickups and deliveries, which will
              capture how requests for pickups and deliveries vary over the course of a day. 
              These models will be derived from data provided by industrial partners.  The
              statistical models will be the basis for optimization methods that allocate and
              route vehicles.   The methods will aim to serve the peaks in demand as
              efficiently as possible.   This entails minimizing the amount of backtracking
              in vehicle routes, while simultaneously attempting to serve customers within
              their specified time windows.       The project will provide benefits to both
              government sponsored transit agencies and privately operated motor carriers. 
              In recent years, wireless communication and on-board computing hardware have
              become widely available to enable real-time routing.  Yet despite the
              sophistication in hardware, real- time routing is still a manual process,
              driven by human dispatchers.   The project can benefit industry by developing
              methods that reduce the number of miles driven, increase driver productivity
              (measured in stops served per hour), and improve customer service (serving
              customers when they want to be served).   The project will also contribute to
              the theory of vehicle routing through creation of models to represent random
              and time-varying arrivals of service requests (i.e., a call requesting a pickup
              or delivery).
