Title       : CAREER: Measuring the Spectrum of the Cosmic Microwave Background Anisotropy on
               Angular Scales from 0.15 to 4 Degrees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9732960

Award Number: 9732960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $477505             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Devlin devlin@dept.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1207,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9732960  Devlin    The main scientific goal of the research is to the study the
              anisotropy of the Cosmic Microwave Background  (CMB) radiation.  The CMB is the
              photon remnant of the Big Bang.  The  observations of  the fluctuations in
              light intensity of the CMB, and by analyzing the data,  the fluctuations in the
              matter density of the universe at roughly 100,000 years after the big bang can
              be inferred and this information used to predict the present distribution of
              matter in the universe.  The anisotropy in the CMB provides a key test of
              models of structure formation of the Universe.  The knowledge of the sizes of
              fluctuations on different angular scales may allow the measurements of
              cosmological parameters such as the mass density of the universe, the expansion
              rate, and the baryon density.  These parameters will enable us to learn about
              the universe today, its past, and its future evolution.    The focus of the
              research is an aggressive plan to produce new results in CMB research. The plan
              is to combine the best aspects of ground-based and balloon borne experiments. 
              The plan is to measure the spectrum of the anisotropy of  the CMB on angular
              scales of from 0.15 to 4 minutes of arc with unprecedented accuracy.  The
              technique of using ground-based observations has already been proven with
              previous measurements made in Saskatoon, Canada..  These measurements have very
              long integration times, but are limited by the poor stability of the atmosphere
              at the site.  Balloon borne observations have negligible atmospheric
              interference, but are limited by integration time.  A telescope built for a
              balloon measurements has been converted  into the Mobile Anisotropy Telescope
              (MAT) which will be used to make observations from a high plateau (5,200 m) in
              Chile.  The atmosphere is stable at this site and integration times can be
              extended for as long as necessary.  The improvement in the  measurements will
              require the use of state-of-the-art detector technology.  A 115 element array
              of transition edge superc onducting bolometric detectors operating at 300 mK 
              will be built for use with the MAT telescope.  The array will to used to
              collect data which will yield independent measurements of the CMB anisotropy
              over a large fraction of the sky.  The net result will be an improvement over
              the sensitivity of  the Saskatoon data by an order of magnitude or more, and an
              increase in angular resolution by a factor of three.    The other goals are to
              establish a new laboratory for (CMB) research, to develop a research program
              that incorporates undergraduates and graduates, and to play a central role in
              developing an astrophysics curriculum.  The curriculum will  range from courses
              for general undergraduates and astronomy/astrophysics majors to courses for
              graduate students.  Major progress has already been made along each of these
              directions.   Data on the CMB with a balloon borne telescope has been obtained.
               Undergraduates will be able to use a newly established laboratory.  The
              undergraduate students will come from a variety of backgrounds, including
              physics, mechanical engineering and computer science.  The development of a new
              astronomy course for non-majors will be exciting and instructive for both the
              faculty and students.  The plan is to extend the scope of the research and
              education activities by initiating an outreach program with the City of
              Philadelphia high schools which will provide area students with supervised
              projects in observational astronomy.  ***
