Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Environmental Science and Engineering
               at Clarkson University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9732294

Award Number: 9732294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Theresa Maldonado                       
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208558             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Powers sep@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stefan J. Grimberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9732294  PI: Powers  University: Clarkson U        ABSTRACT    It
              is proposed that a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site be
              established at Clarkson University in the area of environmental science and
              engineering.  This three-year program will bring eleven outstanding
              undergraduate students on campus for a 10-week intensive summer research
              experience.  The objectives of the REU Site program will be: 1) to provide
              students who are traditionally underrepresented in environmental science and
              engineering (women and minorities) with an opportunity to conduct independent
              research; 2) to teach these students about the process of conducting sound
              research and the importance of research in solving environmental problems; and,
              3) to expose students to the importance of graduate school as an integral part
              of the educational pipeline leading to successful careers in applied and basic
              research.    The primary component of the program will be the completion of a
              research project in the area of multiphase environmental systems. 
              Undergraduates will be assigned a self-contained aspect of a larger research
              project and will work with graduate students and faculty in the Departments of
              Civil and Environmental Engineering, Chemistry, and Biology to complete their
              project.  Students will be matched with these faculty based on the interests
              and abilities of the students and the specific needs of the faculty. 
              Dissemination of the research results will be emphasized; all students will
              participate in research group meetings, write a report, and present their work
              at a University-wide undergraduate research symposium.  A seminar series that
              covers issues related to conducting sound research and graduate school will add
              some breadth to the students'experiences.  The final component of the program
              will be several community-building activities designed to foster cohesiveness
              among the students and enhance their appreciation for belonging to a
              multicultural group.  Assessment of the program will i nclude continual
              evaluation and improvement of our program to ensure the stated objectives are
              achieved.
