Title       : Organic Electrochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9732850

Award Number: 9732850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Miller lmiller@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program,
              focusses on the synthesis and characterization of novel  electroactive
              oligomers, linear polymers, and dendrimers.  Organic  materials that have new
              architectures will be designed and  synthesized in this project.  Professor
              Miller and his students at  the University of Minnesota will use spectroscopic,
              conductivity,  electrochemical, quartz crystal microbalance, impedance, 
              differential scanning calorimetry, x-ray diffraction, and  rheological
              measurements in this multidisciplinary work.  New  polymeric thin films will be
              prepared that are electroactive,  electrical conductive, and photoconducting or
              electroemissive.  The  responsiveness of these thin films to adsorbed vapors
              will be  characterized with the aim of developing new vapor sensors.    There
              are many potential applications for new organic materials  that are
              electrochemically active and that exhibit photoconduction.   Professor Miller
              and his students at the University of Minnesota  will prepare and characterize
              new compounds that are predicted to  have these properties.  A wide range of
              instrumental methods will  be used to determine the electrochemical and
              photochemical activity  of these new compounds.  One example of a potential use
              for these  new materials will be in preparing thin films that are sensitive to 
              chemical vapors.  New chemical sensors for vapors will be developed  for
              compounds that possess the requisite sensitivity to target  analytes.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
