Title       : REU: Watershed Development and Engineering in Urbanizing Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9732609

Award Number: 9732609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vicki Booker                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tammo S. Steenhuis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yaping Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9732609  PI:  Steenhuis  University: Cornell U        ABSTRACT   
              This proposal seeks to engage underrepresented minorities and women in research
              on watershed development and engineering at Cornell University with cooperation
              of Alabama A&M, Florida A&M, Clark Atlanta University and the University of
              Puerto Rico.  The philosophy of the proposed program will be to engage students
              in the forming of a question or hypothesis, planning of a method to answer the
              question or test the hypothesis, critically analyzing the results, drawing
              conclusions, and presenting the findings.  The focus is on those problems
              within the watershed that have biological and/or environmental components.  For
              this, we will initiate an interdisciplinary approach which involves faculty
              with background in either biological, environmental or soil sciences.  Topics
              will include the experimental and simulation studies of the movement of
              agri-chemicals, organisms (such as Cryptosporidium) and other chemicals through
              the landscape, the reduction of nitrogen in animal feeds, composting, and the
              effect of municipal sludges on metal mobility.  The integration of these
              student projects on a watershed scale will be emphasized during the weekly
              meetings.  A summer REU Program is proposed for ten students.  We have also
              included a possibility for the summer REU students to continue their research
              at the home institutions.  A structured setting for students during the summer
              Program will be established, which includes: (1) an introductory session that
              discusses the critical elements of a research program (2) a weekly seminar with
              formal presentations by faculty mentors and REU Fellows, dealing with the topic
              of watershed scale integration of the studies, and general topics (libraries,
              bibliographic databases, computing resources, critical analysis of the
              approach, basics of experimental design, and opportunities for graduate
              programs), (3) regular meetings with the faculty mentor at least twice a week,
              (4) a discussion during  week 7 in which the REU students present their
              progress to the group, and (5) a final presentation during week 10 in a
              department-wide setting.  Also, various group building activities will be
              organized.  Proposed is an aggressive recruitment procedure to expand the pool
              of minorities that benefit from the REU experience.  The project is a
              cooperative effort between Cornell and Alabama A&M and involves the
              participation of three more minority universities in recruitment and mentoring
              during the academic year.
