Title       : Deformation Methods for Grid Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1999  
File        : a9732742

Award Number: 9732742
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guojun Liao liao@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale A. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9215,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9732742
Guojun Liao

A key factor to the success of numerical simulation
              of scientific and engineering problems is that of grid generation of the
              physical domains.  The objective of the project is to develop an adaptive grid
              generation method that can be used with various numerical schemes such as
              finite element, finite difference, etc.  Our method is based on sophisticated
              mathematics and its numerical implementation is straightforward.  It is the
              deformation method which redistributes the grid points according to the
              physical variables that are being simulated.  A monitor function is calculated
              which is small where the error is large.  The deformation method then moves
              each grid point according to the monitor function so that the new grid will be
              concentrated where the need for better resolution exists to reduce the error.
              Model problems from fluid dynamics and other important applications will be
              simulated on such moving grids.  We will demonstrate that the method is capable
              of generating grids that are adapted to the fine features of the physical
              variables such as shock waves, moving fronts, and boundary layers, etc.

This
              project is aimed to greatly enhance our ability to simulate large scale
              computational problems that are crucial to the national strategic interests. 
              The advance of computing technology allows us to simulate some real world
              problem without conducting costly experiments.  But the needs for accurate and
              efficient simulation far exceed the most powerful computers of today.  A lot of
              simplification and upgrading have to be made to stay within the limit of
              today's computing capacity.  Fixed grids are wasteful in computing resource. 
              Our research will lead to software that can automatically put more points to
              the regions where and when the physical variables change rapidly without adding
              new points.  This would be very useful for high performance computing and the
              numerical simulation of material science, environment problems, manufacturing
              process and other fields that require a grid.  By working in the project,
              mathematics and engineering students will gain first hand experience on the
              application of mathematics to the solution of engineering problem.  Advanced
              degrees will be granted to graduate students who make significant contributions
              to the project after their completion of course work.

