Title       : Research in Random Matrices and Integrable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a9732687

Award Number: 9732687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215689             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold Widom widom@math.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9732687  Principal Investigator: Harold Widom  Abstract: Random
              matrix theory has had remarkably wide applicability: the spacing distributions
              arising in random matrix theory have over the past few years been shown to have
              deep applications in number theory; there are applications in numerical
              analysis and computational complexity where condition numbers of random
              matrices are important; random matrix theory has motivated developments in the
              Riemann-Hilbert method, which in turn finds applications to a variety of
              problems in integrable systems and inverse scattering. In physics the
              applications range from  many-body systems (both atomic and nuclear), to
              quantum chaos to quantum transport in mesoscopic systems. Four areas for
              research are specified. The first is related to the fact that in certain random
              matrix ensembles the measure describing the eigenvalue distribution is the
              Gibbs measure for charges interacting via a potential at inverse temperature
              beta equal to one, two or four (corresponding to orthogonal, unitary and
              symplectic ensembles, respectively). The limiting spacing distributions for
              these ensembles are now quite well understood but the methods are applicable to
              these values of beta only. The question for general beta, while quite
              difficult, is mathematically interesting and quite important in statistical
              physics. A new approach looks promising and we intend to pursue it. The second
              area of research is the question of universality of the limiting distribution
              of the largest eigenvalue in matrix ensembles. This would be analogous to the
              universality of the Gaussian distribution for sums of independent random
              variables, the central limit theorem. Thirdly, we propose to study the order
              statistics of the spacings between eigenvalues (which is different from the
              spacing distributions between consecutive eigenvalues mentioned above). For
              example, what is the probability distribution for the largest or smallest
              spacing? There are known results for independent random variabl es but,
              apparently, none yet for for random matrices, whose eigenvalues are far from
              independent. Finally, we hope to complete earlier work on the asymptotics of
              solutions to the periodic Toda equations by determining the asymptotics on the
              so-called critical curves, where the asymptotics will take a very different
              form. The theory of Wiener-Hopf operators and operator determinants should play
              a decisive role in this investigation.     In the 1950s Eugene Wigner, in his
              now classic study of highly excited states of large nuclei of atoms, introduced
              a mathematical model to describe the spacing between these states. This model
              goes under the name of random matrix theory. Since Wigner's pioneering work, it
              has been shown that the mathematics of random matrices has far-reaching
              applications to condensed matter physics, atomic physics and the new area of
              quantum chaos. In mathematics itself, random matrix theory has surfaced in a
              multitude of different contexts. It is natural to ask why the subject has such
              wide applicability. In probability theory the bell-shaped curve is pervasive
              because of a theorem which says roughly that when one adds quantities which are
              random and independent, the sum follows the bell-shaped curve regardless of the
              distribution of the quantities themselves. The distribution functions of random
              matrix theory appear to have a similar universality for a class of problems in
              which there is a high degree of dependence in the underlying processes. In the
              present project the mathematics of random matrix theory will be further
              developed with an eye toward possible applications.
