Title       : Algorithms and Software for High-Resolution Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9732070

Award Number: 9732070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191088             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Plemmons plemmons@mthcsc.wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd C. Torgersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              High-resolution images are essential in many important areas of  science,
              engineering, law enforcement, and medicine.  The need to  extract meaningful
              information from degraded images is vital in  many areas such as aero-optics
              imaging, surveillance photography,  confocal microscopy, and medical imaging. 
              Sources of image  degradation vary among application areas, but include
              atmospheric  turbulence, turbidity in a fluid medium, motion blur, and 
              numerous other effects.    Image processing tasks such as image enhancement,
              reconstruction,  and restoration are computationally intensive; the underlying 
              physical models require the solution to  data-massive and often ill-posed
              inverse problems where the  solution may not depend continuously on the data. 
              All such  problems require significant research into the algorithm- 
              architecture-application interaction and can profit substantially  from the
              availability of high-performance software systems.    Iterative solvers that
              exploit both the structure of the problem,  and the parallel computing
              platform, appear to be the most viable  candidates for  diverse, large scale
              image enhancement problems.    This research project includes the following
              technical topics:    a) New iterative algorithms with effective regularization 
              strategies for blind deconvolution image restoration using  adaptive filtering
              and multichannel phase diversity methods.    b) Acceleration of the iterative
              algorithms utilizing Krylov  subspace based multi-level preconditioning.    c)
              New algorithms which partially mitigate the ill-posed nature  of the image
              restoration problem by integrating numerical and  symbolic computational
              methods.    d) Development of a high performance software package, entitled 
              "Parallel Image Processing Environment (pipe})", which utilizes  the image
              processing algorithms developed in the course of this  research.
