Title       : REU Site: Thermal Analysis of Materials Processing and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a9732073

Award Number: 9732073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Theresa Maldonado                       
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioannis N. Miaoulis imiaouli@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Livia M. Racz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Y. Wong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charalabos C. Doumanidis  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9732073  PI:  Miaoulis  University: Tufts University      ABSTRACT
                 The success of materials processing and manufacturing is strongly influenced
              by thermal and fluid phenomena.  Unfortunately, most processing engineers are
              trained in only a single discipline and lack sufficient knowledge about
              thermal/fluid effects in the process.  In response, Tufts University
              established the Thermal Analysis of Materials Processing Laboratory (TAMPL) to
              conduct interdisciplinary research including thermavfluid sciences, materials
              science, and manufacturing.  This laboratory has proven to be a successful
              place to educate engineers in interdisciplinary research that is relevant to
              industry.  TAMPL is a unique research setting that involves a chain of
              mentorships from faculty to graduate students to undergraduates to high school
              girls.  This aim of the proposed project is to expand the research
              opportunities to undergraduate engineers from colleges and universities where
              settings such as TAMPL are not available.  Also, TAMPL has a strong commitment
              and record to increasing the number of women in engineering careers. 
              Recruitment will be aimed at non-research institutions (as categorized by the
              Carnegie Classification) and limited-research institutions in order to provide
              them with an experience at Tufts, a research university.  Based on our
              experience with Tufts undergraduates, such experience will encourage them to
              continue with their graduate studies in engineering.  Projects include
              examining heat transfer in thermal processing of electronic materials, fluid
              flow in turbulent mixing processes, and process control in thermal
              manufacturing systems.  The P.I.'s and a trained team of graduate students will
              lead the undergraduates through an introduction to the research process,
              project supervision, internet publishing workshops, and presentation skills. 
              Combining these skills with the interdisciplinary nature and extensive
              resources of TAMPL will give these students a unique undergraduate experien ce
              that will encourage them to continue with their engineering education.
