Title       : Local Polymer Dynamics in Melts and Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9732483

Award Number: 9732483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Ediger ediger@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9732483  Ediger    Many important properties of synthetic polymers are
              controlled by  the local segmental dynamics of the polymers.  These include the
               glass transition temperature(Tg), the temperature dependence of  viscous flow,
              the diffusion coefficients of small molecules, and  the rates of physical
              ageing.  Optical experiments and NMR  spectroscopy will be used to investigate
              the relationship between  local segmental dynamics and these important
              properties.  One  project will explore the molecular basis for physical ageing
              in  polystyrene and polycarbonate.  The goal is to understand why  different
              observables age differently and how ageing times below  Tg are related to
              equilibrium relaxation times above Tg.  The  prediction of long term properties
              of polymer glasses depends  upon the answers to these questions.  A second
              project explores  spatially heterogeneous dynamics in polymer melts and their 
              influence on the diffusion coefficients of low molecular weight  species.  It
              is important to understand why these heterogeneous  regions are more important
              in some melts than others so that  technologically important diffusion
              coefficients can be  accurately predicted.  The lifetimes of these regions will
              be  explored because this determines how larger length scale motions  will be
              influenced by these regions.  A third project uses  variable-field NMR
              spectroscopy to study polyethylene and atactic  polypropylene melts.  These two
              simple systems are ideal for  exploring the relationship between local dynamics
              and viscous  flow, and for understanding the polymer motions which are 
              responsible for the glass transition.  It is expected that these  results will
              contribute to an understanding of the industially  important flow properties of
              branched polyethylene.  A fourth  project uses molecular dynamics trajectories
              to test the  interpretation of 2D NMR and neutron spin echo experiments.  This 
              investigation may result in more reliable microscopic inferences  being drawn
              from these experimental ob servables.  %%%  The utility of polymers in our
              society is based upon the wide  range of properties which can be obtained by
              changing the  chemical identity of the repeat units, e.g., some structures 
              produce rubbery materials while others produce hard plastics.  This proposal
              investigates how some important properties are  controlled by chemical
              structure.  This fundamental understanding  will be applied to some problems of
              industrial interest in the  proposed work and will suggest strategies for
              solving a broader  range of practical problems.  ***
