Title       : Algorithmic and Foundational Aspects of Rewriting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9732186

Award Number: 9732186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rakesh M. Verma rverma@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Normalization, i.e., the simplification of expressions with  respect to a set of
              rules called a rewrite system, is a  fundamental computational step found in
              virtually all symbolic  computation and computer algebra systems. Applications
              of this  operation include functional, equational and logic programming 
              languages, abstract data type specification and verification,  automated
              deduction, code generation, type inferencing, and  computer algebra. This
              proposal addresses both algorithmic and  foundational aspects of this important
              problem in symbolic  computing and computer algebra. The project involves the 
              development of algorithms which use preprocessing and static  analysis for
              matching and normalization with respect to static  rules, and incremental
              algorithms for matching and normalization  with respect to dynamic rule sets. 
              Algorithms which learn  efficiently from their history will be designed for
              normalization  with respect to several important and useful classes of rewrite 
              systems. The practical performance of our algorithms will be  investigated. 
              Techniques and sufficient  conditions for the  important unique normal form
              property for nonlinear rewrite  systems and conditional rewrite systems will be
              devised. Abstract  Church-Rosser properties will be investigated for
              hierarchical  combinations of rewriting modulo equational theories. Existing 
              sufficient conditions for the Church-Rosser property of nonlinear  hierarchical
              combinations of ordinary and conditional rewrite  systems will be generalized.
              Hierarchical combinations are the  way in which most specifications and
              software are written. The  project is expected to:  (i) be useful in enhancing
              the  efficiency and power of symbolic computation and computer algebra 
              systems,  (ii) provide understanding of the inherent/complexities  of the
              involved operations, and (iii) yield new results,  techniques and insight into
              two fundamental issues of rewrite  systems, viz., uniqueness of normal forms
              and the Church-Rosser  property.
