Title       : Exciton Dynamics and Laser Action in Conducting Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9732820

Award Number: 9732820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zeev Valy Vardeny val@physics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Werner Gellermann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                              9732820  Vardeny  This  proposal
               by  Professor Z. Vardeny  of  the  Department  of  Physics   of  the 
              University  of  Utah  describes  research   on  semiconducting  polymers  which
               offer  promise  as  new   lasing  materials.   The  research  will be
              conducted  by  members  of  a  Focused   Research  Group  which  will 
              investigate  the  various  properties  of  these materials.  These systems of
              semiconducting  polymers are not yet sufficiently well understood and there is
              at  present  significant controversy about the results of experiments  and 
              their interpretation.  This research will attempt to provide  answers  to 
              critical questions on the origin  of  the  amplified  emission   from   PPV 
              and  related  polymers.   The   roles   of  superfluorescence,   superradiance,
               and  amplified   spontaneous  emission will be addressed in this research. The
              Utah group  will  attack these problems and will thereby contribute to clearing
               up  misunderstandings   and  misinterpretations   through   carefully 
              conducted  experiments  and  theoretical  analyses.   This  basic  research 
              has  the potential of making a great  impact  if  solid  state  organic  lasers
               can  be  produced  in  a  technologically  reliable manner.  %%%  This 
              proposal  by  Professor Z. Vardeny  of  the  Department  of  Physics   of  the 
              University  of  Utah  describes  research   on  semiconducting  polymers  which
               offer  promise  as  new   lasing  materials.   The  research  will be
              conducted  by  members  of  a  Focused   Research  Group  which  will 
              investigate  the  various  properties  of  these materials.  These systems of
              semiconducting  polymers are not yet sufficiently well understood and there is
              at  present  significant controversy about the results of experiments  and 
              their interpretation.  This research will attempt to provide  answers  to 
              critical questions on the origin  of  the  amplified  emission   from   PPV 
              and  related  polymers.   The   roles   of   superfluorescence,  
              superradiance,  and  amplified   spontaneous  emission will be addressed in
              this research. The Utah group  will  attack these problems and will thereby
              contribute to clearing  up  misunderstandings   and  misinterpretations  
              through   carefully  conducted  experiments  and  theoretical  analyses.   This
               basic  research  has  the potential of making a great  impact  if  solid 
              state  organic  lasers  can  be  produced  in  a  technologically  reliable
              manner.  ***
