Title       : SGER: Dynamical Models of Gene Networks in Development.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1997  
File        : a9732702

Award Number: 9732702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42328              (Estimated)
Investigator: Garrett M. Odell odellgm@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              O'Dell   9732702  The goals of this project are three-fold: To develop a
              mathematical framework and computer software for representing and solving
              differential equation models of gene networks, to assemble a minimal model of
              the segment polarity gene network of Drosophila melanogaster and to test and
              refine that model against results in the literature and laboratory experiments,
              adding components to the model as necessary.    Molecular genetics has produced
              a growing wealth of data on a host of functionally important genes. These data
              present both an opportunity and a serious challenge to biologists seeking to
              explain developmental mechanisms. Most, and maybe all, developmentally
              important genes act within dynamic networks whose essential behaviors are
              determined by complex webs of interaction among their constituents. Because of
              their dynamic nature, these essential behaviors cannot be directly inferred
              from the simple arrow diagrams that biologists typically use to summarize their
              experiments. The resolution of the actual dynamic interactions occurring
              simultaneously within even very small networks into accurate predictions of
              overall network behavior is not possible without the use of computer tools.
              Thus, computer models offer a powerful and unique approach to analyzing the
              behavior of such complex dynamic networks. The goal of this proposal is to
              develop and illustrate a general computer modeling approach that can be
              generally used to study gene networks in many different contexts. The basis of
              this approach is to formulate equations describing how the concentration of
              each network constituent varies continuously in time as a function of its
              interactions within the network, and then use them to explore the network's
              behavior. The segment polarity gene network in Drosophila which establishes
              patterned cell fates across the cellular blastoderm will be used as a model.
