Title       : Algorithms in Finite Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9732205

Award Number: 9732205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205589             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laszlo Babai laci@cs.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the design and analysis of  asymptotically efficient
              algorithms for finite matrix groups.    While three decades of work in
              computational group theory have  resulted in a thorough understanding, both
              theoretical and  practical, of many algorithmic aspects of permutation groups, 
              virtually no efficient algorithms have been designed until  recently in the
              potentially more important domain of matrix  groups. This latter area, however,
              is currently experiencing  explosive growth.    This research focuses on
              theoretical aspects and polynomial time  algorithms.  Past experience shows
              that this approach has the  potential of yielding important insights which may
              lead to  efficient implementations.  Indeed, algorithms inspired by the 
              polynomial-time paradigm have made their way into the widely used  group theory
              package GAP.    The main objective is to map out the normal structure of a
              matrix  group given by a list of generators. Components of this project 
              include a number of problems to be handled in the more general  context of
              "black-box groups" (the group operations are performed  by a "black box"). A
              key ingredient is the black-box recognition  of finite simple groups. Another
              component consists in "getting  past" a simple top quotient.    The methods
              include the statistical analysis of number theoretic  properties of the orders
              of elements in finite simple groups  (based on the classification of finite
              simple groups).  One of  the main obstacles seems to require the study of
              modular  representations of simple groups. Combinatorial methods seem to  be
              called for in the analysis of random sampling heuristics which  are required
              for most existing matrix group algorithms.
