Title       : Radical Aromatic Substitution via Atom-Transfer Addition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a9732600

Award Number: 9732600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey H. Byers byers@midlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Jeffrey H. Byers, of the Department of Chemistry and   Biochemistry at
              Middlebury College, is supported by a Research in   Undergraduate Institutions
              award from the Organic and Macromolecular   Chemistry Program for his studies
              of radical aromatic substitution via   atom transfer addition.  Professor Byers
              studies the reactions of   aromatic and heteroaromatic substances with a
              variety of electrophilic   radicals.  The electronic nature of the aromatic
              ring is modified through   the use of suitable protecting groups and through
              the formation of arene   chromium tricarbonyl complexes, thus providing
              aromatic substrates   reactive toward electron-rich radicals.  Professor Byers
              is also   exploring intramolecular reactions leading to the formation of
              mitocene   and pyrrolizidine ring systems, common structural features of a
              range of   biologically active compounds.  Although organic molecules
              containing an unpaired electron (`radicals`)   are often very reactive, they
              have until recently received comparatively   little attention as potential
              participants in the synthesis of organic   molecules.  With the support of a
              Research in Undergraduate Institutions   award from the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor   Jeffrey H. Byers, of the
              Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at   Middlebury College, explores a
              class of radical-forming reactions known   as atom-transfer additions for their
              ability to facilitate the synthesis   of aromatic compounds.  Products
              potentially made accessible through the   discovery and development of this
              chemistry include aryl acetic acids, a   general class of compounds frequently
              used as analgesics and   anti-inflammatory medications, as well as a variety of
              more complex   structures representing common structural features of a range of
                biologically active compounds.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
