Title       : Formal Collaboration Protocols: First-class Interaction Semantics for Multi-user
               Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9732577

Award Number: 9732577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303195             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. David Stotts, Jr. stotts@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The rules governing the interactions among group members in current shared
              computing applications are implicitly defined by scattered code  fragments.  A
              better method from a software engineering viewpoint is to explicitly define the
              collaboration semantics and implement them as a detached module in the system. 
              We call this a first-class collaboration protocol.  The advantages of this
              approach include ease of reading and understanding the rules, formal notation
              for analysis of errors, ease  of developing collaborative systems with modular
              components, and dynamic  adaptation of rules as collaboration progresses. 
              Through this research we will investigate such modular collaboration protocols,
              building and evaluating several complex collaborative systems that use them:  a
              group Web browser (CobWeb) that allows many different protocols; multi-user
              virtual environments (MUVEs); and an implementation of a game called Nomic, in
              which the only possible move  (initially, at least) is to propose and vote on
              rule changes.  This  research will have increasing significance as
              collaborative applications become more common; its impact will be to allow
              construction of collaborative software systems that are more reliable (provably
              correct), cheaper to  build, and cheaper to maintain.  Our results could find
              application in  teleconferencing systems, Web browsers, workflow tools,
              graphical virtual  environments, and CMM-compliant software development
              environments. http://www.cs.unc.edu/~stotts/nsf/iis/css98/
