Title       : Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9732083

Award Number: 9732083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric D. Siggia siggia@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9732083  Siggia  This grant is funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials 
              Research, Physics, and Molecular and Cellular Biology.  Phenomenological
              methods developed in condensed matter physics  will be applied to problems in
              cell biology ranging from the  mechanics of biomolecules to the formation of
              organelles.  In  contrast to approaches taken by cell biologists, for selected 
              problems physical theory can make semiquantitative predictions  before the
              biochemistry is known, and connect models to  experiments in ways biologists
              cannot.    Quantitative force-distance measurements of DNA interacting with 
              condensing agents (histones and polyamines) will be modeled in  order to
              extract binding agents, protein-protein interactions and  the kinetics of
              association.  General questions about folding  pathways in RNA and its behavior
              when mechanically extended will  be investigated by a kinetic Monte Carlo code
              for the secondary  structure, including `pseudo-knots.'    Classical studies of
              chromosomes in meiotic prophase strongly  suggest the morphology of a polymer
              brush.  Polymer theory then  explains a number of their properties that were
              otherwise  mysterious and makes semiquantitative predictions about forces  and
              tensions which are feasible to check experimentally.  The  biases that cause
              topoisomerase II to resolve the engangled  sister chromatid arms during mitosis
              may be understood in terms  of a multiphase polymer blend.    Collaborations
              will continue with the laboratory of Lippincott-  Schwartz at NIH including
              work on the quantitative analysis of  photobleach experiments; testing whether
              data for the drug  induced dissolution of the Golgi is compatible with an 
              interorganelle surface tension driven flow; and, develop and test 
              physical-chemical models for the organization of the Golgi and  other steps in
              protein secretion.    A kinetic Monte Carlo or molecular dynamics code will be 
              developed for short polymers consisting of hydrophobic and  hydrophilic
              monomers and will be used to simul ate dynamical  processes in bilayer
              membranes such as fusion and budding.  Realistic numbers of lipids and almost
              reasonable times can be  attained this way.  Similar generic and coarse grained
              models for  the proteins that catalyze fusion can be included, and the 
              simulations then are a heuristic tool from which to develop a  simple physical
              picture as to how proteins destabilize the  bilayer.    An effort will be made
              also to extend prior calculations of  anomalous scaling in passive scaler
              advection to the velocity  field.  At present there are no deductive theories
              as to why  velocity fluctuations become increasingly non-Gaussian as the  scale
              size increases.  %%%  This grant is funded jointly by the Divisions of
              Materials  Research, Physics, and Molecular and Cellular Biology. 
              Phenomenological methods developed in condensed matter physics  will be applied
              to problems in cell biology ranging from the  mechanics of biomolecules to the
              formation of organelles.  In  contrast to approaches taken by cell biologists,
              for selected  problems physical theory can make semiquantitative predictions 
              before the biochemistry is known, and connect models to  experiments in ways
              biologists cannot.  ***
