Title       : Long Term Behavior of Bond after Interface of Concrete/FRP & Steel/FRP &
               Coordination of Research on the Utilization of Fibre Composites for
               Repair/Retrofit of Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9732908

Award Number: 9732908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hamid Saadatmanesh hamid@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9732908  Saadatmanesh  During the past decade, an increasing level of attention
              has  been paid to fiber reinforced polymer composites as an  alternative
              construction materials.  Several studies by  various researchers in this area
              have indicated that one of  the most promising applications of fiber composites
              in  construction is in the area of structural repair and  retrofit.  In
              particular, research in this field has  indicated that epoxy bonded fiber
              composite sheets and  laminates can be used to externally reinforce a variety
              of  civil engineering type structures for seismic and nonseismic  forces.  The
              recent NSF workshop on research needs in the  area of composites for
              construction, clearly attests to the  promise of this technology and to the
              need for an effective  and coordinated research plan.    This project addresses
              the long-term durability of the bond  at the interface of composite/concrete
              and composite/steel.  A large number of short term studies have indicated the 
              effectiveness of fiber composites for strengthening of  structures, however,
              very few, if any at all, have addressed  the bond and interface behavior, in
              particular, the long-  term durability of the bond.  The successful application
              of  this technology requires a fundamental understanding of the  long-term bond
              behavior.  A comprehensive, accelerated aging  test program will be developed
              to investigate the bond under  various aggressive environmental conditions
              simulated by  special chemical solutions.   Analytical models based on 
              diffusion theories will be developed to predict the rate of  diffusion of
              aggressive elements into the composite and the  bond.   Fick's law will be
              adopted to predict the moisture  profile, and aggressive elements diffusion
              into the  composite and the bondline.  Peck's relationship will be  utilized to
              estimate the life of the bond.  ***
