Title       : Impact of Research Activities on McMurdo Dry Valley Lakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9732029

Award Number: 9732029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61475              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Doran pdoran@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Wharton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                       Diary Note                           OPP-0732029       
                                        Program staff recommend support of this workshop
              proposal,  which is exempt from peer review per NSF Manual 10,  122.1.c.3.b.
              The proposal will support a workshop to address  the impact of scientific
              research on the perennially ice-  covered lakes of the McMurdo Dry Valleys,
              Antarctica. The  Environmental Officer, Joyce Jatko, was consulted as to the 
              relevance of this workshop; she endorsed its funding.    This invitational
              workshop will bring together about 35  experts from not only the polar
              limnology community but from  the broader aquatic community. The workshop
              addresses  important issues, which have been the focus of question or  concern
              by the scientific community, program staff at NSF,  the US non-governmental
              community and the international  Antarctic community. The invited participant
              list is  appropriately balanced by scientific discipline and includes  the key
              international scientists. Program staff discussed  the lack of gender balance
              in the proposed list of  participants with the PIs, who have assured staff that
              a  more appropriate balance will be achieved. The results of  the workshop will
              be made available as a report, to be  widely distributed. The report will be
              useful not only to  scientists, but to managers of Antarctic programs who must 
              ensure that activities conducted in Antarctica are reviewed  to meet the intent
              of the Protocol on Environmental  Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  9732029 
              DORAN  The perennially ice-covered lakes of the McMurdo Dry Valleys  in
              southern Victoria Land, Antarctica, have been the object  of study since their
              discovery by Robert Falcon Scott in  1903. These dry valley lakes are unique on
              Earth, and there  is great interest within the scientific community to 
              preserve their pristine nature to the maximum extent  possible. This award will
              support an invitational workshop  which will bring together about thirty-five
              scientists with  expe rtise in aquatic environments. The purpose of the 
              workshop is to assess the impact of past and current  research activities in
              and around the dry valley lakes. The  group will make recommendations on the
              establishment of  acceptable levels of impact as well as on approaches to 
              management of future research activities in an  environmentally responsible
              manner. Given the uniqueness and  scientifically valuable nature of these
              lakes, workshop  participants will be chosen from the pool of Antarctic and 
              Arctic scientists as well as from investigators in the  broader aquatic
              sciences community. Workshop participants  will address the potential impacts
              of research activities on  the Antarctic lakes, including ice-hole melting,
              SCUBA  diving, remotely-operated and autonomously-operated  underwater
              vehicles, the use of chemical tracers, repetitive  water sampling, waster
              removal and sediment coring. The  impact of shore-based and glacier melt stream
              research  activities on the dry valley lakes will also be explored.  This
              serious approach to one aspect of the issue of human  impact to the Earth's
              environment should provide critical  information to help guide and direct
              future scientific  activities.
