Title       : CAREER: Robust Learning Control with Application to Intelligent Building Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a9732986

Award Number: 9732986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Young pmy@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9732986
Young
The research focuses on the development of new methodologies for
              robust controller analysis and design, which will be combined with
              reinforcement learning techniques to develop a new control paradigm: robust
              learning control.  These new analysis and design tools will then be used to
              address two specific application areas for intelligent building systems:
              structural control and environmental control.  These problems are highly
              multidisciplinary in nature, and present interesting and important research
              challenges.  At the same time simplified versions of these problems will be
              used as effective educational tools in a multidisciplinary undergraduate
              teaching laboratory.

The theoretical and computational part of the work will
              aim towards developing computationally efficient analysis and synthesis methods
              for a general class of robust performance problems for complex multivariable
              uncertain systems.  These will allow one to address problems with parametric
              uncertainty and (possibly nonlinear) dynamic uncertainty, with both unknown
              disturbances and known fixed inputs.  These theoretical results will be used as
              the basis for studying reinforcement learning controllers, by developing an
              uncertainty model for the learning process within the above robustness
              framework.  This will in turn be used to develop a new controller design
              methodology for robust leaning controllers, which combine the best aspects of
              robust and reinforcement learning control.  The controller will have guaranteed
              insensitivity to plant/parameter variations and disturbance signals, while at
              the same time it will be capable of precisely tuning itself to the
              nonlinearities and time-variations of a particular plant.

The first
              application area for these new techniques will be vibration supression in tall
              buildings.  The buildings will be subjected to loading which might arise from
              earthquakes and/or high winds.  The goal is to equip the building with sensors
              and actuators under computer control, creating an intelligent building which
              has the ability to sense and react to its enviroment.  Computer simulations,
              based on mathematical models, will be comtined with wind-tunnel experiments on
              a dynamically-scaled physical model.  A DSP-based real-time digital feedback
              control scheme will be used to implement advanced feedback controllers,
              operating at a sufficiently high bandwidth to effect control of wind-induced
              vibration on the structure.

These techniques will also be applied to design
              controllers for building environmental systems.  These Heating, Ventilation,
              and Air-Conditioning (HVAC) systems present very challenging control problems
              because they are complex nonlinear time-varying systems, and yet the controller
              is required to function on first powering up, preferably without human
              intervention.  Furthermore, high performance is required for energy efficiency,
              while at the same time robust stability is essential for safety reasons.  The
              new robust learning controllers will be tested both in simulation and on an
              experimental HVAC system.  
***  

