Title       : Systematics and Evolutionary Biology: A Continuing Program of Undergraduate
               Research at the American Musuem of Natural History (New York City)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9732279

Award Number: 9732279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melanie L J. Stiassny mljs@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9732279    The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) is an  inspirational
              place for young scientists to work, and its  REU program offers an unrivaled
              opportunity to expose  students to the challenge of original research in fields
              of  biology that they rarely have the opportunity to fully  explore at their
              home institutions.  The AMNH program draws  in the research and mentoring
              expertise of the AMNH's  outstanding scientific staff, and provides students
              with a  coherent, hands-on introduction to research in the broad  areas of
              systematics and evolutionary biology.  In entering  into the Museum community,
              students are offered an  extraordinary opportunity to broaden their experience
              of  biological disciplines and participate in the highest  caliber research at
              a premier research institution.    AMNH offers comprehensive, interactive
              educational  experience that centers around projects carefully designed  to
              introduce undergraduates to the excitement, challenge,  and relevance of
              systematics and contemporary evolutionary  biology.  In addition to the core
              component of hands-on  research, students participate in round-table
              discussions  where they discuss their research progress and problems,  "show
              and tell" their latest findings, and thrash-out ideas  in an informal and
              supportive setting.  A Species Lecture  Series introduces students to eminent
              museum faculty whose  lectures address current debates in systematics and 
              evolutionary theory.  At the end of each summer program,  students participate
              in a Student Seminar where they  give formal slide-illustrated presentations to
              a supportive,  yet critical, audience of mentors and peers.  On leaving the 
              AMNH, students are tracked and, in many cases, supported  through their
              remaining undergraduate, graduate, and even  postdoctoral careers.
