Title       : Operator Theory and Systems Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9732891

Award Number: 9732891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. William Helton helton@osiris.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT DMS-9732891, PI: Helton    This is a proposal to continue
              support for several projects in the parts of   operator theory and functional
              analysis related to engineering system   theory. Linear operator theory has had
              a strong interplay  with analytic function theory and engineering for many
              decades.  Indeed most commercial software (at least in the control engineering
              community)   for solving analytic function problems is based on this type of
              interplay between functions and matrices. One branch of analysis closely
              related to applications is classical Nevanlinna-Pick-Nehari theory,or
              equivalently  commutant lifting theory, a part of the area called operator
              model theory.  The early development of this  was done for the purest of
              mathematical reasons,   but in the mid 1970's  and early 1980's this was shown
              by this investigator and others to be critical to the design of engineering
              systems where   stability of the system is the key constraint. This motivated
              much  more mathematical development and now it is one of the areas   of
              functional analysis most closely associated with control   engineering. For
              many years (since Norbert Wiener) design tools   optimized mean square
              performance. The theory above ultimately lead to   (commercially commonplace)
              tools for optimizing worst case   frequency domain performance. The aim of this
              proposal is to extend this core theory in radically new directions: 1.Highly
              nonlinear generalizations.   The goal is to find canonical ''nonlinear
              generalizations" of   analytic function theory and the related parts of
              operator theory.   Many systems which people wish to control are nonlinear
              (e.g., jet engines),   so there is a big demand for an effective nonlinear
              theory. 2.Linear Operators} Intersections of matrix intervals, and Hereditary
              operators and polynomials   are the subject of work with Jim Agler. 3.
              Optimization over spaces of analytic functions} (with Orlando Merino and
              others). Qualitative theory, computer  algorithms based on this theory, a
              nalysis of such algorithms. Connections of this work with other branches of
              mathematics. These are the key optimization problems which arise in designs of
              linear engineering systems where there are competing constraints, or
              uncertainty in the math model of the physical system one is trying to control.
              4. Computer operator algebra.Linear engineering systems theory and operator
              theory are rife with calculations in a noncommuting algebra. For example, if
              the classical core above is set in engineering   `statespace coordinates', the
              main theorems can be derived mostly by matrix algebra. Helton's group are the
              main providers   of software (called NCAlgebra) for performing general
              noncommuting calculations in Mathematica. The work has gone thru several phases
              and in current research the investigators now have extensive software
              implementing noncommutative Groebner basis algorithms due to Mora in C++ and
              linked Mathematica software   for sorting and ''shrinking" the output in
              various ways. It is used in the  highly ambitious pursuit of trying to find
              computer methods for helping a researcher ''discover" (rather than just verify)
              theorems in branches of operator theory and engineering systems.
