Title       : Towards Friction-Free Work: A Multi-Method Study of the Use of Information
               Technology in the Real-Estate Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9732799

Award Number: 9732799
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rolf T. Wigand rwigand@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven B. Sawyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Crowston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The goal of this pilot study is to examine how the pervasive use of information
              technologies (IT) in the real-estate industry changes the way people and
              organizations in that industry work. Real estate was chosen because it has
              already adopted many new technologies, but, as a transactional intermediary,
              will be greatly affected by the on-going shift to electronic transactions.  The
              objectives of our overall study are: 1) to describe how the use of IT changes
              the ways individual knowledge workers conduct their work, 2) describe
              organizational changes related to the use of IT, and 3) describe how change in
              individual work changes organizational structures and processes. In this pilot
              study, we focus specifically on developing instruments and procedures for the
              first two objectives and the theoretical framework for objective 3. In
              particular, we conduct ethnographic studies of individual real estate agents
              and their adaptations to the introduction of IT and case studies and surveys of
              a sample of real estate agencies.  This study will provide a deeper scientific
              understanding of how work and IT are interrelated and how organizations view
              information technology as enablers of business goals. Further, findings will
              illuminate issues regarding new forms of organization such as "companies of
              one" and virtual organization. In turn, these findings are expected to provide
              critical general knowledge for the design of IT in context. 
              http://florin.syr.edu/~crowston/real-estate.html         

