Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Internal Layers in Fluid Flow and Solid Deformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1999  
File        : a9732876

Award Number: 9732876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Glimm glimm@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Saltz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley J. Plohr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9732876    James Glimm     Abstract    Mixing layers, internal layers, and
              fronts are the primary features of many  important fluid flow and solid
              deformation problems.  The proposers have  established striking progress in
              these areas, and propose here to develop  systematically an effective
              theoretical and computational methodology for their  study.  The central
              intellectual challenge in the study of layers and fronts  involves the complex
              interactions of physical processes with disparate length  scales.  The length
              scales of key microscopic processes within a layer are  typically orders of
              magnitude smaller than those of the ambient fluid in which  the layer is
              embedded, yet they may have a profound effect on the macroscopic  structure of
              the fluid flow.  For this reason, direct numerical simulation  requires special
              algorithms to resolve the important layer microstructure  accurately with
              reasonable computational resources.  The theoretical challenge  is two-fold, as
              the problem requires scale-up techniques to understand the  effects of the
              microscopic processes at the macroscopic level, and then methods  to express
              the nonlinear coupling of distinct physical processes operating on  comparable
              length scales.  While the study of layers and fronts is at least a  two-scale
              problem, the interest here is in practical applications, which  usually involve
              multiple length scales within a layer.  This project will  provide (a) the
              theoretical and algorithmic basis for a new class of production  codes for the
              simulation of complex fluid flow and solid deformation; (b) the  theoretical
              basis for understanding turbulent multiphase flow and fluid mixing;  (c)
              validation of turbulence and mixing models, through exploration of  parameter
              regimes in highly resolved simulations that are in step with physical 
              experiment; and (d) a new mathematical theory for the interaction of nonlinear 
              hyperbolic waves, including an understanding of phenomena which can in some 
              cases prevent or overcome the poor perform ance of simulation codes.    When
              the surface of contact between two distinct materials is unstable, small 
              random disturbances on the surface will develop into interpenetrating 
              structures, such as fingers, jets, droplets, and bubbles.  These structures are
               complex and chaotic, and together they comprise a "mixing layer."  Mixing 
              layers are of fundamental importance in natural phenomena such as supernova 
              explosions, and in technological applications such as inertial confinement 
              fusion (ICF), where they are known to be a major limiting factor in the 
              performance of ICF capsules.  Typically a mixing layer is embedded in a 
              large-scale fluid or solid flow, and in this case the precise resolution of a 
              mixing layer by computer simulation is impractical (if not impossible) if the 
              computer code is to be used to make quantitative predictions on a regular 
              basis.  For this reason, a scientific theory is required to capture the 
              unresolvable microstructure of mixing layers in a macroscopic framework which 
              is amenable to computer simulation.  The goal of this project is to develop 
              such a theory and to demonstrate its validity by comparison with computer 
              simulation and physical experiment.  This work will require new ideas, as 
              described in this proposal, and will contribute to the fundamental knowledge 
              base of science, of significance to a broad range of scientific phenomena.
