Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Electro-optic Field Sensors and Their
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9732516

Award Number: 9732516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29365              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xi-Cheng Zhang zhangxc@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9732516  Zhang    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Xi-Cheng Zhang, 
              Department of Physics, Applied Physics and Astronomy,  Rensselaer Polytechnic
              Institute, to pursue with Professor  Hyun-Shik Kang, Department of Physics
              Education, Chonbuk  National University, Korea, for 24 months, a program of 
              cooperative research on electro-optic field sensors and  their applications. 
              Much of the activity initially will  concentrate on learning from the Korean
              collaborator  techniques used for growth and fabrication of high quality  ZnTe
              crystals.  These electro-optic crystals then will be  used as broad band field
              sensors for the coherent  measurement of freely-propagating ultra wideband
              pulsed  terahertz electromagnetic waves (THz beams).    The present
              collaboration will add an international  dimension to Dr. Zhang's research
              presently funded under  NSF Grant No. ECS-9701486.  The U.S. researcher expects
               this new collaboration to be beneficial to ongoing research  under his NSF
              grant.  The PI reports that the ZnTe sensor  is so sensitive that it eliminates
              the need for metallic  antennas and electrical connections that can interfere
              with  accurate measurement and characterization of the  electromagnetic
              environment.  Other benefits include  improved measurement accuracy by reducing
              susceptibility to  electrical noise pick up, thus, eliminating the  need for 
              electrical power at the sensor head; the sensor head can be  placed in hostile
              or remote areas; and the device's  compactness allows measurement in small
              cavities.  This  project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea 
              Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the  level of cooperation
              between U.S. and Korean scientists and  engineers through the exchange of
              scientific information,  ideas, skills, and techniques and through
              collaboration on  problems of mutual benefit.  This project will provide 
              international training and experience for a U.S. graduate  student in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant  area of ph otonics and
              optoelectronics research..  Korean  participation is supported by the Korea
              Science and  Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  ***
