Title       : Ultrathin Film Molecular Materials: New Molecules, New Deposition and
               Characterization Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a9732650

Award Number: 9732650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Armstrong nra@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     The development of new preparation methodologies for the  creation of
              novel organic thin film assemblies for use as optical and electronic elements
              is the focus of the research in this  project supported by the Analytical and
              Surface Chemistry Program.   Professor Armstrong and his students at the
              University of Arizona  will use a comprehensive approach of synthesis and
              characterization  of these thin film systems.  Organic molecular beam epitaxy
              (OMBE)  and Langmuir-Blodgett (L-B) approaches will be employed to deposit 
              films on a variety of substrate surfaces.  The preparation of  organic films of
              highly luminescent dyes by OMBE will be  characterized through a variety of
              spectroscopic and  crystallographic methods to gain understanding into the role
              of  structure and composition in their ultimate use as microcircuitry 
              elements.  Bilayer and multilayer films of a number of  phthalocyanine
              derivatives will be prepared using the L-B  technique.  The films are being
              investigated for future  applications as microcircuitry and field effect
              transistor (FET)  devices.       The controlled growth of organic molecular
              thin films is an  area of intense interest due to its potential impact in the 
              creation of molecular electronic devices.  The development of new  preparation
              and characterization strategies is a vital component in  the evolution of this
              technology.  Professor Armstrong and his  students at the University of Arizona
              will apply new synthetic  methods and a host of spectroscopic techniques to
              gain insights  into the fundamental electronic and optical properties of
              organic  thin films.  The combination of synthetic and characterization 
              aspects of molecular thin film systems undertaken here will have  relevance to
              a wide range of projected applications of organic thin  films.
