Title       : Structure and Defects of Quasicrystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9732567

Award Number: 9732567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Widom widom@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9732567
Widom
This grant supports theoretical research into the properties of
              quasicrystalline alloys.  Aluminum-rich alloys containing transition metals
              form intricate crystal structures and quasicrystals.  These alloys display
              unusual mechanical properties such as low coefficients of friction, great
              hardness at low temperatures, and ductility at high temperatures. 
              Quasicrystals already strengthen surgical alloys, and may eventually coat
              surfaces of conventional metals subject to wear by friction, such as frying
              pains and automobile engine parts.  The research conducted here will attempt to
              understand the atomic interactions, atomic structure and resulting mechanical
              properties of bulk quasicrystals, their defects and surfaces.  

Electronic
              structure based pair and many-body interaction potentials for intermetallic
              alloys allow reliable total energy calculations for complex crystalline and
              aperiodic structures.  This research evaluates and applies these interactions
              for such alloy families as Al-Mn, Al-Cu-Co, Al-Ni-Co and Al-Cu-Fe.  With the
              interactions in hand, we will evaluate mechanical and thermodynamic stability
              for complex crystalline structure and decagonal and icosahedral quasicrystals. 
              We will improve current understanding of the atomic positions, and understand
              the energetic preference for particular structures.

To understand the
              equilibrium thermodynamics of these phases we will evaluate low energy
              excitations such as vacancies, chemical disorder and atomic vibrations. 
              Quasicrystalline materials possess additional types of structural excitations
              known as phason fluctuations.  The precise meaning of a phason fluctuation in
              terms of atomic displacements is presently not well known.  One stategy for
              modeling thermodynamic properties involves deriving tiling Hamiltonians.  These
              are approximations for calculating the free energy of large aperiodic
              structures based on careful evaluation of energy and entropy for small unit
              cell structures.  With the tiling Hamiltonian we can study phason eleasticity
              and solid state phase transformations.

Forefront theoretical and
              experimental research addresses mechanical properties of quasicrystals,
              including the role of defects.  This research examines structures and long
              range strain fields at dislocations and energetics of grain boundaries and twin
              boundaries.  Structural modifications at interfaces between quasicrystals and
              vacuum or other metals require attention.  Beyond these purely structural
              questions, the low energy excitations discussed above influence dynamical
              properties such as atomic diffusion and dislocation motion.  This grant studies
              such defects.  Starting with simplified tiling and Lennard-Jones atomistic
              models, we eventually link with the tiling Hamiltonians and atomic structure
              modeling.
%%%
This grant supports theoretical research into the properties of
              quasicrystalline alloys.  Aluminum-rich alloys containing transition metals
              form intricate crystal structures and quasicrystals.  These alloys display
              unusual mechanical properties such as low coefficients of friction, great
              hardness at low temperatures, and ductility at high temperatures. 
              Quasicrystals already strengthen surgical alloys, and may eventually coat
              surfaces of conventional metals subject to wear by friction, such as frying
              pains and automobile engine parts.  The research conducted here will attempt to
              understand the atomic interactions, atomic structure and resulting mechanical
              properties of bulk quasicrystals, their defects and surfaces.  
***

