Title       : Monte Carlo Arithmetic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1998       
File        : a9732309

Award Number: 9732309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53140              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Stott Parker stott@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Monte Carlo Arithmetic (MCA) is an extension of standard floating-  point
              arithmetic that exploits randomness in basic floating-point  operations.  MCA
              uses randomization to implement random rounding  --- which forces roundoff
              errors to be randomly distributed ---  and random unrounding --- which randomly
              extends the inputs of  arithmetic operations to arbitrary precision.    MCA has
              potential theoretical and practical benefits.  Random  rounding can be used to
              produce roundoff errors that are truly  random and uncorrelated, and that have
              zero expected bias,  thereby avoiding some anomalies of floating-point
              arithmetic.  Random unrounding detects catastrophic cancellation, which is the 
              primary way that significant digits are lost in numerical  computation.    The
              primary practical benefit of MCA appears to be that it can  give ordinary
              mortals an intuitive, empirical sense of the  accuracy of their computed
              results.  MCA transforms a floating-  point computation into a Monte Carlo
              computation, and roundoff  analysis into statistical analysis.  By running a
              program  multiple times, one directly measures sensitivity of particular 
              outputs to random perturbations of particular inputs.  Generally, it gives a
              different perspective on the study of  error.    The project will encompass two
              tasks:  first, development of an  MCA environment, a set of tools permitting
              numerical analysts to  run existing programs with MCA instead of standard
              floating-  point, and to analyze the results; second, study of several large- 
              scale applications, numerically interesting models that try to  establish, one
              way or the other, the usefulness of MCA in  practice.
