Title       : (SGER) COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Hydrometeorological Analysis of the Spring Creek
               Flood of 1997-Fort Collins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1997   
File        : a9732403

Award Number: 9732403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Smith jsmith@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9732403  Smith     A small exploratory grant is proposed to employ advanced
              state of the art remote sensing and rainfall/runoff modeling approaches to
              examine the meteorology, runoff and channel hydraulics of the catastrophic
              flood which occurred on the Spring Creek drainage on July 28, 1997 in Fort
              Collins, Colorado.  This flood resulted in an estimated 50 to 100 million
              dollars of damage to Colorado State University alone.  Additional damages
              include the devastation of two mobile homes courts, flooding of numerous homes,
              multiple injuries and the unfortunate deaths of five people.  The proposed
              study is a collaborative effort between researchers at the University of
              Connecticut, University of Missouri, and Princeton University.  The researchers
              involved have extensive experience in radar-rainfall estimation, hydrologic
              scaling, and the development of state of the art rainfall/runoff models which
              incorporate remotely-senses data.  The objectives of this proposed study are to
              (1) characterize the meteorological conditions which existed on the evening of
              July 28 leading to over 11 inches of rainfall in less than three hours on      
              the watershed; (2) calibrate and verify radar-rainfall estimates from the
              NSF-funded CSU-CHILL  S-band dual-polarization research radar, and the two
              WSR-88D NEXRAD radars located near Denver, Colorado and Cheyenne, Wyoming,
              using surface recorded  rainfall accumulations; (3) collect and organize
              watershed characteristic and flood data using GIS; (4) apply the rainfall and
              watershed characteristic data to recreate the runoff event using a
              two-dimensional, physically-based hydrologic model; and (5) compare and
              contrast the performance of two-dimensional runoff simulation results with a
              recreation of the flood using the more traditional SWMM and HEC-2 approaches
              for flood warning and hydrologic design.  The collaborative proposers are
              uniquely positioned to perform this research because they immediately sought
              and obtained data relevant to the flood.  Additionally, the c ollaborative
              research team has conducted a significant amount of research and development to
              rainfall/runoff modeling using remotely-sensed inputs.  Furthermore, the two of
              the proposers lived in Fort Collins for many years, have extensive hydrologic
              contacts in the area, and are intimately familiar with the region affected by
              the flood.  It is anticipated that the initial analysis, modeling and
              re-creation of the flood can be performed in less than 3 months leading to a
              summary report and paper on the conditions leading up to, and during the event.
               Additional refinement and modifications of modeling efforts will continue
              until funding is expended.  This initial effort will garner and focus national
              attention on the hydrometeorological conditions which lead to this storm, and
              establish the capabilities of physically-based, distributed-parameter runoff
              models using remotely-sensed rainfall input for predicting short-duration flash
              floods in urban areas.  This new flash-flood modeling approach to be evaluated
              has significant potential to reduce the risk of life and property, as well as
              improve the accuracy of hydrologic design in urban areas.
