Title       : Summer Research Program in Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2000   
File        : a9732158

Award Number: 9732158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terrence W. Rettig                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth A. Cunningham cunningm@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin K. Ligare  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Bucknell University `Summer Research Program in Physics`  will be continued,
              giving eight undergraduate students per  summer the opportunity to collaborate
              with a member of the  Bucknell physics faculty for ten weeks on his or her 
              research.  Students will be recruited from around the  country, with a focus on
              colleges in the eastern seaboard  and Appalachian region.  Six Bucknell faculty
              will offer  projects each summer, so the level of student-faculty  interaction
              will be high.  This immersion in a research  environment is intended to
              complement traditional classroom  experiences of the students.  Participation
              will help  students make career choices, and will provide specific  preparation
              for those that continue on the graduate studies  in physics.  All of the
              students will live together on the  Bucknell campus, conduct most of their
              research in on-campus  facilities, and participate in weekly departmental
              seminars  and colloquia.  Projects offered cover many areas of  physics.  They
              include experimental investigations of phase  transitions in biological cell
              membranes, use of laser  diodes and magnetic resonance to study atomic
              interactions,  experimental studies of pattern formation and chaos in  complex
              systems, observation based studies of star  formation, analysis of data from an
              experiment performed at  Fermilab National Accelerator, theoretical studies in 
              quantum optics, and theoretical studies in general  relativity.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
