Title       : Undergraduate Research Training at Towson University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9732442

Award Number: 9732442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Wubah   (Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Brakke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry E. Wimmers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9732442    This REU Site will train highly qualified students in  biology
              through participation in undergraduate research.  The program will enable
              students to develop skills in  effective experimental design and execution,
              oral and  written communication, and critical thinking.  In doing  so,
              outstanding students will be encouraged to pursue  careers in biological
              research.  Working with their  faculty mentors, students will formulate working
               hypothesis, design and execute experiments, collect and  analyze data, and
              present their findings in both oral and  written forms.  In addition, the
              program will include  seminars by visiting scholars, weekly group research 
              meetings, journal clubs, and workshops in ethics,  scientific writing and
              career development. Students will  also visit three types of institutions that
              represent a  range of research environments different from the  university:
              institutions that combine research with public  education, traditional research
              institutions, and  industrial research-and-development divisions.  Students 
              will participate in a broad range of projects, which will  help students
              understand the interrelationships within and  between the various levels of
              biological organization.  The REU Site at Towson University will offer ample 
              opportunities to each participant through well-equipped  research laboratories,
              numerous field sites, and the  availability of highly specialized facilities at
              allied  institutions.  Towson University's commitment of financial  and human
              resources to the proposed project demonstrate  institutional support for
              undergraduate research.  Special  efforts will be made to involve minority
              students and  women in the program. The Site will train 48 undergraduate 
              students over a three year period, one-third of whom will  be fully supported
              by Towson University.
