Title       : Workforce Agility: Classification and Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9732868

Award Number: 9732868
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace J. Hopp hopp@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark P. Van Oyen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9732868  Hopp   This grant focuses on development of a theoretically founded
              framework for the design and implementation of effective production policies
              for workers in agile workforce systems.  Such systems include a wide range of
              organizations that utilize cross-trained workers and possibly dynamic task
              assignment/job-processing to respond to changes in system workload.  The scope
              of our research includes: (1) constructing a detailed classification scheme for
              manufacturing and service environments that identifies key characteristics
              germane to the selection of a workforce policy, and (2) creating and analyzing
              a series of models with which to predict the performance of various policies in
              various environments and thereby gain insight into the factors that determine
              their efficacy.  The primary focus of the research will be on logistical
              efficiency (e.g., maximizing performance in terms of throughput, flowtime, or
              work-in-process for a given workforce size).  Because this research will be
              carried out in close collaboration with several industrial practitioners, real
              world considerations such as motivational effects, human factors, and
              managerial complexity will be addressed as well.   The models and
              classification scheme developed through this research will provide benefits
              that include: (1) managerial insights into why and where agility in the
              workforce is effective, (2) a set of useful analytical models (performance
              predictors, quantification of opportunity, and near-optimal
              policies/organization schemes) to assist engineers in the analysis/design of
              agile work systems, and (3) extension of the queueing and systems modeling
              technology base to include classes of systems where machines and labor interact
              in new ways for productivity improvement. Technology transfer will occur
              through practitioner and research oriented publications, direct contact with
              industrial sponsors, and teaching efforts to instill well-founded principles of
              workforce agility in the minds of future engineering and manageme nt
              practitioners.
