Title       : Lock-Free and Wait-Free Synchronization in Multiprogrammed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9732916

Award Number: 9732916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218257             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Anderson anderson@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Research will be conducted on lock-free and wait-free shared-  object algorithms
              for multiprogrammed systems in which several  processes may execute on the same
              processor.  In such systems,  process delays are quite common, due to
              preemptions.  Most lock-  based synchronization algorithms perform poorly in
              the  face of such delays, because a delayed process holding a lock can  impede
              the progress of other processes waiting for that lock.  Furthermore, lock-based
              algorithms are susceptible to problems  such as deadlock and priority
              inversion. Lock-free and wait-free  algorithms do not suffer from these
              problems.  Previous research  on lock-free and wait-free algorithms has almost
              exclusively  focused on asynchronous execution models in which processes may 
              interleave arbitrarily.  Such models can be a hindrance when  designing
              algorithms for multiprogrammed systems, because they  force interleavings to be
              considered that cannot arise.  What is  needed is a new framework for lock-free
              and wait-free  synchronization directed toward multiprogrammed systems.  The
              main  objective of this project is to develop such a framework.  This 
              framework will be established through a combination of research on  lock-free
              and wait-free algorithms for multiprogrammed systems,  and lower-bound results
              relevant to the development of such  algorithms.  The framework will be
              experimentally evaluated  using simulation models, synthetic workloads, and
              real-world  applications.
