Title       : Ultrafast and 4pi-Confocal Micro-Spectroscopy of Few or Single Atomic Defects,
               Migration, and Local Processes in Inhomogeneous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9732023

Award Number: 9732023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Williams williams@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                      9732023  Williams    This proposal by Professor Richard T. Williams of
              the Department  of Physics of Wake Forest University describes a research
              program  for the characterization of materials based on far-field optical 
              microscopy.  The goal is atomic scale identification and  characterization of
              local and extended defects in inorganic  materials.  Specific phenomena which
              will be observed and studied  by this technique include local diffusion of
              adsorbates in  zeolites, single molecule imaging of fluorescent dyes in organic
               host matrices, Cesium 3+ clustering at interfaces of fluoride  hosts, 3D
              mapping GaN/AlN films, and characterization of  desorption -induced defects in
              ionic and semiconducting systems.  The proposed work involves new, high-risk,
              high-payoff research.  %%%  This proposal by Professor Richard T. Williams of
              the Department  of Physics of Wake Forest University describes a research
              program  for the characterization of materials based on far-field optical 
              microscopy.  The goal is atomic scale identification and  characterization of
              local and extended defects in inorganic  materials.  Specific phenomena which
              will be observed and studied  by this technique include local diffusion of
              adsorbates in  zeolites, single molecule imaging of fluorescent dyes in organic
               host matrices, Cesium 3+ clustering at interfaces of fluoride  hosts,
              3dimensional  mapping Gallium-Nitride/Aluminum-Nitride  films, and
              characterization of desorption -induced defects in  ionic and semiconducting
              systems.  The proposed work involves  new, high-risk, high-payoff research. 
              ***
