Title       : Ion Implantation Doping Isolation of III-Nitrides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2000     
File        : a9732865

Award Number: 9732865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Pearton spear@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9732865  Pearton    This project will investigate n- and p-type doping of GaN
              and  related alloys by ion implantation and high temperature annealing  to
              achieve greater understanding of doping in GaN and related  materials. Research
              activities include study of several major  topics: (i) use of Mg/O or Be/O
              co-implantation to achieve high  (>10E18cm-3) p-type doping of GaN and AlGaN.
              By varying the doses  of each co-implanted species existing theory will be
              tested, and  the role of  O established by comparing its effect to that of 
              other species; co-implant species include N, Ar or F.  (ii) comparison of
              different acceptor dopants: Ca was found to  have a similar ionization level to
              that of Mg, i.e., ~170meV.  Zn, Cd, Be will be implanted, and C, Ge and Sn will
              be co-  implanted with group III species to assess their functionality as 
              acceptors. (iii) comparison of different donor dopants; the  doping properties
              of the group VI species, S, Se and Te are, as  yet, not established in GaN.
              (iv) use of ultra-high annealing  temperatures to achieve higher activation
              efficiency. Preliminary  data indicate higher doping can be achieved for
              annealing at  >1500 C. The major problem at these temperatures is preservation 
              of the GaN surfaces - various methods of AlN deposition will be  investigated
              as a solution. (v) investigation of new implant  isolation species, such as V,
              Fe or Co, which might create  thermally stable deep levels in GaN and have
              application to  produce device isolation. The significance of this work will be
               the development of a more complete understanding of doping in GaN  and related
              materials providing a materials science basis for  selective area implantation
              in the development of advanced  devices.  %%%  The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of  materials science having high
              technological relevance. The  research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a  fundamental level to important aspects of electronic/photonic 
              devices. The basic knowled ge and understanding gained from the  research is
              expected to contribute to improving the performance  and stability of advanced
              devices and circuits by providing a  fundamental understanding and a basis for
              designing and producing  improved materials, and materials combinations.  An
              important  feature of the program is the integration of research and  education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and  technologically
              significant area.  ***
