Title       : Efficient Sharing of RSA Keys and Diffie-Hellman Bit Security
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1998      
File        : a9732754

Award Number: 9732754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Boneh dabo@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research focuses on two topics in Applied Cryptography:  efficient
              generation of shared RSA keys and the bit security of  the Diffie-Hellman
              secret.    To protect a high security private key one may wish to share it 
              among a few sites. If a small number of sites are compromised no  harm is done.
              An obvious question is who generates the shared  key? Traditionally, a "trusted
              dealer" generates an RSA key pair  and then splits the private key among the
              sites.  This project  studies various protocols for enabling three or more
              parties to  efficiently generate a shared RSA key WITHOUT a trusted dealer.  At
              the end of the computation the participants have an RSA  modulus N=pq. They are
              all convinced that N is the product of two  large distinct primes; however no
              proper coalition knows the  factorization of N.  The protocols should be
              appropriate for  small, low bandwidth devices such as smartcards or Personal 
              Digital Assistants (PDA's).    The project's second topic is the bit security
              of the Diffie-  Hellman secret.  The Diffie-Hellman protocol enables two
              parties  to exchange a secret.  Although an adversary may not be able to 
              compute the entire secret, she may be able to infer certain  information about
              it.  The proposed research will provide bounds  on the amount of information an
              adversary can infer.  To do so  one shows that if an adversary can recover
              certain bits of the  Diffie-Hellman secret then she can also break the entire 
              protocol.  The techniques needed for such reductions involve  lattices and the
              LLL algorithm.
