Title       : Representation Theory of p-Adic Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9732527

Award Number: 9732527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80890              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Kutzko pkutzko@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Philip Kutzko  University of Iowa  DMS-97 32527       Professor
              Kutzko will study the smooth complex representation theory of a reductive
              p-adic group using the method of types.  A type in a group is a compact open
              subgroup together with an irreducible representation in such a way that the
              pair carries information about all irreducible representations.  This approach
              has been used successfully in the past to study other linear groups.  Among
              other projects, the investigator will try to apply the method of types be
              applied in the context of split classical groups with the goal of understanding
              reducibility of parabolically induced representations.    One of the most
              important mathematical ideas of the second half of the century, is that
              analytic formula  often encodes discrete information. For example, one might
              want to count the number of solutions of a particular equation, but discover
              that the solutions are very hard to find. On the other hand, you might want to
              count the number of solutions to a sequence of equations and consider the
              answers as a sequence. Mathematicians call these kind of problems 'discrete'.
              The functions that appear in calculus, and for which calculus works so well,
              are not 'discrete', but 'analytic.'  Amazingly, the right kind of analytic
              function can contain the answer or answers to the discrete examples above. 
              Actually the first examples of this were discovered a couple hundred years ago,
               but in the past thirty years, the subject has been systematized into a branch
              of number theory called the Langlands program.  This project is an important
              part of the Langlands program.
