Title       : Dynamical Properties of Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9732800

Award Number: 9732800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Lobb lobb@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9732800  Lobb
                 This   experimental   research  project  deals   with   dynamical 
              properties   of  superconductors,  with  emphasis  on   high   Tc  materials. 
              The  Hall effect will be studied  in  NCCO  and  PCCO  superconductors of
              varying stoichiometries, in order to determine  whether the anomalous sign
              change of the Hall effect arises  from  vortex pinning or from charge acquired
              by the vortices. The  Hall  effect  and  vortex  correlations will also be 
              studied  using  a  Giaever  flux  transformer, which provides coupling  between
               two  vortex  systems. A second dynamical regime that will  be  studied  arises
                when   fluctuations   near  the   superconducting-normal  transition  in 
              zero  field  lead  to  time-varying  phases.  The  critical exponent parameters
              associated with this transition will  be  probed  with  a  comprehensive set of
              measurements,  from  DC  current-voltage    characteristics,    to    mutual   
              inductance  measurements  up  to 100kHz, to microwave response  measurements. 
              These  measurements will be done in thick (3-D) YBCO  samples  as  well  as  in
              progressively thinner samples, so that the crossover  to 2-D can be studied.
              This research program is interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  involves one or
              more postdoctoral  and  graduate  students,  who  receive  excellent training 
              in  preparation  for  careers in industry, government laboratories or academia.
               %%%  This  basic experimental research project deals with the behavior  of  
              superconductors  which  are  not  in  the   ideal   lossless  supercurrent
              state. Electrical resistance can arise in a Type  II  superconductor  subjected
              to current  flow  and  to  an  external  magnetic field. In this case a Hall
              voltage of a puzzling  nature  can be observed, and is a focus of the present
              research. A second  regime  of  interest in the present work occurs for 
              temperatures  close  to  the critical transition temperature, where fluctuation
               effect s  will  be studied. The work is primarily carried  out  on  high  Tc 
              materials. The Hall effect will be studied in NCCO  and  PCCO  superconductors 
              of varying stoichiometries,  in  order  to  determine  whether the anomalous
              sign change of the  Hall  effect  arises  from  vortex  pinning  or from 
              charge  acquired  by  the  vortices.  The Hall effect and vortex correlations
              will  also  be  studied using a Giaever flux transformer, which provides
              coupling  between   two   vortex  systems.  The  fluctuation  effects   are 
              characterized with a comprehensive set of measurements,  from  DC 
              current-voltage    characteristics,    to    mutual    inductance  measurements
               up  to 100kHz, to microwave response  measurements.  These  measurements will
              be done in thick (3-D) YBCO  samples  as  well  as  in progressively thinner
              samples, so that the crossover  to 2-D can be studied. This research program is
              interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  involves one or more postdoctoral  and 
              graduate  students,  who  receive  excellent training  in  preparation  for 
              careers in industry, government laboratories or academia.  ***
