Title       : Research Internships in Telecommunications Engineering (RITE) Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9732055

Award Number: 9732055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $547680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nariman Farvardin farvar@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wesley G. Lawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adrianos Papamarcou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9732055  PI:  Farvardin  University: U of MD-College Park     
              ABSTRACT    We propose to establish a Research Internships in
              Telecommunications Engineering (RITE) Site within the Department of Electrical
              Engineering at the University of Maryland, College Park to provide research
              opportunities for undergraduates in the broad area of Telecommunications.  The
              proposed RITE Site will involve approximately 18 undergraduates per year.  At
              least one half of the students will be recruited from institutions other than
              the University of Maryland.  Special emphasis will be placed on recruiting
              students from underrepresented groups and from institutions that do not have a
              strong research program.  The program will be limited to US citizens or
              permanent residents.    The program, which starts each year in the beginning of
              the summer, is intended for students who have completed their sophomore year. 
              The students participate in one of 6-8 research projects covering the broad
              spectrum of Telecommunications technologies.  Examples are: wireless
              communication systems, image and video transmission over the Internet; mapping
              DSP dataflows to software implementation; operating systems for DSP
              applications; line-of-site optical communications, rapid prototyping of DSP
              systems, and wideband amplifiers for communications applications.    Each
              project will be directed by one or more faculty (and a mentor from industry if
              appropriate) and will involve a team of graduate and undergraduate students.  A
              final project report will be produced for each project accompanied by a
              presentation in the last week of the summer session during the "RITE Site
              Fair." There will be additional weekly activities including high-level
              technical seminars by faculty and industry speakers on emerging technologies
              and trends in Telecommunications, seminars on technical writing and speaking,
              applying to graduate school and preparing for the GRE exam, and career
              opportunities and trends, as well as field trips to telecommunications c
              ompanies.    In addition to providing exposure to telecommunications research,
              the program will promote communication skills, team work and
              university-industry interaction, and will provide exposure to the real-world
              applications of telecommunications research.
