Title       : PWG/IDA: Disseminating Current Information About Women and Girls in Science,
               Engineering and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9732530

Award Number: 9732530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda G. Basch   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol S. Hollenshead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natnl Cncl for Res on Wom
	      530 Broadway at Spring Street
	      New York, NY  100123930    212/274-0821

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9732530 Basch The National Council for Research on Women (NCRW) will produce
              and
     disseminate a special edition of Issues Quarterly (IQ), `Balancing
              the Equation: Women
     and Girls in Science, Engineering, and mathematics,`
              and IQ Fax. NCRW is a working
     coalition of 77 research centers in the US
              with connections to over 1,500 other
     organizations and networks worldwide
              concerned with improving the status of women and
     girls. The goal of this
              project is to sustain and stimulate national dialogue and action on
    
              issues affecting women and girls in science, engineering, and mathematics
              (SEM). IQ will
     synthesize a broad range of research, data, and
              perspectives on women and girls in SEM.
     It will include first-hand
              interviews with K-16 educators, representatives of girls'
     organizations
              and women's scientific professional organizations and networks, women
    
              practitioners in science and technology, representatives of industry, and this
              issue's
     editorial committee members. IQ will also include data and
              information from recently
     published books, scientific and higher
              education journals, government reports, and reports
     from professional
              organizations. By highlighting current research, policy, and action on
    
              integrating women as full participants in the mainstream of scientific and
              technological
     education, employment, and enterprise in its IQ and IQ Fax
              publications, NCRW will
     advance the accessibility and usability of this
              information by a large and diverse group of
     researchers, educators,
              policy makers, advocates, and a broad general audience. By
     increasing the
              awareness and involvement of this community on issues of gender, science,
    
              and technology, it will encourage research on and exploration of the benefits
              of science to
     society and the importance of diversifying the community of
              scientists. **

