Title       : Energetics and Mechanisms of large Biomolecule and DNA Duplex Dissociation by
               Tandem Fourier-transform Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9732886

Award Number: 9732886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $521515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan R. Williams williams@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This multidisciplinary project, co-supported by the Analtyical and   Surface
              Chemistry Program, the Division of Molecular and Cellular   Biosciences, and
              the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, focuses on   the further
              development of the blackbody infrared radiative dissociation   (BIRD) technique
              for the study of the energetics and mechanisms of   protein and DNA
              dissociation.  Professor Williams and his students at the   University of
              California at Berkeley will implement BIRD experiments on a   7 Tesla FT/ICR
              instrument which is being acquired through this award.    Dissociation of DNA
              duplexes is projected to provide insights into   Watson-Crick base pairing,
              base stacking, and other electrostatic   interactions.  Gas-phase
              hydrogen/deuterium exchange reactions will be   employed as a diagnostic tool
              regarding gas phase ion conformation of   biomolecules.  The ability to draw
              conclusions pertaining to the conformation of   biological molecules in situ
              based on gas-phase ion chemistry is an area   of intense interest in the
              chemical and biological communities.    Professor Williams and his students at
              the Unversity of California at   Berkeley will use a multidisciplinary approach
              of theory and   experimentation to study the gas-phase ion chemistry of
              proteins and DNA.    Dissociation mechanisms and energetics, along with
              hydrogen/deuterium   exchange reactions, will provide important information
              toward the   understanding of the biological molecules and their structures    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
