Title       : Detection and Imaging of Nanoscale Defects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9732804

Award Number: 9732804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270210             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Gidley gidley@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert F. Yee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Frieze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9732804
Gidley
We propose an interdisciplinary research program that combines
              the well known defect sensitivity of positron techniques with state-of-the-art
              positron beam technology in order to detect and image the early stages of
              microstructural damage in a wide range of engineering materials where
              traditional techniques are not adequate.  The inability to characterize defect
              evolution on the manometer size scale represents a major missing link in our
              fundamental knowledge of the synthesis-to-failure life cycle of many
              engineering materials. If materials scientists can measure the microstructural
              evolution of damage from synthesis to failure they will be greatly aided in
              improving such material properties as strength and durability, wear and
              corrosion resistance, environmental compatibility, and fabrication cost
              effectiveness.

The major goal of this research is to demonstrate new
              measurement technology which addresses the initial stages of the nucleation and
              growth of defects to form larger voids that eventually lead to sample failure. 
              Such defect accumulation (which can be highly localized) may be induced by
              mechanical means (e.g., fatigue, thermal stress), by chemical means (e.g.,
              corrosion), by radiation, or by other agents such as electromigration.  Sample
              systems range from crystalline metals to amorphous polymers to heterogeneous
              composites, and include such diverse items as microelectronic devices,
              passivation layers on reactive metal surfaces, and pipes in nuclear power
              reactors.  The primary new technique to be used in this research is the
              positron microscope/microprobe.  This advancement in positron beam technology
              will extend the known defect sensitivity of Doppler broadening spectroscopy,
              positron emission, and positron lifetime spectroscopy by incorporating depth
              profiled, microscopic lateral resolution.  This will pen-nit non-destructive,
              three dimensional, nanoscale, defect imaging.  A more traditional
              non-microscopic beam will continue to be used in a depth profiled mode when
              studying particular surfaces and films that do not require lateral
              resolution.

The proposed research is a broad-based exploratory program that
              builds upon a strong existing collaboration between the University of Michigan
              Physics Department and the Materials Science and  Engineering Department.  To
              provide critical guidance in such an interdisciplinary program we have sought
              out expert collaborators working at universities, national laboratories and in
              industry.
***


