Title       : Poling of Ferroelectric Thin Films; Application to Integrated Memory, Sensing
               and Actuation Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9732847

Award Number: 9732847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Sands sands@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9732847  Sands  Thermally-assisted and electric-field-driven alignment of
              spontaneous electric dipole moments in bulk ferroelectric ceramics is well
              understood.  This "poling" process is in fact essential to the achievement of a
              macroscopically observable piezoelectric effect.  With respect to the emerging
              thin-film applications of integrated ferroelectric films ranging from
              nonvolatile memory to chemical sensors to piezoelectric microvalves, the
              understanding and manipulation of poling effects is limited at present to the
              manipulation of 1800 domain boundaries.  Other potentially important poling
              effects, including control of as-deposited film texture, thermally-assisted
              manipulation of non-1800 ferroelastic domain boundaries, and field-driven phase
              changes leading to shape memory behavior, have received comparatively scant
              attention.  It is the primary goal of the proposed research to elucidate, model
              and manipulate the distribution of spontaneous electrical dipoles in
              ferroelectric films and to understand the relationships between poling
              behavior, properties (ferroelectric and piezoelectric) and device performance. 
                With regard to poling, the primary differences between thin films and bulk
              ceramics are 1) the biaxial in-plane mechanical clamping effect of the
              substrate, 2) the much smaller grains in thin films, 3) the grain-shape
              anisotropy and crystallographic texture of thin films, and 4) the higher
              electrical breakdown fields of most thin films.            The following
              scientific objectives will be pursued: - Evaluate and model the combined
              effects of temperature and electric field on the manipulation of spontaneous
              polarization in Pb-based perovskite ferroelectric films  e.g., Pb(Zr,Ti)03 or
              PZT as a function of the degree and type of mechanical clamping. Determine the
              role of crystallographic texture on domain structure, poling behavior and
              properties.  Model and demonstrate poling via electric-field-driven phase
              transformations and the associated shape memory effects.  These objectiv es
              will be addressed by experiments that employ  PZT/metallic
              oxide/template/substrate combinations designed to yield ferroelectric films
              with microstructures ranging from nominally monocrystalline to
              uniaxially(fiber)-textured to random polycrystalline.  The effect of mechanical
              clamping will be explored by comparing the same prototype device structures
              before and after substrate removal.  Electric-field-driven poling effects will
              be investigated as a function of temperature by hysteresis measurements and in
              situ transmission electron microscopy.  Finally, the understanding attained by
              these investigations will be applied to the design and fabrication of prototype
              memory, sensing and actuation devices, with emphasis on both the initial device
              performance, and the role of microstructure on the reliability and stability of
              the devices.  The involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in
              projects that span the fundamental science to the device prototype under the
              constraints of manufacturability will prepare students for future careers in
              materials integration for functionally-enhanced Microsystems.    The Principal
              Investigator and his students have access to the facilities necessary to
              perform pulsed laser deposition, sputtering, four-circle x-ray diffraction,
              electrical testing, transmission electron microscopy (in situ, analytical and
              high-resolution), electron-beam lithography and all processes required for CMOS
              Si and Si-surface micromachining. These facilities are located in the Principal
              Investigator's laboratory and in the shared facilities of the Integrated
              Materials Laboratory (IML), the Berkeley Microfabrication Laboratory, The
              National Center for Electron Microscopy (NCEM/LBNL) and the Berkeley Sensor &
              Actuator Center (BSAC).  ***
