Title       : Solvation Role on Kinetic Processes in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1998       
File        : a9732910

Award Number: 9732910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold L. Friedman harold.friedman@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fernando O. Raineri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Harold Friedman and Fernando Raineri are supported by a grant from the  
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to use a combination of  
              integral equation techniques and molecular dynamics simulations to   understand
              the structural, energetic and dynamical aspects of the   solvation of complex
              molecules in a variety of solvent environments.    They have developed a
              Surrogate Hamiltonian theory that employs a   renormalized linear response
              theory for the nonequilibrium distribution   function of the solvent in the
              time-varying field of the solute.   The   theory has been applied to number of
              simpler systems and checked with   molecular dynamics simulations.  In the next
              phase of the research,   particular emphasis will be placed on electron
              transfer reactions and   bond-breaking / bond-forming reactions.  The surrogate
              Hamiltonian theory   will be extended to include higher order effects such as
              multiple   moments, solute excluded volume and hydrogen bonding effects.  They
              also   plan to develop a molecular interpretation for the parameters used by  
              physical organic chemists to quantify nucleophilic solvent assistance in   the
              solvolysis of aliphatic halides in solution.  The aim of this research project
              is to improve the way in which   measurable properties of solutions are
              interpreted in terms of the   interactions among the molecular constituents.
              This is particularly   challenging for ionic solutions since the long range of
              the forces   between the ionic charges strongly affect both the measurable
              properties   and the mathematical tools needed to relate them to the molecular
              models.    The work of Friedman and Raineri should provide fundamental
              molecular   insight into the mechanism and dynamics of solvation.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
