Title       : Frontiers of Magnetic Recording
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a9732369

Award Number: 9732369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1890000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Kryder kryder@ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9165,9215,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to a consortium of universities to do collaborative
              research on the topic of magnetic data storage and recording.  The proposal
              expands and builds upon the research of the current collaborative
              industry-university efforts in data storage at the Data Storage Systems Center
              (DSSC), which is an Engineering Research Center at the Carnegie Mellon
              University.  The objective of the research is to investigate the scientific and
              engineering bases underlying technical barriers to extremely high magnetic data
              storage density, and potential solutions to these barriers.  Major thrust areas
              include longitudinal magnetic recording on continuous film media, perpendicular
              magnetic recording with both continuous and self-structured magnetic media, and
              application of processing techniques currently used by the semiconductor
              industry to thin film magnetic materials to produce individual nanometer-scale
              single magnetic domains for high density storage.  The academic disciplines
              involved in this research include extremely thin film magnetic materials
              science and engineering, magnetic device physics, modeling, design and
              processing of nanometer scale descrete magnetic devices, materials science,
              tribology, and micromechanics of magnetic surfaces, fluid mechanics of air
              beqarings, microelectromechanical devices, and signal processing.

The
              research is being coordinated by the Director of the DSSC.  The National
              Storage Industry Consortium provides cost matching to the various universities
              in the consortium in direct relationship on a pro rata basis.
