Title       : Novel Technologies in Pollution Prevention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9732345

Award Number: 9732345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Amiridis amiridis@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Van Zee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9732345  PI:  Amiridis  University: U of SC Columbia       
              ABSTRACT    Funding is requested in this proposal for the establishment of a
              REU site in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of South
              Carolina.  The objective of the proposed site would be to provide chemical
              engineering undergraduate students with research experience obtained from
              projects exploring Novel Technologies in Pollution Prevention.  This is
              considered one of the core competence areas of the Department of Chemical
              Engineering at USC with ten faculty members having active research programs
              associated with it.  Each student will be assigned a faculty member as his/her
              research mentor.  It is further anticipated that due to the significant
              interactions among the faculty the students will be grouped into larger
              research teams in three areas: Catalytic, Separation and Electrochem
              Technologies.    In addition to the individual research projects, the proposed
              REU program will include several group activities for the participants.  The
              goal of these activities will be to enrich the participants' educational and
              research experience and facilitate collaboration and long-term relationships
              between them.  The proposed group activities include tours of industrial sites,
              a weekly seminar series, and workshops on ethics in science and engineering and
              graduate studies, welcome and farewell symposia, and social activities.   
              Exclusively non-USC undergraduate students will participate in the program. 
              Special emphasis will be placed on recruiting minorities from designated
              "target" schools.  It is expected that the program will have a long-term impact
              on the participants: it will encourage them to continue their studies and seek
              research careers in chemical engineering; it will assist them to realize the
              employment and research opportunities available in chemical engineering aspects
              of environmental research; and it will provide an enriching experience by
              exposing them to a non-classroom faculty-student inte raction.
