Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Problems in Mathematical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1998       
File        : a9732894

Award Number: 9732894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71457              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhongwei Shen shenz@ms.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Zhongwei Shen. DMS-9732894    The PI will study several problems which arise
              in the fields of quantum   mechanics and fluid dynamics. For Schr\"odinger
              operators with   electro-magnetic potentials, work will be done on the
              estimates of   negative eigenvalues and the non-classical asymptotics of the
              counting   function. The objective is to establish useful estimates in the
              cases   when the classical Cwikel-Lieb-Rosenblum bound fails.  Work will also
              be done on the semi-classical analysis of the ground state   energy. The
              emphasis will be on the degenerate potentials.  The second line of research
              concerns the Pauli operator, which describes   the motion of charged particles
              with spin. The PI will study   the Lieb-Thirring type inequalities for the
              Pauli operator   with a non-homogeneous magnetic field. Such inequalities play
              an   important role in the study of stability of matter and semi-classical  
              analysis in a magnetic field. Finally work will be continued on   boundary
              value problems in domains with rough boundaries,  which arise naturally in many
              engineering applications.  In particular, the resolvent estimates and
              fractional powers of the Stokes   operator in Lipschitz domains will be
              studied. The objective is to obtain   a better description of the behavior of
              the solutions to the nonlinear   Navier-Stokes equations in nonsmooth domains. 
                This project lies at the interface of mathematical physics, harmonic  
              analysis and partial differential equations. Its goal  is to gain better
              understanding of the spectral properties of   quantum systems, and to improve
              the mathematical theory,  upon which the numerical approximations and
              applications are based,   for the Navier-Stokes equations which model the fluid
              flow.
