Title       : A Non-Thermal Annealing Process Applied to Neutron Transmutation Doped Silicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9732092

Award Number: 9732092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125603             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Donnelly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sam Houston St University
	      P O Box 2026
	      Huntsville, TX  773412026    713/294-1111

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9732092  Donnelly    The project seeks to investigate and develop a new
              annealing technique that is able to both repair damage to a crystal and
              electrically activate dopants in silicon without the use of thermal energy. 
              The annealing is accomplished by focusing a high energy laser pulse onto a
              small spot on the surface of the sample.  Experiments have shown that the
              entire sample is annealed, even in regions far from the laser focal spot.  It
              is speculated that the laser launches a shock wave in the sample, and that this
              wave causes the crystal to anneal.  Because the laser pulses are short
              (nanoseconds), the process is expected to be accompanied by much less diffusion
              than occurs in thermal processes.  Diffusion is one of the limiting factors in
              the design and fabrication of next-generation high density low power devices. 
              A "critical need" for the semiconductor industry, as stated by SIA, is the
              development of a "minimum anneal" for low leakage shallow junctions.  The above
              mentioned non-thermal process is clearly a candidate for this "minimum anneal".
               While the process is attractive for a step in device fabrication, there are
              fundamental questions that must first be answered.  The two most pressing
              questions involve the optimum parameters for annealing, and the actual
              mechanism by which the annealing occurs.  Determination of optimum parameters
              will allow the technique to be applied to a variety of different materials, and
              eventually to patterned devices.  Understanding of the annealing mechanism will
              further understanding of the materials science aspects of the project, and will
              also assist in the application of the technique to different materials.  The
              answers to these questions will be obtained by further experiments which vary
              the parameters involved in the annealing process, by investigating alternated
              methods of achieving annealing without the introduction of thermal energy, and
              by modeling the passage of a shock wave through a damaged crystal lattice.  ***
