Title       : Summer Undergraduate Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  2000     
File        : a9732621

Award Number: 9732621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terrence W. Rettig                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104596             (Estimated)
Investigator: Truell W. Hyde Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor University
	      Post Office Box 97088
	      Waco, TX  767987088    /   -

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9732621  Hyde  The proposed project continues a summer undergraduate 
              research program already in place for the past four summers  at Baylor and
              currently supported by both Baylor and the  National Science Foundation.  Seven
              students will be  selected from open applications with the program advertised 
              at universities around the nation, smaller undergraduate  institutions with
              little or no research capability and  historically minority institutions. 
              Complete application  information, departmental research information as well as
               the ability to apply to the program "on-line" is provided  through a World
              Wide Web page located at  www.baylor.edu/~Truell_Hyde/Scripts/URC.html. allows 
              identification and recruitment of outstanding students from  small, private
              institutions in the Texas, Oklahoma,  Louisiana, Arkansas, and Kansas areas. 
              The NSF Fellows will  interact during the summer with Baylor undergraduate and 
              graduate students from both the United States and several  foreign countries. 
              They will participate in twice weekly  seminars, social activities, an end of
              the summer  Undergraduate Research Symposium and specially designed  classes in
              various physics research fields of interest.  As  in the past, it is expected
              that at least some of the summer  research done by the NSF Fellows will result
              in peer  reviewed publications.  Trips to nearby industries and  research
              facilities, social activities as well as joint  research seminars will be
              offered (as in the past) in  cooperation with other REU activities that will be
              held on  the same campus.  This provides for a much larger number of  NSF
              Summer Fellows with which to interact during the ten  week period and aids in
              producing a "large" program feel.    ***
