Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Manufacturing Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9732219

Award Number: 9732219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $673525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip Sanger p.sanger@csuohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick C. Schoenig  (Principal Investigator former)
              John L. Frater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Y.H. Andrew Liou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland State University
	      East 24th and Euclid Ave
	      Cleveland, OH  44115    216/687-2000

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 7915,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9732219  PI:  Schoenig  University: Cleveland State U     
              ABSTRACT      The Advanced Manufacturing Center at Cleveland State University
              is proposing to provide undergraduate manufacturing engineering research
              experiences to students whom are seeking a Bachelor's degree in Science or
              Engineering.  Participants will be recruited from among CSU students as well as
              students at three regional community colleges who have committed to four year
              baccalaureate programs.  Many of these students will be participants in the
              dual admission program.  Dual enrolled students carry out their first two years
              of study at the community college before completing their BS degree at CSU. 
              The focus of this applied research is manufacturing innovations.    The goals
              of the program are to attract and retain highly motivated students into
              manufacturing engineering careers, to offer an early introduction to research
              for lower level undergraduate students from CSU and regional community
              colleges, to use these experiences to assist community college students in
              their transition into the university environment, to better prepare students
              for entry into the manufacturing field, and to recruit students for advanced
              engineering studies.    Research projects cover various aspects of
              manufacturing engineering and are designed to prepare individuals to develop
              innovative solutions to long-standing manufacturing problems.  Research teams
              will consist of faculty, staff engineers, graduate and undergraduate students
              and, in some cases, high school students.  The teams will usually be
              cross-functional.  Students will have the opportunity to participate during the
              summer and/or throughout the academic year for a total of 600 hours per year. 
              Participants will be encouraged to continue in the program through their
              transfer from a community college into the university.    The project will
              include an optional ethics component.  Two separate modules will be offered to
              address basic and more complex ethical issues.  In additi on, a framework will
              be developed in which students will identify potential ethical issues in their
              own manufacturing research projects and will share their findings with other
              participants.
