Title       : A Virtual Reality Method for Navigating, Managing, and Documenting Large-Scale
               Computational Sciences Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1998 
File        : a9732107

Award Number: 9732107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles H. Koelbel                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna Cox cox@ncsa.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. DeFanti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Sherman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Patterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will enable computational scientists to temporally and spatially
              manage, navigate, and document large, multi-dimensional datasets using advanced
              virtual reality (VR) technologies.  

The primary objectives are to:


              Research and develop a spatially and temporally-based VR software Application
              Manager, coupled with a generalized navigation and interactive recording
              applications programming interface (API), for use with CAVE, ImmersaDesk, and
              Infinity Wall applications

 Enable scientists to mange, navigate, and
              document interactive VR explorations in realtime and then re-render the
              simulation data at higher resolution in non-real time; this will provide
              researchers with a better understanding of their science, as well as provide
              video-based educational materials

 Disseminate information to the national
              scientific community using educational materials developed with these advanced
              VR technologies

Science and engineering researchers attempt to solve complex
              problems by first probing the data to discover underlying principles, and then
              documenting the results so they can be reproduced by the research community. 
              Three-dimensional VR displays provide a far more powerful interface for data
              exploration that the two-dimensional workstation screen.  The importance of
              real-time VR navigational recording and playback is twofold: (1) it provides
              and efficient mechanism to store navigational data for subsequent renderings of
              full-resolution simulations; and (2) it supports asynchronous collaboration
              among networked VR remote sites.

This project software will also link to
              network communication libraries to enable CAVE-to-CAVE recording mechanisms-the
              key to supporting asynchronous collaboration.  Funds are sought to support
              graduate students and summer faculty research.

