Title       : Determination of the Rate of Nucleation of Aerosol Particles in Clear and
               Cloud-Processed Atmospheric Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9732949

Award Number: 9732949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn M. Russell lrussell@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ATM-9732949  Russell    This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
              in the Atmospheric Chemistry Program integrates a research and a teaching
              component into a five-year career plan. The research part of this plan
              undertakes a series of studies to advance our current understanding of both the
              chemical compounds and the meteorological conditions that are necessary for
              nucleation of new particles to occur in the atmosphere. The teaching part uses
              creative new technology-based resources to interest and teach students,
              incorporating important opportunities for mentoring students on their research
              and presentation skills.    The research program applies the recently-developed
              technique of time-of-flight mass spectrometry to the little-understood
              mechanism of sulfuric acid-water nucleation, then extends this empirical
              evaluation of the nucleation rate to ternary mixtures with ammonia and to
              organic compounds. The strength of the approach is that it does not depend on
              bulk liquid properties to describe the behavior of clusters, and hence does not
              suffer from the associated uncertainties. The technique will integrate the mass
              spectrometric measurement technique with a variable-volume reactor vessel for
              generation of clusters in supersaturated conditions to allow the thorough
              characterization of the effect of mixing times on the observed nucleation rate.
              In parallel, modeling is used to investigate the effects of different
              boundary-layer and free-tropospheric conditions on the observed rate of
              nucleation. By implementing a unique new particle dynamics model with the
              capability to calculate the simultaneous nucleation, coagulation, condensation,
              and activation of externally-mixed populations of particles, the nucleation
              rate in areas of mixed aerosol populations are evaluated. These results have
              important implications for the possibility of nucleation of new particles in
              cloud outflow regions, as well as for regions of air where air masses mix.   
              The teaching part of this career plan takes adva ntage of partnerships with
              four government-sponsored laboratories to use new technologies as teaching
              tools in the classroom. Students will discover the images provided by the
              latest satellite technologies and will experience a simulated 'research flight'
              aboard the NCAR C130 aircraft, to increase their interest in and knowledge of
              research in Atmospheric Chemistry. Undergraduate coursework will also
              incorporate relevant policy and economic information to highlight the
              importance of the Atmospheric Chemistry to political legislation and business
              decisions for the fraction of students planning to pursue careers in public
              policy, law, management, and education. Undergraduate and graduate thesis
              programs are both emphasized as techniques to teach students how to work on
              independent projects and to provide them with early encouragement for pursuing
              careers in science by interactions with researchers. Another important part of
              the mentoring included in this plan is directed toward correcting the reported
              shortcomings of women and other traditionally underrepresented students through
              the creation of additional speaking opportunities for students in courses and
              in a new seminar series for graduate students.
