Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Study of Image Estimation and Compression Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1998   
File        : a9732995

Award Number: 9732995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre Moulin moulin@ifp.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The main goal of this project is to develop an analytical, multidisciplinary 
              approach to research and education in Image Processing, integrating important 
              aspects of engineering problems that are often treated separately.  In 
              particular, this study incorporates realistic statistical models for image data
               and physical sensors, and seeks solutions to estimation and compression
              problems  based upon fundamental statistical principles.  The educational
              component of this  project aims at better preparing students for their
              engineering careers by  developing their multidisciplinary and analytical
              skills, and exposing them to  multiple facets of complex engineering problems. 
              This theme is present at all  levels of this project: Firstly, motivated
              undergraduate students are encouraged  to participate in the research. 
              Secondly, an undergraduate Image and Video  Processing course and laboratory
              exercises allow the students to learn, visualize  and assimilate fundamental
              concepts.  Thirdly, an advanced graduate Statistical  Image Processing course
              is being developed with the objective of integrating,  applying and solidifying
              concepts taught in Information Theory, Estimation  Theory, and Statistical
              Optics.  Fourthly, an interactive, virtual Image  Processing lab is being
              developed as part of two Distance Learning projects.    The research component
              of this project addresses key problems in image  restoration and compression
              and quantifies the benefits that may result from the  use of more accurate and
              sophisticated models.  The methodology developed is also  applicable to
              ill-posed statistical inverse problems such as Synthetic Aperture  Radar
              imaging, astronomical imaging, and tomography.  Complexity regularization 
              theory plays a central role in this research.  Complexity-regularized
              estimators  are inherently in compressed form, and fundamental relationships
              between  estimation performance and rate-distortion theory are explored in that
              context.   Additionally, novel techniques for optimizing for  optimizing the
              operational  rate-distortion performance of several image coding systems are
              being developed.
