Title       : Numerical Methods for III-Posed Problems and Large Scale Eigenvalue Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9732022

Award Number: 9732022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296213             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dianne P. O'Leary oleary@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gilbert W. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This work concerns two topics in numerical linear algebra: 1)  Regularization of
              ill-posed linear systems; 2) Solution of large,  sparse eigenvalue problems. 
              These topics share common features:  a wide range of application problems; the
              use of iterative  methods for large-scale problems; and interesting problems in
               matrix perturbation theory.    When continuous ill-posed problems are
              discretized they result in  ill-conditioned linear systems which must be
              regularized to yield  accurate solutions.  This part of the work has several
              goals.  The first is to prove the folk theorem that if the components of  the
              data vector with respect to the singular vectors of the  matrix decay
              sufficiently fast then the conjugate gradient  iteration will produce a
              regularizing set of solution vectors.  The second is to compare the numerous
              formulations of discrete  ill-posed problems to see which are most effective. 
              The third is  to further develop preconditioners to speed convergence of 
              solution algorithms.  The fourth is to improve  data-gathering techniques so
              that the attainable accuracy from  imaging is better, thus, for example,
              revealing smaller tumors or  more information about distant stars.    Over the
              past decade many new algorithms for finding clusters of  eigenvalues of large
              matrices have been proposed.  Although the  effectiveness of some of these
              algorithms has been demonstrated  empirically, analytic results are sparse. 
              Fortunately, a large  number of these methods share a common framework, so that
              it is  possible to develop analytic tools that are widely applicable.  As a
              start toward this goal, attention is focused on a new,  promising
              method---singular vector enhancement---that fits in the  framework.  A
              preliminary analysis of a special case has already  yielded valuable results on
              the relation of eigenvalues and  singular values.    The results of this
              project will impact the solution of ill-posed  problems such as medical image
              enhancement, astronomical data  processing, nondestructive  testing, and
              spectroscopy, as well as  eigenvalue problems arising in systems modeling
              (Markov chains),  computational chemistry, and structural analysis.
