Title       : Topics in Complexity Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9732922

Award Number: 9732922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance Fortnow fortnow@cs.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              For over thirty years, computational complexity theory has  provided the
              computer science community with a theoretical  backbone from which one can
              understand the power of computation.  Computational complexity has produced the
              tools that allows one  to understand what likely can and cannot be computed in
              a  reasonable amount of time and memory.  This research will  continue this
              tradition. While this research will look at a wide  range of problems in many
              different areas of computational  complexity it will focus on two interesting
              directions.  The project first looks at a new model of computation, quantum 
              computing.  Computer scientists have recently discovered the  powerful
              applications of the cancellation effect of quantum  physics.  Though these
              quantum computers do not yet exist, nice  theoretical models of these machines
              allow study of their  complexity.  The research will look at ways to apply the 
              cancellation effects in the well-studied area of counting  complexity to help
              the understanding of the complexity of quantum  computation. The research will
              also embark on a more ambitious  plan of attempting complexity class
              separation, one of the most  important and least successful directions in the
              area.  In  particular, the research will try to show languages in computable 
              in nondeterministic polynomial time, such as the famous traveling  salesman
              problem, cannot be computable in (logarithmic) amount of  space.  The research
              well use tools recently developed by the PI  of simulating space and time by
              alternation and applying Post's  program of looking at properties of these and
              other classes. By  understanding the relationship among complexity classes, one
              can  better understand the nature of computation and provide the  necessary
              directions one needs to solve problems on various  models of computation.  This
              research will help strengthen the  theoretical foundations from which computer
              science stands.
