Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Optics and Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a9732420

Award Number: 9732420
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306463             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Hagan hagan@creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Delfyett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen A. Cerqua-Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 7915,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9732420  PI:  Hagan  University: U of Central Florida       
              ABSTRACT    The REU Site at the Center for Research and Education in Optics and
              Lasers (CREOL) at the University of Central Florida (UCF) will expose ten
              undergraduate students per year, recruited nationally, to twelve weeks of
              research and other educational experiences in lasers and optics.  A primary
              emphasis of these programs will be on encouraging talented undergraduate
              students, in particular women, minorities and persons with disabilities, to
              pursue graduate studies in the field of optics and lasers.  Ten internationally
              recognized faculty in CREOL will be research supervisors in this program. 
              CREOL is a world-leading center of excellence in optics and laser research. 
              The program will include: (1) Introductory informal coursework on the basic
              principles of optics, lasers and optical materials; (2) Research seminars for
              undergraduates by the CREOL Faculty; (3) Bi-weekly industrial visits to the
              numerous optics and laser companies in the Orlando area; (4) Seminars and
              workshops and discussion sessions on issues of ethics in engineering research,
              research group tutorials; and (5) Continuous monitoring of the students'
              progress by the principal investigators, primarily via twice weekly tutorial
              discussion groups.  The summer program will conclude with a poster session in
              which the REU students will present their research results to the CREOL and UCF
              Community.  Research reports will be bound into the REU yearbook, which the
              students compile.  The program will be followed up by helping students to
              obtain scholarships for graduate school.  The program organizers will track the
              career progress of former participants.  A new feature of the REU site is the
              formation of an External Oversight Committee, which will annually evaluate the
              quality of the students' experiences and the site's overall success in meeting
              its and NSF goals.
