Title       : Research in High-Frequency Analog Electronic Circuits for Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9732550

Award Number: 9732550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Gray pgray@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is concerned with the creation of new methods  of electronic
              circuit design which will allow realization of  smaller size, longer battery
              life and lower cost in personal  communication systems such as cellular
              telephones, cordless  telephones and wireless computer networks. In addition,
              new  transceiver architectures are being investigated which will  allow
              multistandard operation which is transparent to the  user. Thus, a single
              personal communication handset could be  used anywhere in the world as it
              automatically adjusts to  different local standards and frequencies. Current 
              implementations of portable transceivers typically use a  multi-chip,
              multi-technology approach with a number of  precision external filters,
              resonators, and other components  in order to meet the stringent performance
              requirement of  the analog RF interface in such systems. These transitional 
              approaches severely limit the achievable levels of power  dissipation and form
              factor, and are not compatible with low-  cost adaptive multistandard
              operation. This research is  exploring new architectures and circuit techniques
              which  will allow utilization of scaled CMOS VLSI technology to  integrate the
              entire transceiver function with only a few  external components. The challenge
              is to find new approaches  that overcome the inherent limitations of integrated
              passive  components such as low Q values in integrated inductors,  capacitors
              and varactors, by utilization of the inherently  high bandwidth capabilities of
              scaled integrated MOS  transistors. The investigators expect to demonstrate at
              the  end of this research project a single-chip multistandard RF  transceiver
              incorporating synthesizers, transmit path, power  amplifier, and receive path
              as well as providing interface  to several different RF standards. This
              prototype will  be implemented in 0.35 micron CMOS technology.
