Title       : Research on Ocean-Atmosphere Variability and Ecosystem Response in the Ross Sea
               (ROAVERRS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1999   
File        : a9732464

Award Number: 9732464
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Van Woert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Oceanic Atmos Admin
	      U.S. Department Of Commerce
	      Washington, DC  20230    /   -

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1315,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9732464  Van Woert     This project is an interdisciplinary study, titled
              Research on Ocean-Atmosphere Variability and Ecosystem Response in the Ross Sea
              (ROAVERRS), of atmospheric forcing, ocean hydrography, sea ice dynamics,
              primary productivity, and pelagic-benthic coupling in the southwestern Ross
              Sea, Antarctica.  The primary goal is to examine how changes in aspects of the
              polar climate system, in this case wind and temperature, combine to influence
              marine productivity on a large antarctic continental shelf.  In the Ross Sea,
              katabatic winds and mesocyclones influence the spatial and temporal
              distribution of sea ice as well as the upper ocean mixed layer depth, and thus
              control primary production within the sea ice as well as in the open water
              system.  The structure, standing stock and productivity of bottom-dwelling
              biological communities are also linked to meteorological processes through
              interseasonal and interannual variations in horizontal and vertical fluxes of
              organic carbon produced in the upper ocean.   Linkages among the atmospheric,
              oceanic, and biological systems will be investigated during a three-year field
              study of the southwestern Ross Sea ecosystem.  Direct measurements will include
              regional wind and air temperatures derived from automatic weather stations; ice
              cover, ice movement, and sea surface temperatures derived from a variety of
              satellite-based sensors; hydrographic characteristics of the upper ocean and
              primary productivity in the ice and in the water derived from research cruises
              and satellite studies; vertical flux of organic material and water movement
              derived from oceanographic moorings containing sediment traps and current
              meters, and the abundance, distribution, and respiration rates of biological
              communities on the sea floor, derived from box cores, benthic photographs and
              shipboard incubations.   Based on archived meteorological data, it is expected
              that the atmospheric variability during the study period will be such that
              changes in airflow patterns a nd their influence on oceanographic and
              biological patterns can be monitored, and their direct and indirect linkages
              that are the focus of the research can be deduced.  Results from this study
              will contribute to our knowledge of atmospheric and oceanic forcing of marine
              ecosystems, and lead to a better understanding of marine ecosystem response to
              climatic variations.  ***
