Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Problems of Micro-mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9732710

Award Number: 9732710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184238             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grigory I. Barenblatt gibar@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Three classes of new mathematical problems related to
micromechanics will be
              studied analytically and numerically. 
The first problem is the investigation
              of nonlinear fourth 
order partial differential equations describing the
              spreading 
of liquid film along a solid surface under recently
              proposed
boundary conditions that represent the phenomenon more adequately
              
than previously used ones.  The second class of problems is 
concerned with
              nonlinear parabolic equations describing flows 
of chemically active fluids
              where a new mathematical 
formulation was recently proposed.  The third class
              of problems 
is related to the numerical investigation of new free
              boundary
problems for the equation of elasticity related to fatigue crack
              
propagation.
     
Micromechanics takes into account the transformation
              of
material microscopic structure in the process of flow or 
deformation of
              real fluids and deformable solids.
It leads to new mathematical models and
              problems.
The mathematical models of three classes of practically 
important
              problems will be constructed and investigated. 
They are: flows of thin films
              along solid surfaces, 
important for chemical and petroleum
              engineering;
flows of reacting fluids near critical (pre-explosion)
              
conditions, important for chemical engineering and internal 
combustion
              engines; fatigue crack propagation and damage 
extension, important for a wide
              class of mechanical engineering 
problems.  New mathematical models will be
              obtained and 
investigated.  Computational approaches will be combined with
              
advanced analytic studies.
 

