Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Experimental Analysis of Adpative Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9732854

Award Number: 9732854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeryl L. Mumpower                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1680               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edi Karni karni@jhunix.hcf.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Peyton Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                How do people play games? More formally, how do people make decisions in
              strategic situations? This is a question that has concerned game theorists for
              decades. Do they use the analytic techniques employed by game theorists or do
              they use other approaches? Evidence from experiments conducted over the past 20
              years has shown that in many situations people do not engage in the sort of
              analysis that a game theorist would. In the last five years, there have been a
              number of studies aimed at trying to determine if the decision making behavior
              used by experimental subjects can be described by a few simple learning
              heuristics and algorithms. The current study first identifies a recurring
              problem in the methods used to identify player types in these studies and then
              proposes an alternative experimental design to eliminate this problem. This
              research is the basis for my dissertation and the funding from the grant will
              be used in performing the experimental portion of the work.  The basic problem
              with previous studies is that the econometric and  statistical methods they use
              are not capable of discriminating between learning rules. The two basic classes
              of learning rules differ according to the type of information players are
              thought to base their decisions on: their own payoff history or past plays by
              their opponent. Rules that are contained in the same class differ on the
              particular amount of and manner in which this information is used. Previous
              studies observed only strategy choices in the experiments and then attempted to
              use econometric tests to determine simultaneously which type of information the
              subjects used and how they used it. A simulations based study has shown that
              these econometric tests fail to be able to succeed in both tasks. Based on the
              reasons these methods fail, the proposed study includes an extra component in
              the experiment intended to monitor the use of information by subjects. This is
              intended to allow the experimenter to determine which type of information the
              subjects are using in order to aid in the process of modeling their learning or
              decision making behavior. The result should be a more accurate and reliable
              means of identifying the use of learning rules among the subjects and possibly
              even identifying behavior not described by current models.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
