Title       : REU: Wyoming Infrared Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9732039

Award Number: 9732039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Canterna canterna@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Dove  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven B. Howell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9732039  Canterna    The Wyoming Infrared Observatory (WIRO) will continue its
              Summer Undergraduate Research Assistantship Program (SURAP) as a National
              Science Foundation Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site for the
              summers of 1998, 1999, and 2000. The principal goals of SURAP are:      To
              introduce the undergraduate student to a realistic and fulfilling experience in
              astrophysics research, including current concerns on science ethics.      To
              acquaint each undergraduate student with the diverse research fields in modem
              astrophysics.      To offer each undergraduate student an opportunity to work
              directly with active professionals and be given the responsibility to become
              independent, creative researchers.      To place each undergraduate student in
              a socially diverse environment which includes student colleagues from different
              cultural backgrounds and a wide variety of geographical and educational
              institutions.      To encourage each undergraduate student to publish their
              results and communicate their research findings at professional meetings.      
                  To expose the undergraduate students to a wide variety of additional
              scientific and outdoor endeavors unique to the Wyoming and Rocky Mountain
              region through a series of field trips.    Six to eight participants will be
              chosen from universities and colleges throughout the nation.   Candidates are
              selected by faculty advisors, based on their academic performance, interest in
              a  research career, and recommendations.  The final SURAP participants are
              chosen to fulfill   SURAP's goal to have students from diverse backgrounds. 
              Student projects are designed to   match student research interests and be
              completed within the summer.  Efforts are made to   recruit freshmen and
              sophomore undergraduates, women, and underrepresented minorities.    A
              concurrent academic/laboratory course and research seminar will accompany the
              tutorial research program to help the students place this experience in a wider
              academic context and provide a general  direction to the program.  This course
              includes an introduction to modem infrared detectors, image processing,
              experience in observing with a modem, computer controlled telescope, and
              academic instruction in fundamental, modem astrophysics.  The focal point of
              the course will be a student-oriented, temporal monitoring program of
              interesting astronomical objects (e.g. LPV's, AGN's, CV's) using WIRO's
              computer-controlled, 24-inch reflector at Red Buttes.  All students, regardless
              of their principal research program, will participate in acquiring and reducing
              visual, near IR, and mid-IR photometric data.  In addition, all students will
              observe at the 2.3 meter telescope with the faculty.  Students who complete
              research projects with their advisors are encouraged to present their results
              at a American Astronomical Society meeting or at the National Conference on
              Undergraduate Research.      James P. Wright  Program Director
