Title       : Artificial Atoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9732579

Award Number: 9732579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Kastner mkastner@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9732579  Kastner    The   research  suggested  in  this  proposal  concerns  the
               properties  of quantum dots and single electron transistors.  The  properties 
              of these quantum dots ("artificial  atoms")  are  sufficiently different from
              ordinary electronic devices  to  require fundamental studies  with the long
              range goal of  translating  these  novel  structures  into  technologically 
              mature systems.  This requires determining the energy levels  and  transition 
              probabilities for  these  artificial  atoms  whose  diameters  are  typically 
              1000  times  the  size  of  ordinary  atoms.   Transistors based on the
              artificial  atom  principle, the "single electron transistors" (SET), are  the 
              goal  of  the next generation of electronic devices.     The  research proposed
              here focuses on two topics, namely 1)  how  do  electrons in an artificial atom
              interact with  those  in  nearby metallic leads and 2) what is the nature of
              the phase  transitions  of  the  electron  droplets  in  high  magnetic 
              fields.   The coupling of topic 1) is believed  to  be  give  rise to behaviors
              closely related to the Kondo effect, which  results  from  the  coupling of 
              localized  electrons  on  a  magnetic  impurity to the Fermi liquid in a host
              metal.  The  second  topic  relates to the magnetic field  induced  phase 
              transition  from a singlet state to the ferromagnetic  state  in  droplets with
              many electrons.  The Kondo problem will be  investigated for SETs carrying
              various numbers of electrons.  The  phase  transitions will be studied   by 
              measuring  the  magnetic  susceptibilties for magnetic fields  greater  than 
              the critical field of ca. 1.7 tesla.  %%%  Research  suggested in this proposal
              deals with  fundamental  problems  of  the  behavior  of quantum  dots,  also 
              called  artificial  atoms.   Such systems have  great  potential  to  become 
              nano-scale electronic components, including  "single  electron transistors"
              (SETs), which will become the heart of  the  next  generation of practical
              electronic  devices.   The  properties  of quantum dots are so different from 
              those  of  ordinary atoms that the fundamental physics governing  their 
              behavior  is  not yet fully understood.  Such  understanding  will  facilitate
              a more efficient and controlled manufacture  of   SETs and their incorporation
              in practical technological  devices.    Two  problems  are  attacked  in  the  
              research  described in this proposal. Both of them deal with  electric  current
              flow into and out of the SETs via the leads made  of  ordinary metal.  ***
