Title       : LCE: Parallel Algorithms for Large-Scale Simulation-Based Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9732301

Award Number: 9732301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $754230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Omar Ghattas oghattas@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lorenz T. Biegler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9732301
Ghattas
The emergence of scalable highly parallel supercomputers has
              opened up new possibilities for modeling complex physical systems in the
              engineering sciences. Significant strides have been made over the past 20 years
              in the development, analysis, and implementation of parallel numerical methods
              for solution of the partial differential equations (PDEs) that govern the
              behavior of many of these complex physical systems. For many broad classes of
              simulation problems in the engineering sciences, parallel algorithms are
              sufficiently mature so that one may move beyond the simulation problem to
              optimization of systems governed by PDEs.

In contrast to the large body of
              work on parallel PDE solution, very little research has been conducted on
              parallel algorithms for optimization of PDEs.  However, given the maturing
              state of parallel PDE solvers, time is ripe to mount a concerted effort to
              develop, analyze, implement, apply, and study parallel numerical methods for
              optimization of systems governed by PDEs or "simulation-based
              optimization."

Parallel algorithms for solving large-scale optimization
              problems governed by complex PDE systems will be developed.  Efforts will focus
              on addressing two barriers that arise in very large scale optimization
              problems: large numbers of constraints and large numbers of decision variables.
              For the former, interior point methods will be developed and to address
              complexity stemming from growth in decision variables; tailor reduced- and
              full-space Newton-Krylov methods for the optimality system will be developed,
              with several choices for preconditioners including those based on infinite
              dimensional approximations of the reduced Hessian. The optimization methods
              will be implemented on highly parallel supercomputers, and applied to several
              challenging problems in engineering science, including inverse problems in
              seismic wave propagation and optimal design/control of biomedical
              devices.
***

