Title       : Synaptic Organization in a Simple Olfactory System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1993     
File        : a9011012

Award Number: 9011012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228806             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Strausfeld flybrain@manduca.neurobio.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An important sensory appendage for insects is the flagellum                    
              of the antenna, containing thousands of receptors called                       
              sensilla that have been classified into types, including some                  
              specialized for chemosensory functions.  The nerve from the                    
              flagellum contains many nerve fibers, or axons, which form                     
              particular groupings when they enter the brain and terminate in                
              distinctive structures called glomeruli.  Each glomerulus is a                 
              sphere-like complex in which nerve cells make functional                       
              contacts called synapses, where interactions occur between                     
              incoming and outgoing information, modulated by local nerve                    
              cells.  The glomerular structure in insects has several                        
              similarities to the glomerulus also found in the vertebrate                    
              olfactory bulb, and it is believed that this structure forms an                
              information processing module for synaptic interactions.                       
                                                                                             
              This work will focus on how olfactory information is mapped                    
              in the glomeruli, to see whether in insects olfactory receptors                
              are represented in different glomeruli according to their                      
              functional tuning, their antennal location, or both.  Light                    
              microscopy and electron microscopy will be used to clarify the                 
              architecture underlying the connections between neurons that                   
              provide input and output, and the convergence and local                        
              circuits that process olfactory information.  The insect system                
              offers an advantageous model because it is possible find                       
              uniquely identifiable single neurons in the brain.  Results                    
              from this work will be valuable to understanding information                   
              processing in general, to chemosensory neuroscience in the                     
              vertebrates as well as invertebrates, to studies on insects as                 
              model systems during neural development of highly specific                     
              neural connections, and to agriculturally related studies of                   
              insect feeding or reproduction which have chemosensory                         
              components.
