Title       : Biosynthesis and Downstream Recovery of Therapeutic Proteinsfrom the Milk of
               Transgenic Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1994     
File        : a9011098

Award Number: 9011098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Weigand                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Velander   (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William N. Drohan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn L. Orthner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9106,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Therapeutic proteins are an example of high-value                              
              proteins whose biosynthesis and downstream recovery has                        
              been limited by low productivity, extreme contamination,                       
              FDA requirements and difficulties due to improper                              
              modification or deleterious altering of the protein                            
              structure by the genetically engineered production system                      
              such as tissue culture.  These problems have led to an                         
              undesirable mode of treatment available to people such as                      
              hemophiliacs due to cost and limited availability of the                       
              replacement protein.  A detailed understanding of the                          
              structure and activity of the protein produced by the                          
              recombinant system facilitates the engineering of                              
              recovery methods for appropriate forms of the protein of                       
              interest as well as having genetic value for the recovery                      
              of other proteins using that same expression system.                           
                                                                                             
              Transgenic mice which express human Protein C that is                          
              biologically active have been a good model for the                             
              production of a therapeutic protein by using a mammal as                       
              a bioreactor.  Protein C is an anti-clotting protein                           
              which has potential for the treatment of clotting                              
              problems associated with septic shock, heart attack, and                       
              hip replacement surgery.  The distribution of Protein C                        
              products is being evaluated based upon proteolytic and                         
              biosynthetic modifications characteristic of mammary                           
              tissue expression.  Proteolysis seems to effect the                            
              integrity of the Protein C produced in murine milk.  Pig                       
                                                                                             
              milk doped with Protein C has also shown this same                             
              problem.  Transgenic pigs containing the same genetic                          
              information as successfully used in mice are being                             
              evaluated as a large scale bioreactor with the potential                       
                                                                                             
              of grams of heterologous protein per day.  An                                  
              immunoaffinity procedure for isolation of Protein C from                       
                                                                                             
              murine and pig milk is being developed.  The future use                        
              of transgenic animal bioreactors depends upon the                              
              knowledge of the biochemical changes that are affected by                      
                                                                                             
              the mammary tissue and milk environments.
