Title       : Mechanisms of Control of the GAP-43 Gene: ROW Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1990 
File        : a9011199

Award Number: 9011199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nora I. Perrone-Bizzozero nperrone@medusa.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Mexico Sch of Med
	      Bandelier West, Room 223
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9220,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The operation of the nervous system depends on nerve cells                     
              communicating with each other through a fine network of cellular               
              extensions known as axons and dendrites.  Axons are usually                    
              longer extensions and their initial growth constitutes one of the              
              crucial steps in determining the organization of the nervous                   
              system.  A growth associated protein, known as GAP-43, enriches                
              axons of nerve cells and is associated with axonal growth.  While              
              the relationship of this protein to growth and the biochemistry                
              of this protein have been well established, little is known about              
              the mechanisms that regulate the levels of GAP-43 in nerve cells.              
              Previous work has indicated that the amounts of this protein are               
              determined by the levels of messenger RNA, the intermediary                    
              molecule that links the activity of the gene with the synthesis                
              of the protein.  The investigator plans to study how the                       
              expression of GAP-43 is regulated by focusing on messenger RNA                 
              regulation.  The levels of mRNA can be regulated at the level of               
              synthesis or at the level of degradation.  Preliminary work from               
              the investigator's laboratory indicates that the key control                   
              point in the expression of GAP-43 may not depend on the level of               
              synthesis but on the regulation of the stability of messenger                  
              RNA.  The study will determine to what extent synthesis and                    
              degradation mechanisms participate in the control of GAP-43 mRNA               
              levels during neuronal differentiation, in vivo and in cultures                
              of isolated cells.  These studies will provide fundamental                     
              information on the mechanisms that govern GAP-43 levels which                  
              will set the basis for future studies on the specific molecular                
              aspects of these regulatory events.  The elucidation of the                    
              mechanisms that regulate the expression of GAP-43  and other                   
              growth-related proteins will not only bring new insights into the              
              question of gene expression control during neuronal                            
              differentiation, but will contribute to the understanding of the               
              molecular events that underlie the development of the nervous                  
              system.
