Title       : Research Initiation: In Situ Measurement of Transient Polymer Melt Temperatures
               via Infrared Pyrometry during Injection Molding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1990      
File        : a9011721

Award Number: 9011721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: F. Hank Grant                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeroen Rietveld rietveld@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The accurate and precise measurement of polymer melt                      
              temperatures during processing is generally a problematic                      
              procedure.  This is especially true for the injection molding                  
              process where the cyclic and transient nature of the operation                 
              results in spatial and temporal variations of the polymer melt                 
              stream temperature.  Current techniques to measure polymer melt                
              temperatures in a typical manufacturing operation are either                   
              ignored, misused, or highly deficient, and there is a great need               
              to advance the technology of measuring important stream variables              
              such as the temperature of a polymer melt.  The primary objective              
              of this study is to develop a reliable methodology for applying                
              infrared pyrometers to the measurement of polymer melt temperatures            
              during the manufacture of plastic articles, whereby such a                     
              measurement could then be used for either monitoring or control                
              purposes.  Several key advantages that infrared pyrometers have                
              over conventional thermometry techniques are:  response times on               
              the order of milliseconds, capacity of in situ real-time                       
              measurement, and potential for measuring subsurface temperatures               
              in a non-intrusive fashion.  However, the conversion of infrared               
              radiation emitted from a polymer melt into more than just                      
              semi-quantitative information is not a straightforward procedure.              
              Commercially available instrumentation will be installed on an                 
              injection molding machine so that the researchers can collect and              
              analyze data obtained from a series of controlled experiments.  An             
              immediate benefit from the research will be a correct methodology              
              for using infrared pyrometers.
