Title       : Long-term Studies of Ecosystem Response to Disturbance Along Environmental
               Gradients at Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9011661

Award Number: 9011661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4373619            (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith L. Meyer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne T. Swank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,1124,1129,9169,EGCH,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will continue long-term studies of response and                   
              recovery of Southern Appalachian forested ecosystems to                        
              disturbances. To understand and predict responses to current and               
              emerging environmental problems requires an expansion of research              
              perspective from a watershed to a landscape. The project will                  
              emphasize new studies along a complex environmental gradient with              
              a continued emphasis on use of experimental manipulation to examine            
              ecosystem response to disturbance. An elevational sequence that                
              represents a gradient in external driving variables (e.g.                      
              temperature, precipitation) as well as a gradient in ecosystem                 
              response will be used in this study.  Three interconnected                     
              ecosystems are arrayed along this response gradient: forested                  
              slopes, riparian zone and stream.  The PIs will test the following             
              ideas in these landscape components: (1) Forest structure and                  
              processes in the Southern Appalachians are currently changing as               
              a result of both historic factors and recent drought-induced tree              
              mortality. (2) Differences in structural and functional                        
              characteristics of stream ecosystems along elevational and                     
              longitudinal gradients are a consequence of changes in the relative            
              abundance of geomorphic patch types along the stream. (3)                      
              Rhododendron maximum is a keystone species in the Southern                     
              Appalachian landscape, regulating the rates of soluble and                     
              particulate element export from the forest and reducing stream                 
              productivity.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This is an outstanding research group that is recognized at the                
              national and international level as leaders in the area of forest              
              ecosystem research.  Institutional support is excellent and the                
              project management is dynamic and effect. Coweeta Hydrologic                   
              Laboratory has been the site of interdisciplinary ecological                   
              research for over twenty years. This is an exceptional Long-Term               
              Ecological Research (LTER) project.//
