Title       : Knightian Uncertainty, General Equilibrium Theory and Macroeconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1990    
File        : a9011194

Award Number: 9011194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36679              (Estimated)
Investigator: Truman F. Bewley truman.bewley@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project supports theoretical research on the economic                     
              implications of Knightian decision theory, an alternative                      
              formulation of choice under uncertainty.  Knightian decision                   
              theory                                                                         
              explains, among other things, how different individuals with the               
              same objective information could attach different subjective                   
              probabilities to events of unknown probability.  Thus, the theory              
              creates a coherent framework in which individuals with the smae                
              information could have different opinions about choices under                  
              uncertainty.  The differences of opinion create asymmetries of                 
              subjective information among individuals, for they do not know                 
              each                                                                           
              others' opinions.  The research elaborates the view that these                 
              asymmetries may help explain important economic phenomena, such                
              as                                                                             
              price behavior, layoffs, and strikes.  The ultimate goal of the                
              project is to deepen our understanding of general equilibrium and              
              the possible underemployment of resources in general equilibrium.              
                                                                                             
              It also provides a deeper theoretical anlysis of possible                      
              remedies                                                                       
              for the underemployment of resources.                                          
                                                                                             
              Knightian decision theory gives behavioral significance to Frank               
              Knight's distinction between risk and uncertainty.  According to               
              these definitions, a gamble is risky if the probabilities of its               
              outcomes are known and it is uncertain if they are not known.                  
              The                                                                            
              development of Knightian decision theory by this project is an                 
              important contribution because this new theory explains a number               
              of different types of decisions that appear irrational according               
              to standard Bayesian decision theory.  These include the failure               
              of certain markets to provide insurance, bargaining behavior of                
              labor and management that produces strikes and layoffs and the                 
              insensitivity of personal saving to changes in interest rates.
