Title       : Evaluation of the Design Criteria and Analytical Reconcili- ation of the
               Instrumented Response of Three Engineered Structures in the Loma Prieta
               Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1990      
File        : a9011286

Award Number: 9011286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44406              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Bergman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Nicoletti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : John A Blume and Assocs
	      
	      San Francisco, CA  94105    /   -

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9288,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a post-event investigation project to learn                            
              engineering lessons from the Loma Prieta earthquake (October                   
              1989).                                                                         
                                                                                             
              The design criteria and instrumented response of three San                     
              Francisco Bay Area structures will be studied in this project.                 
              Located in San Francisco, Emeryville, and San Jose,                            
              California, respectively, each of the three buildings was                      
              designed for lateral forces greater than those required by the                 
              governing codes.  Furthermore, none of the three structures                    
              incurred significant damage during the earthquake.  The design                 
              criteria for all three buildings was developed by URS/John A.                  
              Blume & Associates, Engineers of San Francisco.  The objective                 
              of the research is two-fold.  First, to assess the adequacy                    
              of code lateral force provisions for the design of buildings                   
              in regions of high seismicity and to determine the advantages                  
              of using more rigorously developed design criteria.  The                       
              second is to construct computer models of the three predicted                  
              with measured response.  Through this study the use of complex                 
              finite element codes for the purpose of dynamic structural                     
              analysis will be verified and the opportunity for system                       
              identification studies of the three subject structures will                    
              be presented.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The research will provide a rational assessment of the                         
              effectiveness of rigorous design requirements through a                        
              comparison of demand and capacity resulting from code level                    
              forces, specified design forces, and the actual forces                         
              developed in the earthquake.
