Title       : Improved Perfluorocarbon Microcarriers Used for Cell Culture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1990       
File        : a9011647

Award Number: 9011647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21775              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward M. Trujillo edward.trujillo@m.cc.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Rappaport  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1491,
Abstract    :
              Recent studies with microbial systems have shown that                          
              perfluorocarbon (PF)-emulsions can increase the oxygen                         
              transfer rate and increase the growth and/or amount of                         
              harvested bioproduct.  More recently, attempts have been                       
              made to develop useful PF microcarriers using F-emulsions.                     
              These microcarriers provide an enormous increase in                            
              surface area.  It has been known for some time that                            
              anchorage  dependent cells grow well on fluorocarbon                           
              surfaces.  A new technique has been developed by DuPont                        
              that makes it possible to fix specific proteins to a                           
              fluorocarbon surface.  This technique has the potential to                     
              provide droplets with important and specific factors                           
              necessary for different cells to adhere to a surface, and                      
              makes it possible to provide better aeration.  The PIs                         
              have done some preliminary studies using a purified                            
              fraction of high molecular weight gelatin, bovine serum                        
              albumin (BSA) as a model protein, and perfluorodecalin as                      
              the recipient fluorocarbon.  Gelatin                                           
              has been successfully tested for growth with BHK cells.                        
              This                                                                           
              project will be directed towards purifying the                                 
              perfluorodecalin, preparing beads that are more stable,                        
              and conducting preliminary oxygen mass transport studies.                      
              Successful completion of this project will open the way to                     
              developing PF microcarriers with special adhesion factors,                     
              and optimal gas exchange for cells adhering to the PF                          
              microcarriers.
