Title       : Use of Scientific Evidence in the Courts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9011805

Award Number: 9011805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa Martin                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann J. Lane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9220,
Abstract    :
              In February, 1989, Sears, Roebuck and Company was found innocent               
              of the charge of sex discrimination in a lawsuit brought by the                
              Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).  The two major                 
              expert witnesses, both respected historians of women, testified                
              for the case.  Since one testified for Sears and the other for the             
              EEOC, their testimonies evoked very different visions of women's               
              motivations and women's roles in the work force.  In so doing, they            
              contributed to the way the attorneys defined the significant issues            
              of the case as well as the way the scholarly and legal communities             
              interpreted the meaning of the trial.                                          
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this project is to study in depth the Sears case in             
              order to examine how historical and scientific evidence is used by             
              the Court and to explore the conflicts between scholarly and legal             
              forms of reasoning.  The Sears case itself took EEOC twelve years              
              to prepare and cost 2.5 million dollars.  The trial took ten months            
              in court and resulted in a transcript of 20,000 pages.  In addition            
              to the case analysis, the legal, institutional, and theoretical                
              issues that emerged from it will be explored.  The analysis will               
              include an assessment of the competing discourses of social                    
              science, statistics, the rhetoric of the court, and the scholar or             
              expert witness.  The trial record will be used to illuminate how               
              those involved dealt with contemporary events, how they used                   
              knowledge and historical evidence, and how they understood the                 
              corporate culture and the relationship of the law and the academy              
              to it.  The official record will be supplemented with interviews               
              of the participants.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The examination of the modes of legal discourse in the Sears case              
              brings a needed rigor to the study of theories of discrimination.              
              The project will contribute to our understanding of the factors                
              which influence legal decisionmaking in affirmative action cases               
              and will expand knowledge of the legal theory of equality.  In                 
              addition, the project promises to make a major contribution to                 
              understanding of the role of expert witnesses and social science               
              evidence in the courtroom.  Finally, the research has important                
              implications for shedding light on the relationship of law and the             
              academy to corporate culture.
