Title       : Microscopic Theory of Hypernuclei, Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9011045

Award Number: 9011045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Pieper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Argonne National Lab
	      9700 South Cass Avenue
	      Argonne, IL  60439    630/252-6797

NSF Program : 5919      INDIA (COOPERATIVE SCIENCE)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1250,5951,
Abstract    :
              Description:  This project supports collaborative work by                      
              theoretical physicists Dr. Steven Pieper at Argonne National                   
              Laboratory and Dr. A.R. Bodmer at the University of                            
              Illinois-Chicago, and in the area of microscopic theory of                     
              hypernuclei Dr. Q.N. Usmani at the Jamia Millia Islamia in New                 
              Delhi.  They have previously made calculations of S-shell                      
              hypernuclei, A binding to nuclear matter and AP scattering data                
              using simplified NN interactions, and have shown that a                        
              consistent description of these data can be achieved with AN and               
              ANN interactions consistent with meson exchange models.  The                   
              proposed work will combine this effort with work by                            
              Dr. Pieper at Argonne in developing a variational program for                  
              computing the ground-states of closed-shell nuclei using                       
              realistic two-and three-nucleon interactions.  The combined                    
              programs will extend the closed-shell program firstly to allow                 
              for one or two A particles and secondly to allow computation of                
              P-shell hypernuclei.  The objective is to obtain a more detailed               
              knowledge of the AN and ANN interactions.  The problem of                      
              baryonic mixtures and AE coupling will also be studied.                        
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This project enables two highly qualified scientists, and              
              their teams, to continue and expand collaborative research that                
              had started several years ago and resulted in significant                      
              publications.  The project will enable the Indian team to acquire              
              capabilities for extensive mathematical analysis and calculations              
              necessary for this work and to greatly contribute to the                       
              development of the theory of hypernuclei.  The project is one in               
              which the collaboration is especially beneficial to both sides.
