Title       : Evaluation and Design of Absorption Power Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1990    
File        : a9011996

Award Number: 9011996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanford A. Klein klein@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A research plan is proposed which will result in a thorough                    
              evaluation of absorption power cycles and a methodology for                    
              designing optimum power cycles.  The research will                             
              specifically focus on power cycles operating with low                          
              temperature heat sources, such as solar or geothermal energy,                  
              or the energy rejected from higher temperature cycles.  The                    
              utility of the universal efficiency concept, as a model                        
              leading to economically sound power cycle designs, will first                  
              be evaluated.  According to the universal efficiency concept,                  
              the maximum power of simple cycles subject to heat transfer                    
              irreversibilities may be explicitly determined.  The effect of                 
              additional thermodynamic irreversibilities on the efficiency                   
              at maximum power will be examined with the intent to develop a                 
              realistic goal for the efficiency of well-designed power                       
              cycles.  A detailed evaluation of several absorption power                     
              cycles will be made by comparing their first and operating                     
              costs with those of conventional power cycles.  Particular                     
              attention will be paid to absorption power cycles in which                     
              energy transfers to and from the cycle involve streams having                  
              finite thermal capacitance rates.  The comparisons will                        
              include a consideration of realistic parasitic losses.  It is                  
              clear that heat exchange is of primary importance in the                       
              design of optimized cycles.  Heat exchanger network synthesis                  
              methods will be used to identify improved power cycles designs                 
              and to establish a general methodology for designing these                     
              cycles.
