Title       : Steroid Receptor Mechanisms in Developing Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1991      
File        : a9011339

Award Number: 9011339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Tobet 6176420234  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shriver Ctr Mental Retard
	      
	      Waltham, MA  02154    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Sex differences in brain and behavior are a result of the                 
              perinatal hormonal environment.  Exposure to testicular androgens              
              during critical developmental periods can permanently alter the                
              anatomy, biochemistry and physiology of the brain.  A major                    
              question is how do the gonadal steroids regulate the                           
              differentiation of the brain at the cellular level.  Dr. Tobet                 
              has identified two sex-specific monoclonal antibodies which are                
              influenced by perinatal androgen treatment.  He will use these                 
              monoclonal antibodies as markers to follow selective molecular                 
              changes in development which are hormonally dependent.  Dr. Tobet              
              will pay special attention to the time course of antigen                       
              expression since it is believed that temporal synchronization                  
              between brief increases in gonadal steroid signals and transient               
              neural changes induce sexual differentiation of the brain.  This               
              work will provide a greater understanding of the early                         
              manifestations of steroid actions which lead to normal brain                   
              development.  Moreover, the results could help unravel the                     
              abnormal events that underlie major birth defects involving the                
              sexual differentiation process.  Finally, the importance of these              
              hormonal events is underscored by evidence of sex differences and              
              androgen influences in the susceptibility to certain syndromes,                
              learning disorders and neurological disorders.
