Title       : Enhancing Chemical Reactivity with Perfluorinated Oxyanions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1992     
File        : a9011610

Award Number: 9011610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Strauss strauss@mail.chm.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and                              
              Organometallic Chemistry Program Dr. Steven H. Strauss will                    
              synthesize negatively charged ions (anions) designed to form                   
              extremely weak bonds with the positively charged ions (cations)                
              of metals. The metal salts of such anions are expected to have                 
              unusually high reactivities, so that they can be used to                       
              prepare adducts of metals which cannot be made by any other                    
              route.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              The goal of the project is to understand the solvation of metal                
              ions by very weak donor solvents such as chlorocarbons and                     
              hydrocarbons. Metal salts of perfluorinated oxyanions such as                  
              oxopentafluorotellurate(VI) and dioxotetrafluorotellurate(VI),                 
              and extremely large perfluorinated anions such as tetrakis-                    
              (oxopentafluorotellurato)borate will be prepared. By virtue of                 
              the electronic and steric properties of the anions, the metal                  
              ions will be rendered extremely reactive and are expected to                   
              coordinate to very weakly basic solvents such as methylene                     
              chloride, nitromethane, hexane and liquid xenon. New synthetic                 
              methodologies will be developed for the preparation, isolation                 
              and structural and spectroscopic characterization of metal                     
              complexes containing weakly nucleophilic, weakly bound, and                    
              volatile solvent ligands. Complexes of paramagnetic transition                 
              metals and lanthanide ions will be prepared. The coordination                  
              of solvent molecules to a variety of metal ions in neat solvent                
              will be studied by EXAFS spectroscopy. Potential applications                  
              of the reactive complexes to metalized polymers and new                        
              metastable phases of metal salts will be explored.
