Title       : Long-term Ecological Research at the North Inlet Estuary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1993      
File        : a9011664

Award Number: 9011664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1264362            (Estimated)
Investigator: F. John Vernberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred H. Sklar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis M. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth R. Blood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Stancyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A new emphasis on process-based interactions and feedbacks within              
              the North Inlet ecosystem will be carried out.  The coupling of                
              ongoing long-term sampling programs will process-based                         
              experiments and transect analyses across ecological gradients is               
              planned.  Based upon good descriptions of the long-term temporal               
              variability in ecosystem structure, project emphasis will shift                
              toward experiments designed to explain that variation.  These                  
              process-oriented studies will concentrate on areas where marsh                 
              habitats are encroaching into the coastal forest.  Transects                   
              within this watershed will be sampled to monitor spatial and                   
              temporal variations in nutrients, the deposition of organic                    
              matter, plant and animal biomass, fish migrations, and water                   
              movements.  Select locations along a transect will provide                     
              insights on very long-term processes such as marsh evolution.                  
              These measurements will be combined with experiments on nutrient               
              cycling, sedimentation, decomposition, primary production,                     
              fertilization, trophic dynamics and recruitment in a coordinated               
              effort that emphasizes exchange and transformation process.                    
                                                                                             
              Ecosystem models at a variety of spatial and temporal scales will              
              be developed.  They will characterize and summarize the                        
              complexity of the major structural and functional habitats within              
              North Inlet, test hypotheses, structure our field experiments,                 
              and ultimately, be incorporated into large landscape/climate                   
              models.  Models will focus our attention on general systems                    
              dynamics and the chemical, physical and biological interactions                
              which regulate system level processes.  This focus will, in turn,              
              place the North Inlet LTER project in a strong position to                     
              evaluate the impacts of disturbance events (e.g., hurricanes),                 
              global climate change and regional land-use change on system                   
              processes at various scales.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Key long-term datasets will be extended into a second decade.                  
              This continuity with the past provides the measurements of long-               
              term variations in the estuarine structure, the indices by which               
              change is observed.  Statistical analyses of the short-term                    
              variability in these long-term data sets have shown that certain               
              environmentally controlled parameters, such as chlorophyll                     
              concentrations or seasonal fish migrations, are reasonably                     
              predictable, while other more biological controlled parameters,                
              such as the zooplankton abundance or recruitment success of                    
              benthos, were unpredictable and likely to vary greatly within and              
              between seasons.
