Title       : Mechanical Dreams: Technology & Culture in Interwar France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1990   
File        : a9011492

Award Number: 9011492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Frost   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              While considerable research has been done on the politics,                     
              economics, and cultural implications of technological change,                  
              most such work does not integrate either the various facets of                 
              technological change or the technological artifact with its                    
              dialectically-linked social meaning.  In this study of                         
              technology, productivism, and consumerism in interwar France, Dr.              
                                                                                             
              Frost is utilizing an integrated theory and methodology to                     
              explain the emergence of a set of technologically linked cultural              
                                                                                             
              images and the social impact of technological discourse within                 
              French society at a time when the breadth of technological change              
                                                                                             
              was slight.  This research focuses particularly upon the                       
              contradiction between an emerging modernist view of "progress"                 
              and a genuine lack of concrete technological change.  An                       
              integrated approach like the one that Dr. Frost is using offers                
              an opportunity to observe and define the mutual prestructuring of              
                                                                                             
              technological text and social context.   Techniques for this                   
              study therefore stretch from technical design analysis, through                
              micro- and macroeconomic calculation, to the analysis and                      
              interpretation of technological discourse--from economics to                   
              semiotics--using a range of sources from demographic and economic              
                                                                                             
              statistics to trade fairs and advertising brochures.  this study               
                                                                                             
              is developing conclusions about the processes of innovation and                
              diffusion, the invention of new social roles concurrent with the               
                                                                                             
              invention f artifacts, the economics and finances of innovation,               
                                                                                             
              and the fracture between technological images and artifacts in                 
              interwar (1919-1930) France.  The results should prove                         
              extraordinarily helpful in pointing the way toward a                           
              comprehensive approach to the study of the processes of                        
              technological innovation.
