Title       : Robust Interactive Decision Analysis: Extensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9011206

Award Number: 9011206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Moskowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Decision analysis provides a theoretically appealing approach to               
              making decisions in the face of uncertainty and multiple conflicting           
              objectives.  Unfortunately, most decision makers (DMs) have been               
              unwilling to adopt this rationale approach to important decision               
              problems, in part, due to the stringent information demands it places          
              on them in applying its concepts and methods.  This research project           
              involves the development of a novel interactive approach and prototype         
              decision support system (DSS) for performing decision analysis which           
              relaxes its stringent measurement requirements by precluding the need          
              for the DM to assess his/her beliefs and tastes directly, precisely,           
              and/or completely.  The philosophical basis of the approach is based on        
              robutness and is aimed at making decision analysis a potentially more          
              accessible and viable tool for decision making in practice.  The               
              investigators' initial effort focused on making decisions under                
              uncertainty based on imprecise, incomplete beliefs or tastes.  They now        
              extend our approach (1) to include making decisions under uncertainty          
              when both beliefs and tastes are imprecisely and/or incompletely               
              specified, (2) to include multiple criteria decision problems when             
              either or both tradeoffs and individual attribute value functions are          
              imprecisely and/or incompletely specified, (3) to incorporate knowledge        
              and experience-based intelligence into our RID methodology and DSS for         
              prediction and learning to reduce the cognitive demands on the DM and          
              accelerate the solution process, and (4) to develop the system                 
              principles and prototype design for an integrated, intelligent DSS that        
              can simultaneously support decision making under uncertainty and               
              multiple criteria decision making.                                             
                                                                                             
              The contribution of the research will be both theoretical and                  
              pragmatic.  For example, on a theoretical level, research in decision          
              analysis under conditions of both imprecise probability and utility            
              functions should reveal new insights regarding the dynamics of the             
              relationship between imprecise beliefs, tastes, and choice preferences         
              when making decisions under uncertainty.  Further, the treatment of            
              attribute weights and conditional value/utility functions as random            
              variables in multiattribute utility analysis should allow us to specify        
              the probability function of the imprecisely induced aggregated                 
              value/utility intervals associated with alternatives.  Such information        
              permits the use of stochastic dominance concepts to filter inferior            
              alternatives.  From a pragmatic perspective, the results of this               
              research should lead to the development of a methodology and integrated        
              DSS that should allow more pervasive and successful applications of            
              decision analysis in practice.
