Title       : Segregated Labor Markets and Immigrant Women's Use of Urban Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9011589

Award Number: 9011589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenda Laws   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   Research in geography and related sciences has focused attention          
              on gender-related segregation of space within cities.  One profitable          
              line of inquiry has been the study of the geography of women -- where          
              they work, how they travel, how they function within employment,               
              commercial, and social settings.  Another line of inquiry has observed         
              how gender relationships affect social structures.  Much of this               
              research has assumed high degrees of homogeneity among females and             
              males, however.  This Research Opportunities for Women Planning Grant          
              will support an effort to refine a research plan that will attempt to          
              identify differences in geographic and employment behavior among               
              different types of women.  A case study in New York City will be               
              developed to test hypotheses that the use of urban spaces by women is          
              determined both by their positions in the labor market and by the              
              structures of their households.  This planning project will consist of         
              the analysis of women's positions in the labor market as documented in         
              1980 census data and development and testing of a survey instrument.           
              Because a major focus of the research will be to differentiate between         
              the experiences of recent immigrants versus women who have resided in          
              New York for longer periods, the survey will be administered in Chinese        
              and Spanish as well as in English.                                             
                   This project will help solidify the research design of a larger           
              project that will contribute considerably to our understandings of the         
              different ways that different women operate in modern cities.  This            
              type of research will enhance our knowledge of the role of gender in           
              society, and it will broaden our appreciation of the complex ways that         
              economic and social activities function.  The project also will provide        
              a superb opportunity for a young female scholar with an excellent              
              background to further improve her basic research skills.
