Title       : Fire, Grazing, and Climatic Interactions in Tallgrass Prairie
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9011662

Award Number: 9011662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3517313            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan K. Knapp aknapp@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cathy M. Tate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Hartnett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Kaufman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,1129,9169,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A multidisciplinary study of fire, grazing and fire-grazing                    
              interactions on population, community and ecosystem properties                 
              will be continued on Konza Prairie, a native tallgrass prairie                 
              site in northeastern Kansas.  The proposed research builds and                 
              expands upon a ten-year study of fire frequency effects on                     
              tallgrass prairie.  Previous and proposed LTER efforts will                    
              continue to provide long-term data and baseline studies such as                
              those that spawned a series of intensive short-term experiments                
              and manipulations supported by NSF, NASA, USGS and state funds.                
              Results from these previous studies have been incorporated into                
              current LTER measurements and questions.  The goal of the                      
              proposed research is to understand how grazing influences biotic               
              and ecosystem processes and patterns imposed by fire frequency                 
              over the landscape mosaic, all of which are subjected to a                     
              variable (and possibly directional) climate regime.  A new,                    
              landscape-level study linking surface and ground water chemistry               
              will interface with ongoing measurements to provide a landscape                
              emphasis to ecological research.  The new focus involves                       
              topotedaphic effects and landscape interactions influencing                    
              ecological phenomena; specifically, the relationship between                   
              geomorphic patterns and ecological constraints (fire and/or                    
              grazing) from the perspective of the individual organism to the                
              watershed level.  These efforts are necessary if ecologists are                
              to integrate their research to scales where biotic processes may               
              adequately be incorporated with climate models.                                
                                                                                             
              The Konza Prairie LTER research team has made important                        
              contributions on the area of atmosphere-biosphere interactions,                
              Institutional support for this research is outstanding.
