Title       : Establishment of a Research Careers Program in Physical Sciences, Mathematics, &
               Engineering at the Puerto Rico Resource Center for Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1994    
File        : a9011964

Award Number: 9011964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. McHenry                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259323             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad R. Weiner brad@adam.uprr.pr  (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan G. Gonzalez-Lagoa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9132,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Puerto Rico will establish a Research Careers                
              Program for Minority Scholars to provide opportunities for                     
              undergraduate research training in the fields of physical science,             
              mathematics, and engineering in which Hispanics are notably                    
              underrepresented.  The program will have a significant impact in               
              increasing the number of minority students who choose to pursue                
              graduate studies and careers in these fields.  The UPR-RCMS Program            
              will create an academically enriched environment by providing:                 
              intensive research experiences for students with researchers from              
              EPSCoR and MRCE Programs, who will work closely with them as mentors           
              and role models; special seminars and colloquia to expose trainees to          
              invited minority minority scientists with whom they will discuss their         
              research projects; participation in local and national scientific              
              research meetings in which they will be encouraged to make                     
              presentations; a language skills tutorial for improving the oral and           
              written presentation of their research; and an orientation program to          
              assist them in identifying and entering graduate programs, obtaining           
              financial support for graduate studies, and selecting careers in               
              science, mathematics, and engineering.  Twenty-four talented students          
              will participate each year during a five-year period.  As part of              
              their research training, the eight most outstanding students will              
              travel to national research laboratories for further training each             
              year.  Students will be required, as a result of their participation           
              in the RCMS Program, to prepare a thesis or co-author a publication in         
              a scientific journal.  Participants will be tracked through graduate           
              studies to determine the success of the program in preparing competent         
              minority scientists.
