Title       : A New Storage Facility for the Bishop Museum Systematic Anthropology Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1993      
File        : a9011732

Award Number: 9011732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144138             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger G. Rose  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Tatar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Toni L. Han  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura Word  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bernice P Bishop Museum
	      1525 Bernice Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968172704    808/847-3511

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Bishop Museum is located in Honolulu, Hawaii and its                       
              systematic anthropological collections comprise some 170,000                   
              specimens.  These are significant to the advancement of knowledge              
              of the natural and cultural history of Hawaii and the Pacific.                 
              They constitute a historic baseline for the understanding of                   
              Pacific peoples past and present, and this resource is used by                 
              scientists around the world, as well as by the local academic                  
              community.  For the people of Hawaii it offers an important                    
              source of information about their cultural backgrounds, and the                
              collections provide documentation of traditions which otherwise                
              would have been lost.  To improve storage and access to these                  
              materials the Bishop Museum has constructed a new four-story                   
              building and will transfer the collections to it.  This National               
              Science Foundation grant will provide funds to purchase a                      
              compactor storage system.  Compactors consist of moveable storage              
              units (carefully designed to minimize damage to materials) which               
              have been widely adopted by museums because they make extremely                
              efficient use of space.  Not only will this system safely house                
              the existing Bishop Museum anthropological collection but will                 
              also provide room for future growth.                                           
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons.  First, it will                 
              assist in the preservation of scientifically important and                     
              irreplaceable anthropological materials.  Secondly, it will                    
              facilitate access by both researchers and the interested public.
