Title       : Complexity, Formal Systems, and Linear-Time Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1990       
File        : a9011248

Award Number: 9011248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Krishna M. Kavi                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35013              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth W. Regan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Buffalo
	      1300 Elmwood Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142221004    716/878-4000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to carry out fundamental research in          
              complexity theory and logic, focusing on the formal status of the              
              P=? NP question.  This question involves hundreds of long-studied              
              computer decision problems, and asks whether they can be solved by             
              time-efficient methods, or not.  The first part of the project is to           
              develop a uniform foundation for "structural" complexity theory, one           
              which refines the techniques currently used to investigate polynomial          
              time.  A key idea for making progress is that many of these techniques         
              can be sharpened to study linear time computation, where results               
              analogous to "P = NP" are already known, and where basic properties            
              have simpler representations in formal logic.  Expected results are a          
              better classification of problems solvable in linear or "nearly                
              linear" time, and a deeper understanding of the obstacles to answering         
              the major open questions for polynomial time.  The second part                 
              combines complexity theory with techniques developed by logicians for          
              analyzing certain specific formal systems, ones capable of modeling            
              much current work in theoretical computer science.  Several                    
              researchers have raised the possibility that "current methods in               
              computer science" may be incapable of resolving "P =? NP" and related          
              questions; this project seeks a definite answer in terms of these              
              formal systems.  A further goal is to develop those techniques which           
              these systems may lack, aided by recent evedence that some concrete            
              results essentially require "abstract" methods, and by advances in             
              computer-assisted theorem proving.
