Title       : Insurance and Incentives in Poor High Risk Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9011731

Award Number: 9011731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184643             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Townsend rtownsen@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant renews support for an ambitious and productive project              
              on economies with uncertainty and with private information.  This              
              phase of the project studies the presence or absence of insurance,             
              credit, and risk reduction arrangements in poor high risk                      
              economies.  It develops and makes tractable economic models with               
              private information, limited communication, and spatial separation.            
              It measures which of these impediments are important in practice               
              and determines what information-communication structures prevail               
              in poor high risk villages.                                                    
                                                                                             
              More specifically, the research contains the following:                        
              (1)  Empirical tests of full insurance for three villages surveyed             
              by the International Crops Research for the Semi-Arid Tropics                  
              (ICRISAT) in India from 1975-1984;                                             
              (2)  The development of general equilibrium prototypes with                    
              particular emphasis on private information to explain dispersed                
              land holdings, modeled from historical material for medieval                   
              England, but applicable with modifications to India and Thailand;              
              and (3)  The evaluation of survey questionnaires administered to               
              villagers in northern Thailand to quantify which, if any, risk                 
              reduction arrangements are used and to measure the nature and type             
              of information impediments.                                                    
                                                                                             
              A variety of important policy issues turn on whether or not there              
              are private information problems or impediments to trade in poor               
              high risk villages and whether or not risk reduction devices are               
              available.  For example, rice banks in Thailand are run like                   
              standard text-book banks, not respecting the erratic nature of crop            
              yields.  This project should show whether or not rice banks are                
              needed and, if needed, how they might be improved.  But the major              
              contribution of this project is methodological.  Standard economic             
              theory relies on a paradigm of full insurance and complete markets.            
              The poor agrarian villages studied in this project are used as                 
              natural laboratories in which to evaluate full insurance models.               
              Alternatives to full insurance models exist but they are                       
              unrealistic or so complex that they can not be estimated                       
              empirically.  This project for the first time merges three                     
              different strands of theoretical research with actual applied                  
              research.
