Title       : Critical Zones in Global Environmental Change, Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1991  
File        : a9011335

Award Number: 9011335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124227             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger E. Kasperson rkaspers@black.clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Billie L. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel J. Ratick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanne X. Kasperson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                   The ways in which human activities are altering natural and               
              physical processes of environmental change and the impacts of that             
              change on humans are not evenly distributed across the globe.  Because         
              of special combinations of human and natural attributes, some locales          
              are especially prone toward accelerated processes of change induced by         
              human-environmental interactions.  This project will continue the              
              establishment of a methodological framework for the systematic,                
              comparative study of human-environmental interactions in nine parts of         
              the world where the situation has been assessed as especially critical:        
              (1) South Florida, (2) the Mexico Basin, (3) part of the Amazon basin,         
              (4) the North Sea, (5) the Kenya Dry Hills, (6) the Aral Sea, (7) the          
              Himalayas of Nepal, (8) the Ordos Plateau of China, and (9) the                
              Sundaland Rainforest of Indonesia.  Case studies are being undertaken          
              by scholars familiar with each of these locales to identify and                
              evaluate the human forces that are altering natural processes of               
              environmental change, the growing societal awareness of these impacts,         
              and the nature of societal responses to those changes.  Common research        
              approaches are being used in all case studies to ensure comparability          
              of results.  The work is coordinated by a central research team of             
              scholars with complementary skills and by an international board of            
              advisors.  The research also will be coordinated with related                  
              activities of study groups of the International Geographic Union.              
                   This research continues to lay the groundwork for an important            
              series of intensive, comparative case studies of human-environmental           
              interaction in five critical parts of the world.  The research                 
              ultimately will provide significant new insights about human and               
              natural processes in the study areas themselves, but more importantly,         
              it will provide generalizable knowledge about global patterns and              
              processes of human impacts on and responses to natural environmental           
              change.  The study will also establish a framework for replication in          
              other locales in order to further increase understandings about this           
              critical topic.
