Title       : Determination of Genetic and Kinetic Parameters of Primary Importance to the
               Productivity of Recombinant Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9011487

Award Number: 9011487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dewey D. Ryu ddyryu@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This investigation undertakes a fundamental biochemical                        
              engineering study to develop a novel methodology for                           
              determination of kinetic and genetic parameters of primary                     
              importance to the production of genetically engineered                         
              organisms.  These important parameters include:  specific                      
              production rate, gene or plasmid concentration, fraction                       
              of plasmid-harboring cells, growth ratio of plasmid-                           
              harboring cells to plasmid-free cells, specific plasmid                        
              loss rate, relative plasmid loss rate, lumped rate of                          
              transcription and translation, and gene expression                             
              efficiency.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              There is a total vacuum of the data base of this kind at                       
              the present time, because of total lack of rational and                        
              systematic methodology for accurate determination of many                      
              important parameters, which dictate and control the                            
              productivity of recombinant organisms.  In view of this                        
              situation, it is considered critically important to                            
              develop a relatively simple and yet reliable method by                         
              which those genetic and kinetic parameters of recombinants                     
              can be well characterized and determined through both                          
              theoretical and experimental studies.  Based on                                
              preliminary studies, one such method capable of                                
              determining accurately those parameters is proposed.  From                     
              these parameters, other important parameters can be                            
              estimated and these parameters combined with the                               
              environmental and operational parameters can then be used                      
              for design, scale up, and optimization of recombinant                          
              fermentation processes of industrial importance.  In this                      
              study, the proposed theoretical method will be evaluated                       
              experimentally by using at least two selected "host cell-                      
              vector" systems.  Based on experimental results, the                           
              proposed method of determining the genetic parameters of                       
              recombinant organisms will be further improved or refined.
