Title       : Collaborative Research: Optimism, Affect and Behavorial Self-Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1991      
File        : a9011653

Award Number: 9011653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100537             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Carver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is concerned with the antecedents of mood, affect,               
              and optimism, and the effects of these factors on subsequent                   
              behavior.  The research is to be undertaken by two of the very                 
              best investigators in this line of work. Their past research is                
              highly respected and widely cited.  The underlying assumption of               
              the research is that affect, mood, and optimism is tied to the                 
              individual's perception of the rate at which he or she is                      
              progressing toward a desired goal.  Developmental and applied                  
              promises to detail not only the antecedents of mood and optimism,              
              but also the effects of these transient (in the case of mood) or               
              chronic dispositional (in the case of optimism) features on the                
              behavior of the individual.  The fundamental gains to be realized              
              in this research are impressive.  Equally impressive are the                   
              implications of this set of investigations for applied research                
              (e.g., on health).  All in all, this set of investigations                     
              presents an ideal blend of basic, applied, and developmental                   
              research approaches, all focused on an important topic, by highly              
              qualified researchers.  The program of research promises to tell               
              us much of the manner in which personal factors influence the                  
              fundamental status of the human organism.
