Title       : Macroeconomic Effects of the Loma Prieta Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1990      
File        : a9011105

Award Number: 9011105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Anderson                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne B. Perkins jeannep@abag.ca.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond Brady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assn of Bay Area Govt
	      P.O.Box 2050
	      Oakland, CA  946042050    415/464-7900

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9288,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Researchers have predicted that there would be                                 
              significant economic aftershocks of any major                                  
              California earthquake, with the magnitude of                                   
              that impact estimated to be two to five times                                  
              the value of direct physical damage.                                           
                                                                                             
              This project will examine the data from the                                    
              Loma Prieta Earthquake to assess the                                           
              macroeconomic impact of that earthquake on the                                 
              Bay Area economy.  Macroeconomic impacts                                       
              include the economic effects of the earthquake                                 
              on employment, income, and output of                                           
              industries in the region.  Some additional                                     
              work will be conducted, if possible, to                                        
              estimate the effects on the economies of the                                   
              State and nation.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Data will be obtained from both published and                                  
              unpublished reports on the economic impacts of                                 
              the earthquake, unemployment claims and                                        
              employment statistics.  Additional data on                                     
              damage to transportation and lifelines,                                        
              buildings, and building contents will be                                       
              obtained from public agencies and other                                        
              sources.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The analysis of these data will use ABAG's                                     
              input-output model for the San Francisco Bay                                   
              Area.  Input-output analysis provides a method                                 
              of desegregating an economy into its                                           
              constituent sectors, thereby providing a                                       
              format within which these sectors can be                                       
              studied in depth and structural                                                
              interdependence of the economy can be related                                  
              to consumption patterns.                                                       
                                                                                             
              One key goal of this project will be to                                        
              identify the major factors affecting the size                                  
              of the economic losses (and gains) for two                                     
              reasons:                                                                       
                                                                                             
                   (1)  to enable future researchers to                                      
                        better predict the economic                                          
                        implications of future earthquakes;                                  
                        and                                                                  
                   (2)  to enable better analysis of the                                     
                        costs vs. benefits of earthquake                                     
                        mitigation strategies.
