Title       : Effects of Climate Change in the Colorado Alpine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1992      
File        : a9011658

Award Number: 9011658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $971370             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Nelson Caine cainen@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Halfpenny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project represents a third phase of the University of                     
              Colorado Long-Term Ecological Research program.  It builds upon                
              research in alpine processes and patterns related to disturbance               
              conducted during Phase I and Phase II of the program.  Field                   
              studies will be continued at Niwot Ridge and in the Green Lakes                
              Valley with selected studies in the wider region of the Colorado               
              Front Range.  The goal of this research is to understand the                   
              influence of snowpack and summer precipitation on ecosystem                    
              processes and landscape patterns and to use this understanding to              
              predict responses to climate change.  The central hypothesis is                
              that alternation of snowpack or rainfall regimes will cause                    
              changes in alpine ecosystem processes and patterns at site and                 
              regional scale.  The alpine tundra is often thought to be                      
              sensitive to climate change and is known to have responded to                  
              such changes in the 12,000 years since deglaciation.  The reasons              
              for this sensitivity are its low productivity and tight nutrient               
              cycling and its situation at an extreme for many plant processes.              
                                                                                             
              In Phase III of this project emphasis will be place on further                 
              experimental studies of ecosystem processes and patterns and                   
              their modeling as a means of predicting the effects of altered                 
              showpack and summer precipitation patterns.  In particular, scale              
              considerations will be emphasized hierarchical approach.  Remote               
              sensing will be used to examine regional primary productivity                  
              along elevational and climatic gradients in the Front Range and                
              to facilitate extrapolation from the primary study site at Niwot               
              Ridge to other alpine areas.  This theme derives from that of                  
              Phase I, which was based on the premise that present alpine                    
              ecosystems reflect past climatic conditions and Phase II, which                
              focuses on the resilience and resistance of tundra systems.  Many              
              of the databases derived from this earlier work will be crucial                
              to our Phase III research and will be maintained for the next six              
              years.
