Title       : Haptic Perceptual Instruments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9011013

Award Number: 9011013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Turvey turvey@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia Carello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The haptic nervous system allows one to know about nearby objects              
              and surfaces by means of contact with the body.  Without having                
              to look at an object, a person can get an impression of some of                
              its properties by holding it and wielding it.  This research                   
              conceptualizes the haptic subsystem in wielding as a measurement               
              instrument which capitalizes smartly on lawful regularities, such              
              as the constant pattern of the resistances of an object to                     
              rotations in different directions.  The experiments will examine               
              the haptic perception of object length, angular separation of                  
              components, orientations, and shape.  They will do so for                      
              conditions where one object or two are held in the hand.  People               
              in the experiments will respond by adjusting (visible) movable                 
              surfaces or pointers to quantify the perceived properties.  The                
              experiments will attempt to identify the mechanical variables                  
              that relate uniquely to the perceived geometric properties of the              
              hand-held objects, and to show that wielding must be done in a                 
              definite though complex way in order for a particular property to              
              be perceived.  Identifying these hand-related capabilities and                 
              their physical basis will help the design of sensory and motor                 
              prostheses, robotic limbs, and clever tools.  Understanding the                
              form and function of haptic perceptual instruments will advance                
              the theory of special purposes cognitive mechanisms.
