Title       : The Effect of Surface Functional Groups on the Dispersion, Chemical Properties,
               and Catalytic Behavior of Carbon- Supported Pd and Pt-Sn Catalysts Prepared
               from Metal Cluster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9011275

Award Number: 9011275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339600             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Albert Vannice mavche@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory L. Geoffroy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of the effects of different oxygen-containing                  
              functional groups on the dispersion, sinter resistance, and                    
              catalytic behavior of palladium on carbon and of platinum-tin                  
              on carbon.  The strategy is to alter, in a controlled way, the                 
              concentrations of carboxyl, lactone, carbonyl, hydroxyl, and                   
              phenolic groups on a high-purity carbon.  Historically,                        
              attempts to do this have been frustrated by the difficulty of                  
              characterizing carbon surfaces.  In this study, carbon                         
              surfaces are characterized by reflection infrared                              
              spectroscopy, thermal gravimetric analysis /mass spectrometry,                 
              and differential microcalorimetry after treatment at 1000 to                  
              remove all surface groups and after treatments in air, nitric                  
              acid, and hydrogen peroxide to selectively restore certain                     
              groups.  Novel approaches to the preparation of metal/carbon                   
              catalysts involve the synthesis and impregnation of palladium                  
              and platinum-tin organometallic complexes that can be easily                   
              reduced at low temperatures.  The influence of palladium                       
              crystallite size on magnetic and chemical properties is                        
              determined by magnetic susceptibility measurements, heats of                   
              adsorption for oxygen, carbon monoxide, and hydrogen on the                    
              metal, infrared spectra of chemisorbed carbon monoxide, and                    
              solid-state magic-angle-spinning nuclear magnetic resonance of                 
              chemisorbed hydrogen as well as palladium-105.                                 
                                                                                             
              The work addresses directly the performance of carbon-                         
              supported noble-metal catalysts, but the results are also                      
              relevant to production and use of carbon electrodes, coal                      
              gasification, and petroleum reforming.  Carbon-supported                       
              noble-metal catalysts are widely used in the specialty                         
              chemicals and petrochemicals industries.
