Title       : Development of Human Motion Analysis Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9851111

Award Number: 9851111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37633              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ray F. Moss ray.moss@furman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. D. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Furman University
	      3300 Poinsett Highway
	      Greenville, SC  29613    864/294-3468

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The purpose of this project is to complete the development of a laboratory
              facility on the campus of Furman University that integrates the teaching of
              related areas of analysis of human motion.   These areas include anatomy, 
              biomechanics,  exercise physiology,  motor  development  and  physics.     The 
              current curriculum does not allow for students to integrate any two of these
              areas at this time, primarily due to lack of hardware capabilities.  The 
              development  of  this  facility  permits  the students to incorporate all of
              these areas into a coherent frame work from which they can establish the
              interdependence among these areas.  They will discover the importance of
              efficiency of movement, not only for improved outcome of activity, but also for
              the energy savings to the body.   Students will manipulate both the environment
              and the performer to determine what aspects are the most important for learning
              and performance.  laboratory exercises are being designed so the students will
              discover for themselves the relationships among force, work, performance and
              energy cost by several methods as described in the proposal. Having  this 
              experience  will  not  only  aid  the  students  in understanding the overall
              aspects o~ human motion, but it  will also give them insights that will enable
              them to begin asking new questions concerning human motion.  To ensure that
              students glean the most from this experience, faculty members from the
              departments of Physics and Health and Exercise  Science  are developing an 
              interdisciplinary studies course, IDS 54 Biomechanics, that will draw on the
              knowledge o~ all areas of the curriculum relating to human motion. Students
              will  be  responsible  for  a  project  that  requires  them  to incorporate 
              all  modules  of  the  facility  and  present  their results  to  the  faculty 
              of  Physics  and  Health  and Exercise Science departments.  These laboratory
              experiences will increase the insight o  our students into the human motion and
              its analysis.  They will als o improve their math, physics and computer skills.
