Title       : Mathematics Education and Graphics Visualization Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9851545

Award Number: 9851545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Burgmeier burgmeie@emba.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry L. Kost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Dummit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The fundamental principle at the center of curricular innovations in Mathematics
              at the University of Vermont (UVM) is the conviction that the apparent
              separation of mathematics instruction from the problems mathematics is used to
              solve, and from the tools used to solve them, is artificial and must be
              removed.     The different components of mathematics education -- traditional
              lectures, wide-ranging computer related activities, project-oriented
              instruction, and effective writing of mathematics -- must be integrated into a
              single seamless whole. Based on past UVM faculty experience with particular
              aspects of this principle, we realize that the success of our innovation
              efforts requires that careful attention be given to the design of the
              mathematics classroom.     This project will equip a classroom with 13
              workstations, and a support room with an additional six workstations, providing
              high level graphics capability in both rooms. We will implement broad-scale
              calculus reform and eventually extend these modifications to the full gamut of
              mathematics offerings. Our implementation accomplishes essentially all of the
              recommendations of national action plans for education in the mathematical
              sciences. In addition, the proposed reforms at UVM allow many variations in
              individual teaching styles. In fact, virtually all of the approaches presented
              in Priming the Calculus Pump can be carried out within the proposed UVM
              framework. This is the major point of UVM Proposal: the mathematics classroom
              of the future must accommodate a diverse spectrum of instructional activities,
              and be sufficiently flexible to incorporate future improvements and innovations
              in teaching methodologies.     Our design strikes an appropriate balance
              between the need for hands-on student involvement and the expense of providing
              state-of-the-art computational facilities for the large number of students
              taking mathematics classes. The classroom can also be used for traditional
              lectures and for computer demonstrations, and will be use d by several other
              departments on campus for interdisciplinary activities. The training received
              by the large number of students using this facility is expected to percolate
              throughout all mathematics and science courses at UVM.
