Title       : A Multi-Use Computer Based Data Acquisition System for The Mechanical
               Engineering Technology Program at The Ward College of Engineering Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a9851104

Award Number: 9851104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard A. Canistraro canistrar@mail.hartford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Hartford
	      200 Bloomfield Avenue
	      West Hartford, CT  06117    860/768-4635

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Funding is requested for an integrated, computer based data acquisition system
              and laboratory for the Mechanical Engineering Technology (MET) program, in the
              Ward College of Technology at the University of Hartford. This system will
              permit students to gain hands-on experience with state of the art methods of
              data acquisition, while exploring the various physical phenomenon encountered
              in the field of MET. A major advantage of the proposed laboratory will be the
              use of a single data acquisition system in several required undergraduate
              courses. The computerized system will interface with conventional
              instrumentation such as load cells and displacement measuring devices and will
              permit electronic transmission of data. Systems of this type are widely used in
              industry today and will serve to substantially strengthen the applied aspect of
              the MET program. The requested software, LabVIEW by National Instruments, is
              currently used at major universities and industry alike and takes the place of
              the common voltmeter and oscilloscope. This proposal can be considered
              innovative due to the use of a single data acquisition system along with
              conventional transducers in nearly every major course. Presently, five courses
              have been targeted and the additional hardware needs for each is detailed in
              the following sections. It is also believed that the use of the computer in
              place of traditional instrumentation will allow women and minorities to
              experience a more even playing field than the traditional student in
              engineering technology, who often has had some experience with conventional
              instrumentation. Today, virtually every student has had experience with
              personal computers and LabVIEW is very similar to the common Apple and Windows
              operating systems. Once implemented, this laboratory will provide students with
              a working knowledge of the discipline as it actually occurs in industry today.
              The use of a single system will provide a coherent and unified approach to data
              acquisition and post processing.
