Title       : Improving General Zoology Students Understanding of the Nature and Process of
               Science Through Inquiry and Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a9851264

Award Number: 9851264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28882              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharolyn J. Belzer belzshar@isu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Moodie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Streubel  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      
	      Pocatello, ID  83209    208/236-3277

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project radically redesigns a traditional introductory General Zoology
              laboratory to emphasize critical thinking and exposure to the scientific
              process of inquiry through investigation. It also lays a foundation for
              building the student skills and interests needed to motivate undergraduate
              students to become involved in research projects. After an Internal assessment
              of the University's Biology Department, deficiencies were found in student
              understanding of Science as a process (similar problems have been identified on
              the national level by a variety of reports). Numerous changes have been
              implemented across all course levels; but a key component of the department's
              corrective plan targets introductory-level courses. Students' first year of
              science was too often an uninspiring experience of rote or passive learning and
              formula "cookbook"' laboratory experiments, in which the outcomes were known
              before the lab work began. Under this Project, the curricula and its laboratory
              experiences are redesigned to engage students in an active learning process,
              using ''"inquiry"-based labs. The emphasis of the laboratories is shifted from
              the instructor, facts and procedures, to students, concepts and processes. Labs
              become open-ended investigations, in which students hypothesize, interpret
              data, communicate and defend their results. Technology is used both in the lab
              and in the field, on introductory-level experiments ranging from a trout
              stream's ecology to an innovative genetic study of corn snakes. Faculty will be
              aided in assessing the program by three semester's in-depth data on student
              performance, compiled prior to any curricular changes.
