Title       : FTIR: A Tool for Changing College and High School ChemistryCurriculum to a
               Discovery Mode
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9851025

Award Number: 9851025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Martino pmartino@fvcc.cc.mt.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd Morstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice E. Alexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Flathead Valley Cmty Col
	      Number One First Street E
	      Kalispell, MT  59901    406/755-5222

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Changing College and High School Chemistry Curriculum to a Discovery Mode is
              designed to impact college and K-12 education by revising teaching methods,
              bringing modern laboratory methods, advanced Chemical concepts, discovery based
              instruction, and community service learning (CSL) projects to freshman and
              sophomore science and non-science students at Flathead Valley Community College
              (FVCC) and chemistry students at Flathead High School (FHS) in rural northwest
              Montana. In 1994 we purchased microscale laboratory equipment and added CSL to
              the curriculum. The next phase introduces Fourier Transform Infrared
              Spectroscopy (FTIR), the requested equipment. FTIR expands our courses
              qualitatively and quantitatively, supporting the small sample sizes obtained
              with microscale techniques and instrumentation based quantitative analysis. It
              allows kinetics studies, provides high throughput for large classes, and more
              effectively interests our students in science and in teaching science, exposing
              them to current research and analysis methods used in the workplace. Use of
              modern instrumentation to develop and enforce concepts and theories integrates
              lecture and laboratory components and adds discovery based instruction. The
              spectral analysis software to be installed at both schools supports
              undergraduate research projects and joint discovery projects/tutoring and
              mentioning projects with FHS. The student synthetic project using FTIR, is
              added in organic courses. Non science students in chemistry and environmental
              science courses learn the role of instrumentation in the process of scientific
              discovery. A Criminalistics course will be added to support FVCC's Criminal
              Justice program and local law enforcement officers, utilizing FTIR to analyze
              drugs paint chips and explosives. Project results will be disseminated to
              college and high school chemistry and CSL educators locally and nationally via
              publications, presentations, and electronic delivery The project will be
              evaluated by student reflection, academic s uccess, and enrollments.
