Title       : Equipping the Statistical Toolkit: An Intranet-Based Approach to Introductory
               Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9851146

Award Number: 9851146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40953              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gavin M. Cross gcross@coe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paula J. Sanchini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coe College
	      1220 First Avenue NE
	      Cedar Rapids, IA  524025008    319/399-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project equips a 24-workstation computer classroom to be used by a new
              introductory course in statistics. The Statistical Reasoning course replaces
              two large enrollment courses taught by Statistics and Psychology faculty, each
              of which is a required course for more than one major. This new course is an
              interdisciplinary team taught course.     The Statistical Toolkit project
              improves statistical education at Coe College in three ways.    1 ) The
              Statistical Reasoning course has been designed by a team of faculty
              representing the Mathematical Sciences, Business Administration and Economics,
              Psychology, and Biology Departments, and incorporates the best ideas about how
              to teach statistical concepts in use in those disciplines.    2) The course
              operates as two independent 7-week modules, each accomplishing separate goals.
              The first module introduces the use of statistical techniques to explore the
              characteristics of samples and builds a foundation for hypothesis testing. The
              second half of the course moves from this common start to a unique,
              discipline-specific laboratory which investigates methods in a statisticians'
              toolkit: goodness-of-fit, ANOVA designs, correlation and regression and
              multiple regression. In this way, the Statistical Reasoning course benefits
              from a tightly designed, interactive foundation module and yet adopts a
              teaching style and develops examples best suited to each user-discipline.    3)
              All sections of the course start with Statistical Foundations, a web-based
              'virtual' course which presently uses the JavaScnpt simulations, statistical
              software and conferencing capabilities of the Coe Intranet to illustrate basic
              statistical concepts. Transition to the new classroom will allow this project
              to take advantage of the interactivity of Java and expand the hands-on nature
              of the course material. It will also extend the use of these materials to all
              students in introductory statistics courses.
