Title       : Enhancement of Advanced Laboratories in Molecular Biosciences and Microbiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9851070

Award Number: 9851070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Taller bjtaller@cc.memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 Modern, research quality instrumentation will provide the foundation for the
              development and implementation of new laboratory courses in biochemistry,
              advanced microbiology, advanced medical microbiology, and cell and
              developmental biology. These new courses each incorporate several separate
              laboratories, reducing redundancy and providing a more research-like approach
              by not artificially separating disciplines. The requested equipment will
              complement recent acquisitions to provide meaningful laboratory experiences
              utilizing current technologies for students planning careers as scientists or
              technicians. For example, Biochemistry Lab I emphasizes protein purification
              and characterization. As is typically done in research, students will isolate
              proteins by a combination of conventional chromatography, HPLC and
              electrophoresis. Biochemistry Lab II will emphasize recombinant DNA techniques
              and will use the techniques learned in Biochemistry Lab I to characterize the
              resulting recombinant proteins. The equipment requested will facilitate
              incorporation of modern techniques in HPLC, microassays, protein analysis and
              macrophotography into the undergraduate curriculum. Computers with Internet
              access will be used to design experiments, to analyze data and to prepare
              classroom and research presentations. Laboratory manuals will be created for
              each course and will be made available for distribution. The amount of
              equipment requested will encourage students to work in groups, promoting
              development of the communication, teamwork and leadership skills highly valued
              in many work settings.
