Title       : Biology Computer Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9851208

Award Number: 9851208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38137              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Hamilton rhamilto@mc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi College
	      
	      Clinton, MS  39058    601/924-5131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project provides computing equipment and software for a biology computer
              laboratory. Mississippi College has been successful in modernizing and
              enhancing the curricula in biology to include modern methods of analysis for
              both classroom and laboratory instruction as well as independent student
              research. Our goal has been and is to provide the means for student
              interrogation of systems under investigation. The computer laboratory
              complements our existing facilities for an investigative biology curriculum by
              allowing for modern methods of computer data analysis and imaging capabilities.
               Our main objectives when incorporating the computer laboratory into the
              curriculum are to replace less powerful and more time consuming and manual
              methods of data analysis with more powerful and less time consuming
              computer-assisted methods of data analysis, and to use imaging capabilities to
              investigate phenomena that cannot be investigated through any other means. 
              These objectives are achieved by using a network of general purpose
              mlcrocomputers in a computer laboratory. Software, including general purpose
              analytical and simulation software networked computers, allows for detailed
              monitoring of student use, including a detailed and accurate determination of
              the relationships between academic performance and use for both specialized
              applications and the facility in general.  The inclusion of modern methods of
              data analysis in our curricula results in graduates who have an enhanced
              capacity to understand the nature of modem scientific data. Simulations of
              systems that cannot otherwise be investigated allow us to expose students to
              aspects of biological sciences that are currently beyond our capabilities.
