Title       : Experimental Model-Based Control Design Using Multibody Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9851406

Award Number: 9851406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41147              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raffaello D'Andrea rd28@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Psiaki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The aim of the proposed project is to introduce a graphical dynamics simulation
              component using multibody software packages to the dynamics and control
              curriculum in the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering department at Cornell
              University, and to develop a new undergraduate course which explores the
              interplay between system identification, multibody simulation, and
              experimentation in the control design process. This will be achieved by
              purchasing and constructing four experimental platforms, and interfacing them
              to high-end Windows based PCs equipped with various software packages for data
              acquisition, system identification, control design and analysis, dynamical
              simulation, and real-time control. Due to the great advances in computing
              power, simulation has become an integral part of most engineering disciplines.
              This is certainly true for the design of high-performance control systems. For
              many control applications, the design cycle consists of obtaining high fidelity
              models of the system to be controlled, performing a control design based on
              reduced order models (for example), verifying the control design on the
              simulation model, altering the design until the required level of performance
              is achieved, and then testing out the design on the physical system. If the
              required level of performance is not achieved, this cycle is repeated. It
              should be stressed, however, that simulation is only a tool in the design
              process, and that extensive experimental verification should always be the end
              result of the design process; the real world is simply too complex to be fully
              simulated. Thus, an important goal in engineering education is to expose the
              students to the obvious advantages of simulation, but at the same time to make
              strong connections between computer simulations and the real devices which are
              being simulated.
