Title       : SHARE (Software and Hardware Academic Recycling Effort) Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9851213

Award Number: 9851213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley S. Wang swang@csusm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U San Marcos Fdn
	      435 East Carmel Street
	      San Marcos, CA  92078-436    760/750-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, rapid development in computer network technology has created a
              huge job market for individuals with network management experience. While most
              colleges and universities provide their students with access to many of today's
              cutting-edge technologies and applications due to security and other concerns,
              network technology has been and remains an area that most students are not
              allowed to access directly. Between the universities' interest in protecting
              their networking and other assets, and the students' desire in learning network
              technology, the Software and Hardware Academic Recycling Effort (SHARE) Project
              calls to create an instructional and experimental network environment. It
              recycles existing hardware and software made available through campus upgrades.
                 For California State University at San Marcos (CSUSM), this project would
              benefit directly all 230 Computer Science majors and minors, and about 1400
              students of other majors each year who take Computer Science courses. This
              opportunity is especially important to CSUSM's high female and substantial
              ethnic minority population. It would also facilitate the development of a new
              course that provides students with hands-on experience on networking related
              topics by sharing their knowledge and experience with each other. In addition,
              this project would also benefit indirectly thousands of students of other
              institutions by providing a model to create an invaluable instructional tool
              for those young talented minds that have the desire to learn the cutting-edge
              technologies by "doing it." In summary, it is expected that this project would
              be an excellent model for other institutions which wish to achieve the
              following objectives: maximizing the usage of valuable computer resources,
              administering ~ recycled computer network into a precious education tool, and
              instilling the principles of self-reliance as well as teamwork in a simulated
              work environment.
