Title       : Redesigning the Introductory Electromagnetism Laboratory with
               Conceptual-Computational Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9851620

Award Number: 9851620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20965              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Gering gering@pss.fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel H. Blatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                In the second semester introductory physics laboratory, college sophomores
              confront several challenges to learning electricity and magnetism. These
              challenges include the abstract nature of the theory, the necessity of
              constructing specific mental visualizations, the invisible nature of the
              electric and magnetic forces, sophisticated mathematics, an unfamiliar
              vocabulary and lack of motivation. This project's primary goal is to redesign
              this laboratory's curriculum to increase the number of students who
              successfully meet these challenges.  The requested equipment includes
              laboratory apparatus, microcomputers, data acquisition hardware, and computer
              software. The strategies to achieve this goal include: (1) By automating
              selected experiments, students will complete this hands-on work more
              efficiently than at present. These time savings will allow the development of a
              series of Conceptual Computational Activities (CCA's) where students will
              construct and analyze many of the key visualizations inherent to
              electromagnetism. (2) Several new experiments are being developed so students
              may gain hands-on experience with important pieces of contemporary
              electromagnetic technology. These technologies are the building blocks for many
              of the appliances students use daily, but do not understand. This strategy
              improves the motivation and enjoyment students derive from this laboratory
              course. This project expects to achieve these outcomes:      Reorienting the
              traditional laboratory toward a greater emphasis on concept development.   
              Measuring the improvement in students' conceptual understanding.    Using
              educational research to guide development of new curricula which integrates
              computer data acquisition and interactive, Conceptual - Computational
              Activities (CCA's).    Making these curricula available to the national physics
              education community.    Strengthening Florida Tech's ability to serve as a
              resource to local high schools.
