Title       : Connecting an Undergraduate Electronics Laboratory to the Web and LAN for
               Automated Data Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9851072

Award Number: 9851072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer T. Ross jross@uop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Turpin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Simulation tools, computers, and the Internet are transforming our
              instructional  methods and the ways students learn. This project integrates
              existing  measurement equipment, computers and simulation software, with new
              power  supplies, multimeters, and function generators in the main undergraduate
               Electronics Laboratory allowing the instruments to be controlled by computer
              and  accessed via the Web. Using the LabVIEW environment and computer network, 
              students will simulate, measure, and collect data automatically in a wide 
              variety of experiments and easily share data across the network with team 
              members and instructors. The new laboratory will be heavily used in over nine 
              different undergraduate laboratory courses in the Electrical and Computer 
              Engineering Curricula.  By using LabVIEW's Internet components, and existing
              Win  NT server, the stations will be configured to be controlled through the
              Web as  we investigate remote laboratory experiences for non-traditional
              students, local  High Schools, and junior college pre-engineering students.
              This project goes  beyond simply automating data collection, but rather will
              provide a laboratory  course sequence, which builds on student's measurement
              and communication skills  throughout the curriculum. Specifically, the goals of
              this laboratory curriculum  are: (1) to improve the quality and the capability
              of the Electronics Laboratory  in support of critical measurements on
              electronic circuits and devices, (2) to  provide the capability to efficiently
              analyze and interpret real data against  simulation and theory, (3) to teach
              new measurement techniques including data  acquisition concepts, (4) to
              facilitate team projects with an integrated  measurement and communication
              network, and (5) to enable remote access to state- of-the-art electronics
              measurement facilities to benefit non-traditional, high  school and
              pre-engineering students.
