Title       : Use of a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with an Energy Dispersive X-ray
               (EDX) Analysis System in Earth Science and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9851292

Award Number: 9851292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19967              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Webster webster@misu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen J. Kihm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard R. Barkosky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher P. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minot State University
	      
	      Minot, ND  58701    701/857-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                In this proposal, we address a need for modern, major instrumentation by
              seeking a used research grade scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an energy
              dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis system and related sample preparation
              equipment. The SEM will be used to significantly improve laboratory instruction
              in the Earth Science and Biology programs, and to expand opportunities for
              student research. Another common goal in Earth Science and Biology is to expose
              introductory students to a sophisticated technique that will allow them to
              investigate geological and biological materials at a scale not commonly
              available in introductory courses. This is expected to capture their interest,
              and help excite them about the sciences. The high magnification, excellent
              resolution, and EDX capabilities of the SEM will allow us to incorporate
              research-based investigations into a wide range of upper-level courses. In
              Earth Science, students will be able to deal with the mineralogy and textures
              of fine-grained geological samples (mineralogy, petrology,
              sedimentation-stratigraphy, and soils), and characterize the morphology and
              surfaces of microfossils and grains (paleontology and geochemistry). The EDX
              system will allow in-situ chemical analysis of minerals (mineralogy and
              petrology). With the ability to study these small-scale features, students will
              better understand textural and compositional characteristics of geological
              materials, and improve their problem solving skills as they interpret important
              geologic processes. In Biology, students will be able to study plant tissue
              morphology at the cellular level in plant anatomy and physiology courses, which
              will have important applications as part of studies at both the organismal and
              sub-cellular levels. This provides an important bridge between two rather
              different levels of biological work. In Earth Science and Biology, use of the
              SEM will improve students' understanding of important concepts by allowing them
              to investigate them first-hand. Of equal importance, stud ents will be more
              excited about (and better prepared for) becoming involved in significant
              independent research.
