Title       : Integrated Undergraduate Physical Geography Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9851437

Award Number: 9851437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40724              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Lapenis alapenis@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Mower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Arnason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Renee E. Sieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Floyd M. Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Departments of Geography and Planning (DGP) and Earth and Atmospheric
              Sciences (DEAS) at the State University of New York at Albany (SUNYA) have
              traditionally offered environmental courses built on the delivery of a strong
              theoretical framework but lacking in the instruction of practical methods of
              environmental analysis.  In this project we will establish an Integrated
              Undergraduate Physical Geography Laboratory (IUPGL) to bridge the gap between
              practice and theory in environmental education and to provide students with a
              clear guide through different environmental courses. The IUPGL will be a joint
              facility for the Department of Geography and Planning (DGP) and Department of
              Earth and Atmospheric Sciences (DEAS) of SUNYA.     Additionally, we will
              strengthen links between SUNYA and Union College (located in nearby
              Schenectady, NY) through the joint operation of the Inductively Coupled
              Plasma-Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) analytical facility. This cooperation will
              bring the expertise of Union College faculties in practical environmental
              geochemistry to SUNYA and, simultaneously, will improve the access of SUNYA
              environmental courses to Union College students. Undergraduate students will be
              trained in chemical and physical analysis of soil and water as well as in
              methods of hydrological and climatological observations.     Global Positioning
              System units will be used to locate environmental parameters and GIS technology
              in the existing GIS Laboratory will be used for spatial data processing. 
              Development of practical science skills will provide a base for students taking
              future courses in GIS/GPS, geographic theory, and public policy and planning.
              This training also will significantly broaden employment prospects for SUNYA
              baccalaureate graduates. All data collected in the IUPGL through a variety of
              student projects will be presented as an annual database available for further
              use in the different natural science courses at SUNYA and Union College.
