Title       : Integration of Quantitative Materials Characterization Throughout Chemistry &
               Physics Curricula, Purchase of Thermal Analysis, Viscometry, & Gel Permeation
               Chromatography Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1998       
File        : a9851107

Award Number: 9851107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen D. Hunter adhunter@cc.ysu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas D. Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daryl W. Mincey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shane C. Brower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy R. Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Youngstown St University
	      One University Plaza
	      Youngstown, OH  445550001    330/742-2377

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Because of the growing scientific, technological, and economic importance of
              polymeric and solid state materials, many national science and technology
              organizations strongly encourage the integration of these topics into the
              curriculum for both majors and non-majors in science, engineering, and
              technology. At Youngstown State University, we have already integrated
              Materials science lecture topics and qualitative lab experiments into many of
              our Chemistry and Physics courses. The acquisition of the equipment in this
              proposal will allow us to expand this coverage and introduce many new
              quantitative synthetic and biologically derived polymer and solid state
              materials experiments into our sophomore through senior level Chemistry lab
              classes, the condensed matter Physics lab classes, a proposed Materials Science
              lab course. Non-science majors, including education majors, will use this
              instrumentation in new lab based general education courses having the discovery
              research format.  Pre-service science teachers will be exposed to these methods
              in more depth through their integration into our course offerings at the
              sophomore and junior levels.  In addition, materials characterization will be
              fully integrated into our professional development offerings for working
              teachers through both specialized summer lab courses optimized to meet the
              needs of science teachers and through "in service" days. The acquired thermal
              analysis equipment will allow our students to quantitatively evaluate phase
              changes in solid state, polymeric and biologically relevant materials and to
              quantify the chemical reactions of solid state materials at elevated
              temperatures. The viscometry and GPC/SEC equipment will allow our students to
              quantify the molecular weights and related physical properties of synthetic and
              biologically derived polymers. These new quantitative experimental results will
              be related to both the underlying physical principles and the practical
              applications of these materials in lecture discussions. This instrum entation
              project will directly impact over 400 students each year.
