Title       : Improvement of Science Education with Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9851218

Award Number: 9851218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Massimo D. Bezoari bezoari@huntingdon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen K. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Huntingdon College
	      1500 East Fairview
	      Montgomery, AL  361062114    205/265-0511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project will bring modern technology in gas chromatography-mass
              spectrometry (GCMS) to science and non-science majors at Huntingdon College.
              Basic theory and demonstrations will be added to freshman-level chemistry
              courses. Hands-on use of the requested instrument will begin in the Organic
              laboratory, making experiences in analyzing molecular structure more
              representative of modern methods. Students will experience additional GC-MS
              methods, such as headspace sampling of flavors and fragrances and selected ion
              monitoring, in the Analytical/Environmental Chemistry course. The instrument
              will promote environmental and forensic applications (in collaboration with the
              state forensic science laboratory), making student laboratory experiences more
              exciting and interesting by connection to real-life situations. The quality and
              scope of undergraduate research and capstone projects will also improve.
              Students will use GC-MS in conjunction with FT-NMR and FTIR analysis,
              establishing further connections in learning how science is done and making
              them better prepared for graduate school and industrial employment in
              chemistry. The project will influence an outside audience with mini-course
              offerings and will serve as a model for other institutions similar to
              Huntingdon. The success of the project will be determined by student course
              evaluations, the number of majors taking undergraduate research projects,
              formal presentations, publications, and surveys. Dissemination will occur
              through presentations, publications in international chemistry research and
              chemistry education journals, the World-Wide Web, and interactions with
              educators at scientific meetings.
