Title       : Introducing Electronic Mapping Tools in a Geology Field Camp and a
               Research-Based Geology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9851165

Award Number: 9851165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32109              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth Z. Lincoln BLincoln@Albion.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy N. Lincoln  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albion College
	      611 East Porter
	      Albion, MI  492241831    517/629-5511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Electronic mapping tools, including global positioning system (GPS) and laser
              ranging equipment, promise to revolutionize geological mapping. Our project
              will give students in our field camp and on campus a working familiarity with
              this equipment, and allow them to develop new insights into geology that the
              precision and data-managing capability of this equipment allow. The largest
              impact will be in our six-week field camp, taught in the Rockies. GPS is best
              suited to support our traditional mapping exercises, and will be used to locate
              points and log data in several multiple day projects. Laser rangefinders,
              coupled with GPS, provide a means of fast and accurate detailed topographic and
              geologic mapping of small areas. Total stations, when used with proper
              surveying techniques, provide even higher accuracy, at a cost of more time. By
              using both a total station and a rangefinder in several projects, students will
              develop practical experience with the capabilities and the limitations of each
              tool. As a result of our project, students will be able to select the
              appropriate tool for their task, understand the principles on which the tools
              operate, use the instruments effectively in a field setting. In our 15 years of
              teaching field camp, we have uncovered a number of field problems that these
              tools are well suited to address, and we are excited to see the results. We
              have been able to pilot work with GPS, and thus have the experience to design
              effective projects.   Our Department has a successful philosophy of making all
              of our instrumentation available to students at all levels. Thus this equipment
              will also support innovations in courses and student research projects on
              campus ranging from introductory students creating topographic maps to seniors
              developing new research projects based on precise mapping of local outwash
              deposits.
