Title       : The Study of Chemistry by the Guided Inquiry Method Using Microcomputer Based
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9851611

Award Number: 9851611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27168              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Durick mdurick@badlands.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bismarck St Coll
	      1500 Edwards Avenue
	      Bismarck, ND  585011276    701/224-5400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal will allow Bismarck State College, a community college serving
              the southwest quadrant of North Dakota, an opportunity to modernize its
              chemistry curriculum by introducing guided inquiry-based instructional methods
              into laboratories. By purchasing scientific and computing equipment, BSC will
              be able to integrate computer-interfaced equipment into its chemistry labs.
              This will allow BSC the following opportunities:    (1) To provide students
              with current technology by introducing guided inquiry-based labs that will
              include practical experience in computational data acquisition and analysis.
              (2) To prepare students with similar laboratory experiences as those conducted
              at four-year colleges and universities. (3) To improve the technical literacy
              of students entering the workforce. (4) To conduct a four-day workshop for
              approximately 20 area high school teachers. (5) To provide students with
              opportunities to design experiments that illustrate theory.    As a result of
              curriculum changes in general chemistry, organic, and biochemistry, about 800
              students annually will be able to design experiments and manipulate variables
              allowing an opportunity to observe the relationships between theory and
              practice. In addition, they will be studying chemistry as practiced by
              professional chemists. This will help students compete more successfully when
              they transfer to four-year institutions or enter the workforce.  Approximately
              20 high school science teachers will have an opportunity to experience these
              technologies by participating in BSC's summer workshops. These teachers will in
              turn influence at least 200 high school chemistry students each year.The
              academic achievements of this guided inquiry-based curriculum will be assessed.
              The results will be disseminated at conferences, through publications in
              professional journals and over the Internet.Assessment will include surveying
              students for their reactions to guided inquiry-based, computerinterfaced labs,
              and giving them the American Chemical S ociety's standardized test. High school
              teachers participating in BSC's summer workshops will complete evaluation
              forms. Faculty at transfer institutions and employers will also complete survey
              forms to assess students' level of success.
