Title       : UV-Visible Spectrophotometers for the CPLP Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9851220

Award Number: 9851220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie E. Ellefson-Kuehn jellefso@harper.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Q. Weil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Rainey Harper Col
	      Algonquin & Roselle Roads
	      Palatine, IL  60067    312/397-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                William Rainey Harper College, Harold Washington College, Oakton College, and
              University of Illinois at Chicago are members of the Chemical Professional
              Laboratory Program (CPLP) Network. The CPLP is an initiative supported by the
              NSF-DUE Course and Curriculum Development Program. The CPLP materials under
              development focus on providing students with experiments using scenarios drawn
              from seven different departments in four different colleges within the
              University of Illinois at Chicago. An important instrumentation need has been
              identified by the network participants to support the best implementation of
              the CPLP concept: the use of rapid and reliable diode array instrumentation
              (UV-Visible) for many of the experiments. This instrumentation, whose purchase
              or upgrade is the focus of this proposal, is needed to make the student
              experience of general chemistry concepts, in a professional context, as
              effective as possible.  In addition to the interdisciplinary nature of the
              materials developed, the CPLP has a strong faculty development focus. Community
              college faculty worked extensively during the dissemination program learning
              the methodology and pedagogy of these labs. It is anticipated that this program
              will, have a positive impact on teaching and learning chemistry as well as
              provide a more effective laboratory experience.
