Title       : Integration of a Liquid Crystal Thermography System into Undergraduate Heat
               Transfer Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a9851096

Award Number: 9851096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17425              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Anderson andersoa@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal seeks funds to purchase a Liquid Crystal (LC) Thermography
              system consisting of (1) a liquid crystal image processing system (personal
              computer, image processing board, CCD camera, lighting system and Windows based
              software) to record, process and store thermal images and perform quantitative
              temperature measurement; (2) a liquid crystal preparation kit to process
              thermochromic liquid crystals and apply them to heat transfer surfaces; and (3)
              a liquid crystal calibration unit to calibrate liquid crystals. The PI proposes
              to integrate the LC Thermography system into the mechanical engineering
              curriculum at Union College from freshman year to senior year as a tool for
              teaching heat transfer fundamentals and for stimulating curiosity about heat
              transfer applications. Students will learn how to use hi-tech equipment to
              visualize heat transfer processes and the mechanical engineering department
              will replace demonstration type, cook-book lab exercises with hands on learning
              about heat transfer. Specifically, the LC Thermography system will permit
              full-field, accurate, quantitative temperature measurement with a method for
              electronically recording and storing thermal images. These capabilities will
              improve students ability to perform heat transfer design, develop students
              intuition about the effects of boundary conditions on temperature distribution
              and it will excite students about heat transfer. All equipment will be used in
              undergraduate engineering labs and to promote undergraduate research. The
              project is exciting beyond Union College because it presents a model for
              integrating the use of a LC Thermography system into a four year undergraduate
              curriculum.
