Title       : DNA Amplification Throughout The Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9851631

Award Number: 9851631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29590              (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd T. Eckdahl eckdahl@griffon.mwsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Ashley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Crumley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Boutwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Andresen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Missouri Western State Col
	      4525 Downs Drive
	      Saint Joseph, MO  645072246    816/271-4200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The project includes a set of laboratory investigations which emphasize the
              impact of molecular biology and computer technology on diverse biological
              fields. The experiments  introduced into General Biology, Ecology, Cell
              Biology, Genetics, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology courses are
              investigative, discipline-specific, and build in their levels of difficulty and
              independent student work as the course level increases. Several of the
              investigations are based on prior independent student research projects. 
              Students are actively engaged in the process of science as they design and
              conduct DNA amplification experiments to test hypotheses, use electronic media
              for data collection, and analyze their results in the context of internet
              resources arising from the emerging field of bioinformatics. Student laboratory
              reports are created using a novel electronic conferencing system. A project
              home page includes the laboratory procedures used and examples of student
              laboratory reports, serving as a vehicle for communicating project results to
              the educational community.  A commitment has been made by Modern Biology,
              Incorporated, to market the discipline specific DNA amplification
              investigations resulting from the project as experimental kits. The kits will
              provide high school and college classrooms nation-wide with the materials and
              procedures needed to give students first-hand experience with technology that
              is reshaping biology. Students preparing to be teachers are also involved in
              the courses and special workshops to investigate incorporation of these
              techniques into their future classrooms.
