Title       : Further Improvement in Undergraduate Involvement in Experimental Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9851176

Award Number: 9851176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16252              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. St. James jstjames@mail.millikin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millikin University
	      1184 West Main Street
	      Decatur, IL  625222039    217/424-6211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project is to further improve the ability of our students to use the
              latest software and hardware for research and learning in Psychology, to foster
              a sense among students that they are doing psychology, as well as learning it.
              The purchase of the proposed hardware (principally computers) and software will
              make it possible to markedly increase laboratory experiences in courses in
              Sensation and Perception and Learning. New experiments will be added in
              Introductory Psychology, Cognitive Psychology, Advance Statistics, and Advanced
              Experimental Psychology. Upgraded equipment will make it possible to use
              software for real-time data acquisition and analysis that requires newer
              machines than are currently available in our undergraduate laboratory.    
              These additions build on an existing, successful program to incorporate more
              research into undergraduate education. Students affected by these laboratory
              improvements include introductory students, Psychology majors, and a
              significant number of Elementary Education majors. We will offer next year a
              new laboratory course that meets a University-wide requirement of a laboratory
              introduction to scientific principles. Independent student research in our
              department will be further strengthened by a new Senior Capstone research
              requirement in Experimental Psychology. Both the laboratory course and the
              capstone, as well as other independent student research and faculty/student
              collaboration, will benefit from new software for implementing experiments that
              will be significantly easier for novice users to learn.     The hardware and
              software will also make new types of experiments available, such as those
              employing auditory stimuli. Student access to Internet tools for research will
              be improved. Our previous success in involving undergraduates in research will
              be extended into new areas, and more students, majors and non-majors,
              scientists and nonscientists, will get to participate in the science of
              Psychology.
