Title       : Lighting Simulation Laboratory: A Networked/Distributed Computing Facility for
               Design Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9851308

Award Number: 9851308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Murali Paranandi paranam@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fuller Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Johnston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project is to develop a "lighting simulation laboratory" to facilitate
              interactive, project-   oriented learning of principles of design, evaluation,
              and analysis of visual and qualitative  aspects of the built environment for
              undergraduate students of architecture and interior design. It  provides
              opportunities to apply advanced visual computing technologies iteratively and
              fluidly  for creative design. We propose to use Radiosity-based visualization
              techniques on high-end  desk-top computers to predict lighting performance in
              built spaces as a basis for design  decisions. Radiosity represents a
              fundamental advance in computer graphic technology because  it allows accurate
              simulations based on the physical characteristics of light and materials. The 
              proposed lighting simulation laboratory will augment the current facilities in
              our Architecture  Design and Visualization Laboratory (ADVisLab), funded in
              part by a prior ILI-IP grant from  NSF, by utilizing high-end desktop computers
              to facilitate visual engineering approaches to  design. The added capabilities
              brought by this laboratory setup will enable our undergraduate  students to do
              what they cannot do with other existing software programs or physical modeling 
              alternatives: to visualize their lighting designs scientificallv and accuratelv
              rather than illustrating  desired lighting effects intuitively without a sound
              photometric basis. This project will have a  direct and profound effect on the
              learning experiences of beginning undergraduate students in  the department by
              incorporating advanced technologies in introducing fundamental skills of 
              design representation and exploration (80 students per year) at the
              introductory level. It will also  have a broader curriculum-wide effect by
              enriching the learning experiences of upper-level  students by allowing them to
              achieve proficiency in the use advanced technologies through CAAD studios (30
              students per year) and technology electives (about 60 students per year). This 
              facility will al so be used during summer semester by Miami University's
              undergraduate research  scholars, as well as area minority high school
              students. The equipment will include fifteen  networked high-end desktop
              computers with appropriate software and peripherals for lighting  simulation.
