Title       : Interdisciplinary Computer Graphics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9851654

Award Number: 9851654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19248              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Urbanczyk kevinu@sul-ross-1.sulross.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn E. Loomis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank A. Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jim V. Richerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elbert F. Bassham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sul Ross State University
	      
	      Alpine, TX  79832    915/837-8011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal is for the creation of an interdisciplinary computer graphics
              laboratory for use by the field-oriented earth science departments at a small
              university (Sul Ross State University). The problem that we are trying to
              address at our small institution is the lack of interdepartmental cooperation
              in the education of earth science students. Our objective is to develop a
              computer laboratory that would be the focal point of our interdisciplinary
              teaching. It would enhance our ability to integrate the different earth
              sciences on campus-Geology, Biology, and Natural Resource Management, and
              create a "functionally' larger earth science department as opposed to the
              smaller individual departments. The primary expected outcome of the project
              would be to create a new multi-disciplinary course. This course would be a
              semester long experiment which would require students to "acquire, analyze, and
              present" data from a small field area. The students would collect diverse
              geologic/biologic data in the field, integrate it into a GIS database (with
              faculty help), analyze the data to answer specific questions regarding the
              interrelationships between the geologic and biologic data, and present the
              results in the form of an open forum poster presentation. The students would
              take this course at the sophomore level (the prerequisites would be an
              introductory course in one of the disciplines). A second significant outcome
              would then be the ability to integrate the laboratory into other advanced
              courses later in the students undergraduate career. We feel that this is a
              creative means of taking full advantage of the educational opportunities
              available at a small institution such as ours.
