Title       : Computational Physics at Flordia Tech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9851258

Award Number: 9851258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15516              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew A. Wood wood@wd.astro.fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Mantovani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Numerical simulations have fundamentally changed the way science is done. The
              change has occurred within our lifetimes and has mirrored the exponential
              growth of the performance-to-price ratio for computer hardware. Today's
              high-performance desktop machines are computational platforms the equals of the
              first generation of supercomputers. As a result, computationally intensive
              simulations are now an option for any working scientists. For centuries,
              students of the physical sciences have learned their disciplines through
              theory, observation, and laboratory experimentation. To this list we may now
              add numerical simulation, and we must update the traditional undergraduate
              curricula to reflect the new order.    This project is using a Computational
              Physics Lab (CPL) with 11 high-performance PC workstations and software. The
              CPL is the focal point of the new emphasis on computational physics. In the new
              curriculum, the CPL is an instructional resource used in both lower-division
              and upper-division courses.  Specifically, the CPL allows the development of
              the sophomore-level course Computational Physics, and it is used by students
              enrolled in the senior-level courses Undergraduate Research I & II. In
              Computational Physics, students learn the tools of numerical experimentation
              and apply them to current topics in physics and astrophysics. In addition to
              serving the majors of the department, the CPL is also used by students in the
              SARA NSF-REU Summer Intern Program, and by local K-12 teachers as part of an
              outreach program. It will be in use 12 months a year. Finally, although the
              Computational Physics course is intended primarily for departmental majors, the
              course content is sufficiently comprehensive that students in any SME&T program
              may find it to be a useful elective course for their degree programs.
