Title       : Undergraduate Structure and Dynamics Studies Using NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1998       
File        : a9851622

Award Number: 9851622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay H. Baltisberger jhb@physics.berea.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry K. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lee E. Roecker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Berea College
	      Berea College
	      Berea, KY  404040002    606/986-9341

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Berea College is improving its program in chemistry by adding new laboratory
              experiments involving structural elucidation and molecular dynamics throughout
              its curriculum. One goal of our laboratory instruction is to have students
              learn basic experimental techniques and be able to apply these techniques to
              real world problems. The primary tool for developing these experiments is a
              nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)1,2 spectrometer, an ideal tool for adding new
              structure and dynamic experiments. In the organic course, students are
              introduced to NMR spectroscopy in the laboratory. They use 1H and 13c NMR to
              verify the products from organic synthesis. In the instrumental analysis and
              physical chemistry courses, students learn how NMR can be used as a tool to
              determine complicated structures and to probe solution reaction dynamics. In
              physical chemistry, the students use NMR to apply the principles of quantum
              mechanics to practical problems. Once they complete their advanced coursework,
              students have experience with the basics of two-dimensional NMR techniques,
              including correlation spectroscopy (COSY) and heteronuclear correlation
              spectroscopy (HETCOR) to solve structural problems.  The last step in the
              education of our students is a required research experience. NMR enhances the
              research interests of the department, while providing a solid foundation for
              strong student-faculty interactions. Knowledge of NMR, along with Fourier
              transform infra-red spectroscopy (FTIR), and gas chromatography/mass
              spectrometry (GC/MS), should prepare our students for a variety of problems
              they might encounter in a research environment. Implementation of this program
              is a model system to be used at other institutions; for example, our
              affiliation with the Appalachian College Association provides an excellent
              avenue to bring NMR experiments to an audience that might not otherwise have
              this wonderful opportunity.
