Title       : Introducing Laser Light Scattering Technology into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9851268

Award Number: 9851268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35592              (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Bumpus john.bumpus@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shoshanna R. Coon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The major objective of this project is to introduce laser light scattering
              theory and technology into the undergraduate chemistry curriculum at the
              University of Northern Iowa. Funds wil purchase a laser light scattering system
              built around Wyatt Technology's miniDAWN triple-angle light scattering
              detector. Laser light scattering theory will be presented in the lecture part
              of our physical chemistry course while application and hands-on experience will
              be presented in the laboratory. In addition to physical chemistry, laboratory
              experience in this technology will be made available to students enrolled in
              our biochemistry laboratories and in our undergraduate research program. Laser
              light scattering techniques are very useful for characterization of synthetic
              and biological polymers and laser light scattering instruments are recognized
              as detectors of choice during gel permeation high performance liquid
              chromatography (GPC-HPLC) because in addition to detecting the polymer, laser
              light scattering detectors can provide important structural information about
              the polymer in question. Indeed, light scattering detectors are the only HPLC
              detectors that are suitable for determining absolute molecular weight. The use
              of laser light scattering instruments is relatively common in industrial
              settings where polymers are manufactured studied and sold. Unfortunately, light
              scattering theory and practice is rarely addressed in undergraduate chemistry
              programs. In the past, laser light scattering instruments were difficult to use
              and data acquisition and analysis was tedious and complex. Relatively recent
              advances in instrument design as well as in data handling have, in large part,
              solved these problems. We believe that it is now time to introduce laser light
              scattering theory and techniques into the undergraduate curriculum. We also
              believe that our program may have a substantial impact on other undergraduate
              chemistry programs, especially those interested in strengthening their
              curriculum in the areas of p hysical chemistry, polymer chemistry and materials
              science.
