Title       : Adaptation and Assessment of Workshop Physics and other Activity-Based Curricula
               in a Physics Course for Preservice Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9851480

Award Number: 9851480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17554              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric C. Anderson andersonec@mail.avila.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Avila College
	      11901 Wornall Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641451698    816/501-3730

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing an improved algebra-based introductory physics course
              sequence based on Workshop Physics and other activity-based curricula. The new
              course sequence is aimed at preservice precollege science teachers, especially
              physics teachers, for whom this course sequence may serve as their sole
              exposure to physics. Coverage is reduced slightly from the standard
              introductory course to mechanics, waves and sound, light, and electricity and
              magnetism, with treatment of modern physics limited to electrons and
              radioactivity. Lectures are replaced by direct observation and guided,
              collaborative inquiry. When possible, computer-based labs and video capture and
              analysis is used to model real world phenomena. Each student group completes an
              independent investigation each semester, and gives an oral presentation to the
              class using presentation software and hardware. The new course is intended to
              improve scientific inquiry skills, conceptual understanding, skill and
              confidence with modern technology, and student retention and attitudes towards
              science. Emphasis is placed on carefully evaluating and improving the
              effectiveness of this activity-based curriculum in a less selective
              institution. Guidance and assessment in collaborative group functioning will
              respond to concerns reported in the literature. Multiple choice conceptual
              evaluations is used with free-response items to probe conceptual understanding
              and ability to apply conceptual knowledge in novel contexts. The Maryland
              Physics Expectation survey is administered to evaluate changes in student
              attitudes and beliefs about physics. Baseline assessment data collected in the
              present course permits meaningful comparisons. Assessment results, new
              free-response assessment items, and improved instructional methods based on
              assessment results will be presented through American Association of Physics
              Teachers national meetings and the Project Kaleidascope network.
