Title       : Microcomputer Service Technician Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9851100

Award Number: 9851100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Cothran cothran@ped.tec.sc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Witt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Piedmont Tech College
	      Emerald Road
	      Greenwood, SC  29646    803/223-8357

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Survey results in Piedmont Technical College's seven-county service area
              parallel a national trend: a severe shortage of well-trained microcomputer
              service technicians. . Employers are eager to here people who can establish and
              maintain networks, set up and upgrade microcomputers and software, and
              troubleshoot problems arising from the interaction of hardware, software, and
              networks, and pay them well (an area average of over $32,000/year). Yet there
              is no program in the area to systematically train such technicians.    This
              project will create a 39-credit, three-semester Microcomputer Service
              Technician Certificate which will efficiently and effectively move students
              from turn the computer on" to "set up, manage, and troubleshoot a network". The
              thirteen courses (six new and seven modified) will equip students to: (a)
              install, configure, and troubleshoot operating systems; (b) install and replace
              cards, boards, and peripherals; (c) install, upgrade, and troubleshoot
              applications software; (d) establish, maintain, and upgrade microcomputer
              networks; (e) diagnose freestanding and networked microcomputer problems using
              standard diagnostic equipment and software; and (f3 develop and manage internet
              website.  The coursework building on the capabilities of a 25-station dedicated
              microcomputer lab, will be highly interactive, with student projects ranging
              from assembling and disassembling basic rnicrocomputers through creating and
              operating "mini-networks" using multiple network software. The three strands of
              activity will focus on: microcomputer basics (e.g. operating systems, basic
              programming, and applications packages); internet basics (both programming and
              website development); and networking (including LAN service, support, and
              management). In keeping with the national need, proactive dissemination will
              target both internal and area audiences and regional and national groups.
