Title       : A Unified Plan for Mathematical and Moleclular Modeling Data Analysis and
               Chemical Communication in the Laboratory Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9851333

Award Number: 9851333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41441              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberley R. Cousins   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Tate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brett J. Stanley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Mantei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      5500 University Parkway
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Computers and computing skills are increasingly important for the practicing
              chemist. Used in conjunction with the laboratory course, mathematical and
              molecular modeling, and computer analysis of data can enhance the students'
              understanding of the various representations of chemical systems: macroscopic
              as observed in laboratory; microscopic through molecular modeling; and
              symbolic, through data analysis and mathematical modeling. Written laboratory
              reports provide an effective venue for communicating both results of
              experiments, and conclusions drawn from analyses. We are establishing a
              chemistry computer laboratory and two data acquisition stations to be used
              throughout the chemistry majors' curriculum. Beginning with the general
              chemistry course we are introducing a set of carefully chosen software
              applications in graphing, word processing, spreadsheets, molecular modeling and
              computational chemistry, mathematical modeling, and data acquisition and
              analysis. The new laboratory significantly upgrades all aspects of chemical
              computing in our department, in accordance with the goals and objectives
              outlined in our Department's Program Assessment Plan.
