Title       : Simulated Workplace Technical Physics Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9851066

Award Number: 9851066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26078              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Tyndall btyndall@riscy.forsyth.tec.nc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Forsyth Technical CC
	      2100 Silas Creek Parkway
	      Winston-Salem, NC  271035150    919/723-0371

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Highly-skilled, well trained technicians are the backbone of the high-tech world
              in which we live. Many of these technicians receive their education from
              two-year technical schools and community colleges which offer associate degrees
              in a wide variety of engineering-technology areas. Prospective employers desire
              technicians who are well versed not only in their chosen specialty but also in
              other important skills. Among these skills are problem solving, the ability to
              work in teams, the ability to communicate ideas both orally and in written form
              and the ability to use modern data gathering and analysis tools.    The FTCC
              Technical Physics Project seeks to create an environment where technical
              students learn physics concepts and develop other desirable technical skills as
              well. A number of flexible modules will be developed which use
              activity-centered learning techniques to teach the physics concepts and
              problem-based learning to teach and foster these other desirable skills. Each
              module will introduce or build skill in the use of modern data gathering and
              analysis tools, lead students to solve "real world" problems in working teams,
              provide the opportunity for students to discuss the problems and solutions
              within their teams as well as with other students in the class and in other
              classes (via the internet) and write formal technical reports based on their
              findings. It is believed that this total immersion technique will lead to
              increased retention and understanding of the physics concepts and a high degree
              of success in the workplace.  The modules themselves will be developed by teams
              of faculty representing physics engineering technologies, mathematics and
              English and representatives from industry advisory boards. They will be field
              tested at two-year colleges in North Carolina, South Carolina and Michigan.
