Title       : Request for Two Environmental Growth Chambers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9851050

Award Number: 9851050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy St. Omer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Kutilek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Marked changes in global environments such as increasing levels of atmospheric
              carbon dioxide and ultraviolet radiation are rapidly occurring as a result of
              man's actions. Explorations of changes in global environments and determining
              how species may function and adapt under such changes are two fundamental areas
              of physiological ecology with theoretical and practical applications. The
              Biology Department at San Jose State University has a conservation and
              ecological emphasis in its undergraduate and graduate curricula which can be
              enhanced with studies exploring the effects of changing global environments on
              plant growth. The environmental growth chambers in this department are over 25
              years old and are subject to frequent breakdowns. Many of our students are
              first generation students who do not have English as their first language and
              are likely to benefit from "doing" science activities that are relevant and
              interesting. The environmental growth studies proposed here which explore
              Future predicted climatic changes on plant growth will give students the
              opportunity to explore, in a meaningful way, concepts of global changes while
              using advanced technological equipment. The growth chamber experiments will
              provide assessment modes which do not rely solely on language skills. A major
              program in this department is the preparation of undergraduate science students
              for science teaching at the pre-college level. One of the major goals
              associated with science instruction in this department is to ensure that
              students develop positive attitudes to doing science and become comfortable
              with the use of scientific equipment. Growing plants in different climatic
              environments will stress the integrated approach to learning science and will
              allow students to explore natural phenomena in controlled environments.
