Title       : Remote Design/Manufacturing Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9851567

Award Number: 9851567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Van Til vantil@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Srodawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sankar Sengupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    313/377-2100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              It is common for products to be designed at one location and manufactured at
              another location(s). Hence, systems to ensure efficient communications between
              the design and the manufacturing facilities are required. In order to allow
              students to study the problems associated with this issue, a linkage between
              the engineering/ manufacturing facilities of Oakland University's School of
              Engineering and Computer Science and the industrial technology facilities of
              Seaholm High School in Birmingham, MI is proposed. The facility linking these
              sites will be called the Remote Design/Manufacturing Laboratories.  The
              proposed Remote DesignlManufacturing laboratories will serve as the conduit in
              which Oakland University engineering and computer science students using
              Oakland's CIM and AIM laboratories can work with Seaholm High School students
              using their technology facilities. Oakland students will be responsible for the
              engineering design and development of products as well as automated
              manufacturing systems. The Seaholm students will be responsible for technical
              design issues as well as constructing the products and manufacturing systems in
              Seaholm's technology facilities.  Projects to be conducted in the proposed
              laboratories will be team-based, both university and high school students will
              be assigned to each team. The projects will emphasize two key factors that
              differ from most current team-based projects conducted in university
              engineering/computer science or high school technology programs. The first is
              that the teams will contain members with varying levels of education,
              experience and job descriptions. The second major difference is that team
              members will be located at different facilities with most interactions
              occurring using the proposed laboratories.
