Title       : Digital Media Interactive Micro-Network Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1998      
File        : a9851506

Award Number: 9851506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk T. Smallman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin C. Benson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Springfield Tech Cmty Col
	      Armory Square
	      Springfield, MA  01105    413/781-7822

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Telecommunications Technology Department of Springfield Technical
              Community College (STCC) proposes to enhance its curriculum by acquiring a
              Digital Media Interactive Micro-Network Lab with assistance from the national
              Science Foundation. This request is made because the technical considerations
              involved in designing and configuring the visual information for the Internet
              is an area into which our students should be venturing but cannot, because our
              current facilities have no capability for the lab experiments.  As information
              providers increasingly make use of the Internet, the benefits of being able to
              provide detailed moving images and user interactivity with the content are
              becoming clear. But the costs of such enabling solutions as fiber optic
              delivery have so far proven overwhelming, even to such large enterprises as
              telephone companies.  We see increased experimentation looking for ways to
              improve data throughput on the Intimate as being desirable, but there are also
              possibilities for reducing the data demands of the material being fed into the
              Intimate. In the creation of moving images/sounds in windows controlled with
              selection buttons, there are a number of technical approaches which result in
              better quality and interactivity without increased bandwidth.  The experiments
              outlined in this proposal seek to explore the tactics and techniques by which
              aspects of the information may be data-reduced while maintaining acceptable
              qualities as perceived by the user. The experiments pertain to two avenues of
              concern:    1) Finding the best techniques for reducing bandwidth demands for
              Internet-destined materials and CD-ROM-destined materials in motion    2)
              Finding the best techniques for providing enhanced user interactivity with
              these two media, up to and including digital simulation of using real-world
              instrumentation.  With the Digital Media Interactive Micro-Network lab facility
              requested, our students could enter the realm of these technical challenges by
              performing the listed experi ments themselves and evaluating the results in
              both qualitative and quantitative terms. This lab is being envisioned as a
              micro-miniature working model of a world of CD-ROM and Internet       . . _ _ .
              , .
