Title       : Astronomical Observing for All Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9851041

Award Number: 9851041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10171              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Wilkerson wilkerje@luther.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darrel B. Hoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Luther College
	      700 College Drive
	      Decorah, IA  521011045    563/387-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this proposal we seek ILI funding to upgrade the astronomical observing
              facilities at Luther College. Our current observing facilities are inadequate
              to meet the needs of our large classes. Also, modern digital cameras make
              exciting, new projects accessible to undergraduates. Astronomy has a unique
              ability to capture student interest and this equipment - telescopes, CCD
              cameras, portable computers and associated accessories and software, would
              reach a large portion of the student body. We will use the telescopes in
              observing sessions for introductory classes consisting primarily of non-science
              majors and including a large fraction of elementary education majors. These
              classes are large and require a few observing stations to meet the needs of the
              students. Not only would these observing sessions allow the students to see
              objects discussed in lecture but we would present the observational evidence
              for ideas that have shaped science such as the Copernican model of the solar
              system and Newton's law of universal gravitation. In addition, the students
              would learn the power of instrumentation in making astronomical observations.
              We are in a position to take full advantage of this equipment with advanced
              students because we will be able to obtain two Sun workstations from the
              college for use with this project. Astrophysics students will then be capable
              of processing data from CCD observations to make precise measurements of
              objects like variable star periods and the orbital periods of Jupiter's moons.
              We will also utilize archived astronomical data to compare to their
              measurements and as input separate data analysis projects. As a final
              application of this equipment, we will develop an outreach program with local
              K-12 schools. This program will involve Luther faculty and students running
              observing sessions as part of a hands-on astronomy program offered to the
              schools and one telescope will be available on a loan basis.
