Title       : Enhancement of the Community College Chemistry Curriculum with Fourier Transform
               Infrared Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9851173

Award Number: 9851173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10047              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan W. Roper   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shawn L. Reese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Los Rios CC System Distric
	      1919 Spanos Court
	      Sacramento, CA  958253905    916/920-7881

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this project is to incorporate Fourier-Transform Infrared (FT-IR)
              analysis into several chemistry courses at Sacramento City College (SCC).
              Currently our dispersive instrument is used for a variety of tasks. The organic
              students use IR as a tool for substance identification including reaction
              rnixture/product analysis and the investigation of components in naturaI
              product mixtures. Analyses performed with our current IR spectrophotometer are
              slow. The low student throughput and the lack of modem features limits our
              ability to update existing curricula. We propose to update the spectroscopy
              component of our curriculum and replace our dispersive IR with an FT-IR
              spectrophotometer.  The main beneficiary of this project will be the organic
              chemistry courses at SCC, however, allied health chemistry students as well as
              second semester general chemistry students will also benefit. The incorporation
              of FT-IR into the organic chemistry curriculum will allow for the enhancement
              and modernization of existing experiments, the introduction of new methods of
              data analysis, and the discussion of FT-IR theory. The use of FT-IR and
              reflectance accessories will virtually eliminate the time constraints
              associated with the use of our dispersive instrument, thereby allowing for
              increased student access to lR spectroscopic methods. For allied health
              students, a more instructive and meaningful experience with IR will be
              possible. The introduction of FT-IR into general chemistry will provide
              students with a connection between acquisition of data and theoreticaI concepts
              presented in lecture as well as hands-on experience with a type of
              instrumentation which is used in industry and in the upcoming, higher level
              coursework students will eventually encounter.
