Title       : Using FT-NMR in an Environmental Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9851659

Award Number: 9851659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90185              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Brandt brandt@wcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Kwochka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The chemistry faculty members at Western Carolina University, a primarily
              undergraduate institution in the southern Appalachians, have added an
              environmental focus to the curriculum. This emphasis is a logical fit for this
              department because of our ecologically-diverse location, our student employment
              record in the environmental sciences, and a number of environmentally-based
              student research projects. The FT-NMR instrument system is being used to
              develop novel experiments that promote student learning by (1) identifying
              synthesized compounds using of state-of-the-art instrumentation, (2) exploring
              alternative methods of synthetic chemistry that strive to minimize impact on
              the environment, (3) examining preparative procedures for compounds that serve
              alternative methods for pest control, and (4) developing a general
              environmental awareness. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometry is a
              powerful tool that, although rarely associated with environmental chemistry,
              significantly enhances the learning process. Using this instrument, students
              characterize compounds which have been prepared using alternative methods of
              synthesis. The dye-sensitized irradiative removal of protecting groups-is one
              preparative method that seeks to prevent pollution from the outset.  The FT-NMR
              system is  also used to characterize ferrocene-based catalysts which have been
              prepared with the concept of atom economy in mind. More sophisticated,
              multi-dimensional NMR technique are used to evaluate the three-dimensional
              structure of the products of these catalytic processes. Insect pheromones,
              employed for mating disruption of insect pests, are prepared and characterized
              by NMR. Finally, the requested instrument supports a vigorous undergraduate
              research program.
