Title       : Incorporating Computer Experimentation into an Upper Division Mathematics
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1998       
File        : a9851632

Award Number: 9851632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Earnest aearnest@math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald C. Grimmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Recognizing the need for a greater emphasis on active and collaborative
              learning and a greater emphasis on inquiry and discovery in the mathematics
              curriculum, the Department of Mathematics has set the objective of introducing
              computer laboratory experiences into several upper division mathematics
              courses. Two major goals of this project are 1) to ensure that all mathematics
              majors have the opportunity to develop the experimental and computational
              skills required for success in later course work and in a broad range of career
              settings, and 2) to ensure that Science, Engineering and Technology students
              with majors outside mathematics have a better opportunity to understand the way
              that mathematics affects their chosen discipline.    At present our
              undergraduate computer lab facility is inadequate for the desired enhancements
              This has already been seen in our first step, the integration of a computer
              experimentation component in the first course in differential equations. The
              Department of Mathematics wishes to also implement computer experimentation in
              additional courses in Probability, Fourier Analysis, and Differential Equations
              during the next two years. Significant changes are envisioned in these courses
              in the next two years. To this end, the Department of Mathematics seeks support
              for a major upgrade of its currently available equipment.
