Title       : Introduction of Optics and Fiber Optics into the Undergraduate Engineering
               Experimentation Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9851338

Award Number: 9851338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24593              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher H. M. Jenkins cjenkins@taz.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjeev K. Khanna  (Principal Investigator former)
              Daniel F. Dolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory A. Buck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Optical techniques and especially fiber optics are revolutionizing the
              telecommunications industry and are expected to make substantial advances in
              their application to process control and manufacturing, health monitoring of
              aerospace, military, and civil structures and medical science.  However, our
              graduating engineers are lacking in the concepts and application of optics and
              fiber optic technology. None of the present lab oriented courses such as
              Introduction to Manufacturing Mechanical Measurements, Thermo-fluid Science,
              Mechanical Vibrations and Mechanical Engineering Design I & II, touch on these
              important fields of study. Through this proposal, it is our endeavor to
              introduce such concepts in the class room and demonstrate their applications in
              the laboratories through a hands-on experience. It is further envisaged the
              students will use this knowledge in creating better and more innovative designs
              in their capstone design projects, which typically deal with product design,
              manufacturing, testing, sensing, and control.  With this proposal, we seek to
              procure the necessary equipment to help achieve the above mentioned goal of
              introducing optical techniques and fiber optic technology in a wide range of
              courses across the mechanical engineering curriculum.
