Title       : Computers to Support Quantitative Analysis/Statistics Across a Biology
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9851563

Award Number: 9851563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21799              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Arnold rarnold@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall L. Fuller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We are equipping a laboratory to support a systematic approach to the teaching
              of statistics across a biology curriculum.  Students often do not understand or
              appreciate what it means to be quantitative and yet most science requires the
              collection and analysis of data.  While getting students involved in hands-on,
              project-oriented laboratory exercises is critical to the teaching of science,
              we also believe that students should then take the next step and understand how
              to manipulate, analyze and display their data correctly.  We are teaching
              statistics across our curriculum by beginning with first principles in our
              introductory course and then expanding and reinforcing these principles and
              statistical procedures in our 200/300 level required courses. The two mobile
              labs (each with 8 Gateway notebook computers) can travel to any laboratory and
              be networked to a departmental server in a new computer room; thus the notebook
              computers function in much the same way as we now use microscopes which are on
              mobile carts and available to everyone.  We are teaching all students how to
              use a common statistics software package, and they have a departmentally
              developed statistics manual that explains the underlying theory, methodology
              and practical application of all statistical procedures used in the course. 
              Students are involved in collecting, manipulating, analyzing and displaying
              their own data in at least 6 different courses and in a multitude of different
              projects before becoming involved in any upper level research course; thus,
              they enter this phase of their academic careers with a better understanding of
              experimental design and statistical analysis.  We believe our systematic
              approach will be successful because students will be doing statistics
              throughout their academic program in a repetitive, organized and consistent
              manner.  Furthermore, if successful, this approach is transferable to any
              academic program where statistics is emphasized, regardless of discipline
              (i.e., many natural science or soci al science disciplines).
