Title       : Speech and Hearing Science Laboratory Instruction for Undergraduate Students in
               Communication Sciences and Disorders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9851123

Award Number: 9851123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55561              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Petrosino lpetros@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger D. Colcord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald C. Scherer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The purpose of this project is to offer a model program of undergraduate
              education in communication sciences and disorders (CDIS) that will integrate
              science and technology throughout the curriculum. Laboratory experiences and
              experiments have been designed to actively engage students in the scientific
              investigation of critical parameters in speech production. Students will employ
              problem solving skills relative to the physiological and acoustic aspects of
              speech production. Students will formulate hypothesis, design experiments, and
              by the senior year, engage in independent research exploration. The infusion of
              laboratory experiences into the undergraduate curriculum will increase students
              understanding of the complex relationships among all speech processes and
              increase and develop skills in critical thinking and scientific methodology.
              Building the scientific base at the undergraduate level will: (1) Allow for a
              laboratory-based curriculum with scientific inquiry to teach students
              scientific methods and that research contributions are rewarding and important;
              (2) Allow for the early introduction and active use of a scientific and
              research ethic among the students; and (3) Allow CDIS to be pursued as a field
              of study in and of itself, in order to prepare students to enter related fields
              that require basic science background as well as to enter a graduate program in
              CDIS. Various instrumentation has been requested to set up specific
              physiological and acoustic work stations to allow scientific inquiry into the
              basic speech sciences. Incorporated into the proposed project will be the
              development of a laboratory manual for each work station. In addition, project
              outcomes will be disseminated through presentations at professional conferences
              and manuscript submission to an appropriate scholarly journal. Dissemination of
              the project results will be useful to other universities as they attempt to
              improve the science base in the undergraduate curriculum in communication
              sciences and disorders.
