Title       : Case Studies in the Introductory Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9851068

Award Number: 9851068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23487              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Crosby   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Murphy  (Principal Investigator former)
              Douglas N. Arion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carthage College
	      2001 Alford Drive
	      Kenosha, WI  531401929    414/551-8500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Using Case Studies in the Introductory Physics Laboratory addresses two
              important motivations for laboratory improvement. First, enrollments at the
              college in both algebra-based and calculus-based introductory physics has more
              than doubled since 1994 due to increasing numbers of biology chemistry, math
              and physics majors as well as revitalization of the physics program. Second, a
              pedagogical renovation of the introductory physics laboratory is needed to
              better prepare students for the world beyond the classroom and better foster an
              ability to understand and apply physics. The laboratory program in this project
              focuses on semester-long team-based Case Studies in which students develop a
              scientific approach to inquiry and problem solving, reinforce understanding of
              physics concepts, develop a sense of ownership of their work, experience
              application of physics to real-life situations, and learn to communicate their
              research and results.     After choosing a topic for Case Study, each student
              team chooses and defines a self-designed Case Study, and later proposes and
              conducts a series of tests and measurements. Regular instructor guidance and
              feedback is given throughout the entire Case Study process. Each team reports
              preliminary results and proposes additional tests and measurements to be made.
              Teams conduct Case Studies using a selection of computer-interfaced sensors,
              digitized video and ordinary lab equipment. Case Study culminates with a
              physics "open house" and a formal report prepared for the World Wide Web. Case
              Studies are supplemented with five basic-physics experiments, called
              Interludes, which develop basic skills and reinforce fundamental physics
              concepts.     Through the Case Study approach, students are encouraged to
              become active learners and to extend this capability to other academic
              experiences. Results of this program will be presented at local and national
              conferences and submitted for publication in appropriate journals; exemplary
              Case Studies will be posted on the Carthage  web page for access by interested
              parties at other institutions.
