Title       : Instrumental Electrophoresis and Chromatography in Bioanalytical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9851084

Award Number: 9851084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81119              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Hobey whobey@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kristin N. Wobbe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The newly reorganized Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
              Worcester Polytechnic Institute proposes to introduce Instrumental
              Electrophoresis and Chromatography in Bioanalytical Chemistry by converting a
              very traditional wet analytical chemistry laboratory course into a largely
              instrumental modern bioanalytical course. Students will be exposed to protein,
              nucleic acid, metabolite, and drug analysis and separation using rapid
              instrumental means with highly sensitive and discriminating detectors viz.
              capillary electrophoresis and high performance liquid chromatography, both with
              diode array detectors. Through use of experiments such as the identification
              and isolation of isozymes, the products of enzyme cleavage of proteins and
              genes, and the chemical modification of membrane proteins, students will be
              exposed to a variety of specific methodologies. A "capstone" experiment in
              which the student team must choose and justify the "most appropriate" approach
              to an analysis will test their understanding of principles. Professional
              reports on the specific experiments developed, and dissemination of an
              Instrumental Chromatography laboratory manual should aid other schools in
              introducing such methods, particularly capillary electrophoresis where the
              literature on undergraduate usage, while growing, is still sparse. These
              changes are aimed first at the Biochemistry majors for which the Department was
              given authority in September 1995, and at those Chemistry majors pursuing the
              recently introduced Medicinal Chemistry option. However, all Chemistry majors
              should benefit from the changes. Generally, the revised course will be taken in
              the second year, with the equipment being used in required research project
              work in the third and/or fourth years.
