Title       : Undergraduate Physical Anthropology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1998      
File        : a9851420

Award Number: 9851420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36916              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert DiBennardo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal seeks support for implementing a network of computer
              workstations in an undergraduate physical anthropology laboratory. This network
              will complement and enrich the "hands-on" experiences of students in two
              introductory level laboratory science courses (Introduction to Human Evolution
              and Introduction to Human Variation), and one advanced level course in Human
              Osteology. These courses target both science majors and non-science majors,
              including many prospective elementary and secondary school teachers, as well as
              pre-professional students with interests in medicine, dentistry or veterinary
              science. The workstations will be used in conjunction with actual physical
              specimens and a graphics database to be created using a high resolution digital
              imaging camera. These images will be stored on an NT Server that will link the
              workstations and peripherals and provide internet connectivity. The many unique
              specimens in the Department's collections of fossil human and primate materials
              will be available for on-screen display, allowing students to make comparative
              observational and measurement assessments between them and the specimens at
              their workbenches. SigmaScan Pro and Microsoft Office drawing tools will be
              used for the on-screen measurements and analysis to be made. The high
              performance, high capacity server that will operate the LAN allows the many
              "one-of-a-kind" specimens which the Department has in its collections to be
              accessed simultaneously by up to 15 student study groups. Students will be
              actively engaged in an interactive process of discovery by observation and
              measurement. This will make real for them both the inherent variation and the
              inherent similarity of all our close relatives, and the significance of these
              differences and similarities in the context of our evolutionary history. As
              work on development of the laboratory progresses, it will be documented on an
              Anthropology at Lehman College web homepage and reported at major anthropology
              society meetings.
