Title       : Interactive, Interdisciplinary Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9851011

Award Number: 9851011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacquelyn A. White   (Principal Investigator current)
              Claude Russo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shai Neumann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evelio Sotolongo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah McClinton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brevard Community College
	      1519 Clearlake Road
	      Cocoa, FL  329226503    305/632-1111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Brevard Community College (BCC), a multi-campus, co-educational institution of
              higher learning located on the east cost of Florida, will continue to develop
              and utilize computer technology to develop an interactive, interdisciplinary
              approach to teaching science, mathematics, and technology.  A key component of
              this effort will be the establishment of three computer laboratories on the
              Melbourne Campus and at the Kennedy Space Center/Patrick Air Force Base
              (KSC/PAFB) extension which serves space industry and military installations in
              the district.      Each lab will be designated for a specific discipline (math,
              science, or technology) with classes held during concurrent sessions.  In
              addition, these laboratories will be capable of "c-u-see-me" technology and
              utilized to design a complete curriculum of interdisciplinary courses.  The
              first interdisciplinary course scheduled for development under this project
              will be College Algebra/Chemistry.  Each interdisciplinary lab class will
              consist of ten PC's and multimedia and internet/intranet equipment which will
              enable live interaction between classes and allow the classes to transmit and
              receive from outside the campus, including classes at different institutions
              having similar capabilities.      These labs are proposed to teach students the
              inter-relatedness of math, science, and technology in problem solving; to
              expand the currently used technology for online instruction to include
              c-u-see-me technology for home-bound students with disabilities; and to bring
              these interdisciplinary courses to students at the KSC/PAFB extension.   
              Evaluation of the project will consist of a comparison of student success
              rates, satisfaction, and retention in classes using the interactive,
              interdisciplinary pedagogy to traditional lecture-based classes.  Assessing
              project impact will also shed light on its value to disabled students unable to
              attend classes onsite when compared to other online instructional methods
              currently used by the college.  An ANOVA will be  run on course outcomes to
              determine if students with disabilities have an improved success rate in the
              mathematics, science, and technology fields as a result of increased
              communication and interaction through the use of C U SEE ME technology.
