Title       : Field Experiences in Environmental Geophysics and Earth Surface Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9851222

Award Number: 9851222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21367              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn C. Kroeger gkroeger@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Gardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Our introductory geoscience laboratory, Earth Materials and Processes, serves
              over 120 students per year, one fifth of the Trinity student body, most of whom
              are non-science majors. This laboratory currently includes no field work or
              instrumental component. We will enhance this course with an inquiry-based,
              instrumentally supported, quantitative field experience. This experience will
              include a refraction seismic survey and a real-time differential GPS survey of
              a fault-bounded basin near campus containing a flood control dam. A round-robin
              schedule will ensure that each student has a hands-on experience with both
              surveys, and will also allow the incorporation of a computer based mapping
              exercise, using an existing computer facility, into this introductory
              laboratory. We will acquire an exploration seismograph, GPS receiver and laptop
              computer to implement this plan. Using the same equipment, we will integrate
              and enhance the field components of upper division elective courses in
              Geophysics, Geomorphology, Hydrology, and, GIS and Remote Sensing with joint,
              extended field projects. The newly created Government Canyon State Natural Area
              will be used as the common field site for these courses. This area, which has
              been set aside as an important geologic area for teaching and research, is
              located astride the boundary between the catchment zone and the recharge zone
              of the Edwards Aquifer, the sole-source water supply for San Antonio, Texas.
              Additional benefits of these activities include the enhancement of field
              experiences in other geoscience courses and selected courses in biology and
              physics, and expanded undergraduate research opportunities for students from
              Trinity and affiliated institutions. The results will be disseminated by
              presentations at national meetings and workshops. Resulting materials and
              student reports will be available on our department Web site which will also
              host a Web based GIS for the Government Canyon State Natural Area.
