Title       : DNA Sequencing: A Multidisciplinary Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9851150

Award Number: 9851150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34959              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca A. Reiss reiss@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Molecular genetics is not just for biologists anymore, and biologists must
              become technologically competent for research in the next century. A result of
              collaboration between biologists, chemists, electrical engineers, and computer
              scientists is the development of automated DNA sequencers that utilize
              capillary electrophoresis coupled to laser detection of fluorescently-labelled
              molecules. These instruments eliminate the need for radioactive material and
              neurotoxins, and are ideal for undergraduate education since extensive safety
              training is eliminated, and toxic wastes are not generated.     In addition,
              the advances that have made this technology possible are relevant to other
              disciplines. The goals of this project are to modernize the biology curriculum
              and interface biology with other disciplines. The theme is the importance of
              collaboration between scientists to insure continued advances in science and
              technology. Sequencing will first be introduced in faculty directed
              undergraduate research projects, and then into upper division courses taught by
              those faculty. This includes required courses in environmental engineering and
              environmental science. An introductory module appropriate for introductory
              biology students and non-biology majors will be developed.     Bioinformatics,
              the storage and analysis of sequence data, will be introduced in first year and
              advanced computer scientist courses. Electrical engineering principles used in
              the instrument will be emphasized in seminars by personnel from the
              manufacturer of the instrument.  A seminar course will bring together students
              and faculty from different disciplines to design multidisciplinary projects.
              Technical Communication majors will design internet sites, instructional
              material, and assessment questionnaires for the project.     The outcomes of
              this project mirror the mission of the school; students will learn (1) how DNA
              sequencing can be used as tool in medical and environmental science; (2) how
              knowledge is created and communicated  and; (3) the importance of
              multidisciplinary collaborations in solving technical and scientific problems.
