Title       : Coordinating Undergraduate Field Laboratories for a Biotic Survey: A
               Service-Learning Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9851239

Award Number: 9851239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96148              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Fauth fauthj@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College/Univ of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Lack of a national biodiversity database currently hinders conservation
              efforts, particularly in areas undergoing development, where unique species and
              natural communities are often destroyed before their value is recognized. This
              proposal outlines a solution to this problem: coordinating the laboratories of
              traditional field courses to conduct biotic inventories of local natural areas.
              Using the service/learning model, undergraduates in upper-division biology
              courses (e.g., entomology, ichthyology, plant taxonomy) will conduct biological
              surveys of town, county and state parks, and natural areas owned by nonprofit
              organizations and private landowners (e.g., historic gardens and plantations).
              These groups cannot usually afford to hire consulting firms to inventory
              biological diversity, yet their properties often harbor rare or unique flora
              and fauna. The educational benefits of this strategy are profound. The best way
              to learn science is to do science, and the best way for undergraduates to do
              good science is to be interested in producing a tangible, valuable product. 
              The educational goals of this project are to improve students' understanding of
              the entire scientific process, from observation to hypothesis testing,
              experimentation, data acquisition, analysis, interpretation and ultimately,
              publication in both print and electronic media. Access to modern equipment,
              including remote data acquisition and monitoring equipment, global positioning
              equipment, geographic information systems and networked computers will increase
              both the students' scientific sophistication and the quality and accessibility
              of the survey results. Including process-oriented courses such as plant ecology
              and plant physiology will help students see the interrelationships among
              biological phenomena, enabling them to ask broad, fundamental questions.
              Integrating information from multiple courses will add cohesion to the
              undergraduate curriculum.  This project will assist the SC Natural Heritage
              Program and the National Gap  Analysis Project, and can serve as a national
              model for applying the service/learning approach to biology.
