Title       : Using Interdisciplinary Geologic Microscopy to Teach the Scientific Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9851002

Award Number: 9851002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52307              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila J. Seaman sjs@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Geosciences at the University of Massachusetts seeks to
              engage undergraduate students in critical thinking and practicing the
              scientific method by using geologic microscopy to introduce students to the
              basic concepts of physical geology at the earliest possible course level in the
              geology program. Geologic microscopy appeals to the natural interest that
              students at all levels have in examining geologic materials at a scale outside
              of the realm of daily life experience. The goal of this project is to train
              both majors and non-majors in methods of analyzing problems, evaluating
              observations, and drawing solid conclusions with confidence. Presentation of
              observations (data), analytical pathway, and conclusions, to other students in
              group microscopy sessions, will build students' confidence in their ability to
              make simple observations and to extrapolate them to conclusions about geologic
              processes on a spatially and conceptually large scale. The observational
              microscopy component of the geology major curriculum will be used to enhance
              student perception of geology as a collection of closely interrelated fields.
              The development of a new introductory physical geology course targeting first
              year students of all interests, entitled "The World Under a Microscope" will
              result from this project. This course will introduce the topics explored in
              typical introductory physical geology courses through the use of observational
              microscopy. The equipment requested will also enhance major revisions, already
              in progress, as well as the cohesion of the introductory
              geology-mineralogy-petrology-structural geology sequence. Revisions of the
              existing courses will involve microscopy-based student collaboration and
              independent semester-long student research projects. The major curriculum
              change resulting from this project will target students experiencing their
              first taste of the field of geosciences. In addition, the project targets earth
              science teachers who commonly enroll in introductory geology c ourses at the
              University of Massachusetts, and upon whom we depend to present geosciences as
              a legitimate field of study to the university students of upcoming decades.
