Title       : Establishment of a Biology Computer Laboratory for a Project-Based Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9851543

Award Number: 9851543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29221              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce C. Wightman wightman@muhlenberg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul T. Mier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Denise L. Wallack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth R. McCain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Niesenbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Muhlenberg College
	      24th and Chew Streets
	      Allentown, PA  18104    215/433-3191

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Muhlenberg College Biology Department emphasizes inquiry-based learning in
              its curriculum. Students learn by designing original projects in the field or
              laboratory, analyzing and interpreting their data, and presenting them to
              faculty and their peers. A project-based approach increases student investment
              in learning. Some of these projects have led to student publications. The
              Department is planning to expand the project-based approach across the
              curriculum and increase the emphasis on quantitative data analysis. Four
              intermediate and advanced level courses are targeted for this proposal:
              Scanning Electron Microscopy, Field Botany and Plant Ecology, Advanced
              Molecular Genetics, and Physiological Regulation and Adaptation. All four
              courses will emphasize student projects, quantitative analysis and presentation
              of results in a departmental symposium and poster session. This initiative
              requires that students have access to sophisticated data analysis software and
              hardware. In order to make these technologies available to students, the
              Department is planning the construction of a Biology Computer Facility. The new
              computer laboratory will provide access to current technology for students
              doing research projects in these four courses as well as students performing
              independent or honors research projects.
