Title       : Instrumentation and Process Control Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a9851065

Award Number: 9851065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53838              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alamgir A. Choudhury   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cyril I. Pontillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene M. Silgalis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Anthony  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cuyahoga Community College
	      700 Carnegie Avenue
	      Cleveland, OH  441152833    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Traditional courses in the area of instrumentation, measurement and control of
              electrical and electronic engineering technology (EET) and mechanical
              engineering technology (MET) programs have been developed as a single
              three-semester hour course with fifty percent theory and fifty percent
              laboratory content.  In this laboratory-based project, students are able to
              measure process variables, study characteristics of the instruments and
              processes, learn computerized data acquisition and use the data to control the
              processes. Using the software-based control system, students are also able to
              create virtual instrumentation and study its behavior before implementation of
              actual process. Further, more complex processes may be created by combining
              individual processes and used to train industrial personnel in modern
              instrumentation and process control technology. Development of the laboratory
              using LabVolt process stations, National Instrument data acquisition hardware,
              and an IBM PC platform with a LabView system is a cost-effective way to deliver
              control experiences to students.
