Title       : Interactive, Microcomputer-Based Undergraduate Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9851024

Award Number: 9851024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35264              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl P. Trout   (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Abul Hasan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Haiduke Sarafian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Doncheski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Toothacker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The goal of the project is to improve interest in and understanding and
              application of physics concepts by undergraduate students in general education,
              engineering, technology and science tracks. The project builds on preliminary
              local work to use a microcomputer-based laboratory (MBL) to improve student
              involvement in laboratory experiences, to link kinesthetic, perceptual and
              logical-symbolic experience of phenomena, and to increase the quality and
              immediacy of data capture and display. Experiments, demonstrations and
              simulations apply and extend publicly reported MBL experiments. Experiments
              based on active, collaborative, learner centered pedagogical techniques are
              used  in mechanics, electricity and magnetism, heat and thermodynamics, and in
              modern physics.  The project is unusual in involving two neighboring campuses,
              which should speed development of learning modules in its connections to 12
              campuses in the Penn State Commonwealth College at which lower-division physics
              is taught with good opportunity for internal and external dissemination, and in
              using laboratory experiences to connect physics and mathematics instructions to
              each other.  Support provides software and hardware to equip a basic MBL at
              York and Mont Alto and for additional instrumentation and equipment to develop
              a wide range of experiments at York. The two campuses are collaborating to
              speed development of a complete set of laboratory experiences for students. It
              is expected that learning in physics will improve measurably and it is hoped
              that the bridge between science and mathematics instruction will enhance
              learning in both disciplines.
