Title       : Project DESCARTES: Building Undergraduate Access to Geographic Information
               Science Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9851550

Award Number: 9851550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89348              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith C. Clarke kclarke@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leal A. Mertes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Siegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel C. Michaelsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  Support from the NSF Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement (ILI)
              program will be used to conduct an educational experiment in integrating
              graduate and faculty research at UCSB directly into our undergraduate program.
              UCSB's status as an NSF National Center for advancing geographic information
              science and the unique role that research plays at UCSB make Santa Barbara an
              ideal place for this experiment.     The plan will launch project Descartes,
              with four components: 1. A Descartes Laboratory to act as a focal point, with
              advanced research level facilities for technical geographic information
              science; 2. formal modifications to the curricula of six existing classes to
              use real research data and critical thinking in the classroom; 3. A new class
              to add the "research experience" into the senior level curriculum; and 4. a
              suite of informal additions to build a research environment enrichment
              experience for students aimed at encouraging publication, research activity,
              scientific meetings, and continued contact alter graduation.      We anticipate
              significant local, national and international impact as a consequence of
              following the project Descartes dissemination plan.  One way this will arise is
              through accelerated development of modules for the core curriculum II in GIS. 
              These modules are student oriented so that they can be directly integrated into
              the classroom.  The development of this NCGIA sponsored curriculum is truly
              collaborative with guidelines posted at the NCGIA Web site
              (http://www.ncgia.org).      Benefits are also anticipated for community
              college faculty and students, and K-12 teachers and students.  The focus for
              community college students will be improved technical training.  At the high
              school level, NCGIA is leading efforts to introduce Geography and GIS
              approaches into the complete spectrum of the curriculum.  We hope to use the
              new laboratory as a showpiece for open houses and lectures during geography
              awareness week.  During this week we average 50 to 60 presentation s in
              schools.
