Title       : Geography Computing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9851009

Award Number: 9851009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26027              (Estimated)
Investigator: X. Mara Chen mxchen@salisbury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brent R. Skeeter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Chapman McGrew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salisbury University
	      1101 Camden Avenue
	      Salisbury, MD  21801    410/548-5395

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this project is to create a specialized computer
              laboratory that will achieve an integrated approach to teach the modern
              techniques and content of geography.  An integrated approach will be used that
              emphasizes project-oriented teaching and learning.  GIS, remote sensing and the
              Web will be used by students as effective tools in geography education.     The
              goal of this project is to provide students with a unique computing environment
              where they can better grasp the coherent links between content-based courses
              and technique-oriented courses and solve real-world problems from a broad
              geographic perspective, and to promote students' participation in the National
              Conference of Undergraduate Research.  A balanced content-based education
              combined with hands-on training in modern techniques is crucial to delivering
              excellent undergraduate education. Typically, the design of an institution's
              geography curriculum stresses lectures for content-based courses, and
              lecture-then-lab approaches for technique courses. There have been no real
              links between these two groups of courses.     With the proposed Geography
              Computing Laboratory Project, however, the courses will be taught in an
              integrated, project-oriented fashion. In content-based courses, teaching
              emphasizes fundamental geography principles and concepts, yet requires students
              to solve real-world problems using geographic computing techniques. In
              technique courses teaching coupled with training is project-oriented and
              application-driven, instead of pure training on hardware and software
              mechanics. This integrated approach will promote a problem-solving learning
              environment so that students will understand the holistic aspects of geographic
              issues and problems. In this learning process, students would be able to obtain
              not only broad content-based education, but also technical skills in geographic
              spatial data analysis. They will become highly competitive and productive in
              the modern workforce.     In this two-year project, se veral publications will
              result from class projects and students' independent research studies.
