Title       : Integration of a GC-Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer into the Undergraduate Chemistry
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9851180

Award Number: 9851180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40777              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Sherwood   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jason J. Evans  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert W. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin D. Perry  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Arkansas Tech University
	      
	      Russellville, AR  72801    501/968-0389

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on improvements in upper division chemistry laboratories
              that would be fostered by the acquisition of a GC-ion trap mass spectrometer. 
              In the upper division laboratories, the students perform comprehensive
              investigations beyond what is normally fond in many 'cookbook" type laboratory
              experiments. Each project lasts for two to four weeks, and includes some
              library research, sample preparation, and method development. The GC-MS is an
              integral part in several of these laboratory projects.  The mass spectrometry
              of large biomolecules has become an increasingly powerful bioanalytical
              technique. Due to the size and cost of the necessary instrumentation,
              biological mass spectrometry is absent from most undergraduate curricula. In
              this project an experiment is being developed using the GC-ion trap that
              integrates the methodology of bioanalytical mass spectrometry into the course
              curriculum.  Undergraduate research projects focusing on GC-MS method
              development and gas-phase thermochemistry are also underway.  Arkansas's
              abundant natural resources foster many opportunities for environmentally
              related research projects. One example focuses on relating the aromatics
              emanating from various bird nests to the senses of predators.  We also are
              utilizing the GC-ion trap mass spectrometer in the organic laboratory to aid in
              the identification products from organic syntheses.
