Title       : Teaching Undergraduates in Biological Sciences: Concepts and Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9851373

Award Number: 9851373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48745              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis Callahan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lori Isaacson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mercedes A. Ebbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen A. Killian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this ILI proposal is to offer new laboratory exercises that
              utilize state of the art  technology in four upper level undergraduate courses:
              Endocrinology, Neuroanatomy,  Neurophysiology and Parasitology. Students play
              an active role in incorporating this technology into practical and experiential
              learning and thus are better prepared for careers in science. The proposed
              laboratories are based on three pedagogical principles: student-designed
              inquiry, collaboration among learners and use of new technology. Students test
              hypotheses, conduct experiments, collect and analyze their data and present
              their results in written and/or oral reports to their class and to lower-level
              students in workshops. Thus other undergraduates  also benefit from this
              project. Literature review and assimilation is a critical aspect of these
              laboratory exercises and reports. With these innovations in our courses,
              students are experiencing real science as it is performed by research
              scientists.  All of these courses, except Parasitology, are included in the
              interdisciplinary Neuroscience Minor, jointly offered with the Department of
              Psychology. Approximately 100 students enroll in these courses each year. Most
              of these students continue their education in post-baccalaureate programs
              across the nation, such as medical veterinary, dental, physical therapy and
              Ph.D. programs.  The results and impact of this project will be assessed by
              formative and summate evaluations conducted in collaboration with an evaluation
              coordinator. Results will be shared with colleagues through publications in
              education journals, presentations at professional meetings and the Miami
              University website.
