Title       : Development of a Remotely Accessible Dynamical Systems Laboratory for
               Undergraduate Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9851039

Award Number: 9851039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan P. Gosink                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79241              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sven K. Esche sesche@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marehalli G. Prasad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michail K. Tsatsanis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The objective of this project is to develop and implement a remotely
              accessible laboratory for the Dynamical Systems course in the second semester
              of the sophomore year of the new engineering curriculum at Stevens Institute of
              Technology. This course on dynamical systems will provide an educational
              experience which is integrated and taught concurrently with the courses Design
              4 (focusing on the design of dynamic systems), Applied Science 4 (providing the
              mathematical foundations for the analysis of dynamical systems), and
              Electronics and Instrumentation. The proposed laboratory implementation is
              based on the utilization of smart laboratory devices and the exploitation of
              the existing computing and networking infrastructure of the Stevens Institute
              of Technology through the world wide web. All preparatory instructional
              materials for the laboratory experiments, as well as testing and
              self-assessment tools for the students will be provided in electronic form on
              the internet. After fully implementing this internet-based, remote-access,
              interactive approach to laboratory instruction in the Dynamical Systems course
              of the undergraduate engineering curriculum with experimental setups from
              diverse areas of mechanical and electrical engineering, the extension of this
              approach is planned for other applications of dynamical systems in civil and
              chemical engineering and to other educational areas as well. The proposed
              laboratory facility is aimed at achieving a set of general curricular
              objectives and developing specific knowledge and skill sets in the students
              that are desired by industry. A major criterion for the assessment of the
              success of the project will be the ability of the students to demonstrate the
              use of competencies in the Senior Design Courses.
