Title       : Development of an Urban Groundwater Laboratory at Queens College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9851444

Award Number: 9851444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35519              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Belitz kenneth belitz@qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Ludman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                We propose to develop an urban groundwater laboratory at Queens College that
              will infuse modern technology and a hands-on problem-solving approach
              throughout the Geology Department's curricula. The beneficiaries of this
              initiative will be undergraduate Geology, Geoscience Education, Environmental
              Science, and Environmental Studies majors and a total of nearly 2000 students
              per year who enroll in departmental course offerings.  The urban groundwater
              laboratory will have several components. The centerpiece will be a network of
              six wells drilled into the Upper Glacial Aquifer that underlies our campus. In
              addition, there will be manual and digital field equipment for monitoring
              selected components of the hydrologic cycle, for measuring aquifer properties,
              and for conducting subsurface tracer tests. A set of computers will be used to
              interpret field data and access data from nearby weather stations.  Students
              will be involved at all stages of the development of the groundwater monitoring
              network. They will work with the driller to log the wells, to collect sediment
              samples, and to learn well-development procedures. Once the wells are
              installed, they will use associated field equipment and computers for a variety
              of experiments including monitoring climatic conditions, soil moisture and
              water table response to recharge events. Students will evaluate aquifer
              properties by conducting pump and slug tests, and obtain water samples for
              analysis in departmental laboratories. The hands- on experience gained by the
              students will be invaluable for those who enter the environmental consulting
              sector, and give all students first-hand knowledge of groundwater flow and
              subsurface transport. These projects using modern equipment and computers will
              replace current paper-based exercises, and will be a major improvement in
              pedagogy in courses at all levels of the curriculum.
