Title       : A Microelectronic Processing Lab Course Designed to Stimulate Interdisciplinary
               Team Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9851197

Award Number: 9851197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48197              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin A. Wolden cwolden@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mariet A. Hofstee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reuben T. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Educational activities directed at electronic materials processing are a new
              and growing component of the Colorado School of Mines undergraduate curriculum.
              This expansion is multidisciplinary in nature with at least four departments on
              campus heavily involved in the growth. It has also been strongly supported by
              the administration through the recruitment of new faculty with expertise in
              this area, the construction of new facilities, and the development of new
              curricula. Nevertheless, the program has a critical need for a laboratory class
              in electronic materials processing to provide students with hands-on experience
              with the steps involved in device fabrication. The goal of this proposal is to
              obtain key pieces of processing equipment needed to develop this lab course. A
              primary goal of the proposed course will be to give undergraduates a
              fundamental understanding of the processes leading to the production of
              semiconductor devices. Equally important will be the focus on developing
              teamwork and communication skills in an interdisciplinary environment. Lab
              activities will be performed by senior level students from four different
              departments. The lab projects will be designed to draw from the diverse talents
              of the various team members. Since the proposed experiments will be relatively
              simple, the students will be allowed to help design their own experiments and
              not just follow processing recipes. The communication of individual project
              results to their fellow classmates through both verbal and written mediums will
              be an important aspect of the course. Since device processing brings aspects of
              chemistry, physics, materials science, and engineering together in one very
              visible application, the course will provide an innovative medium for
              emphasizing the value of a multidisciplinary education. The class will also
              provide a direct connection between the classroom instruction students have
              received and the technology that impacts them daily. We feel that this approach
              will be successful in reinforci ng concepts learned in other classes, and that
              it will develop the teamwork and communication skills essential for the
              students' careers after graduation.
