Title       : Integration of Molecular Biotechnology into the Biochemistryand Biology
               Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9851596

Award Number: 9851596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30123              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane W. Husic dhusic@esu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane E. Huffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : E Stroudsburg U of Penn
	      
	      East Stroudsburg, PA  18301    717/424-3542

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project upgrades the biochemistry and biotechnology laboratories at East
              Stroudsburg University (ESU) as part of a comprehensive three-phase plan
              designed to strengthen the undergraduate curricula for biology, biochemistry
              and chemistry majors. Phase I (building improvements) and Phase II (acquisition
              of essential laboratory equipment) have already been addressed by the
              departments and university. Phase III, addressed in part by this project,
              involves curricular review, the development of new laboratory experiences in
              biotechnology, and the acquisition of equipment required for these new
              educational opportunities. Specifically, new DNA and protein workstations will
              be integrated into 1) the biochemistry and biotechnology courses, 2) the
              undergraduate research program, and 3) outreach education programs for regional
              high school science teachers.  The current biochemistry laboratories focus on
              traditional experiments involving isolation and characterization of
              biomolecules, with an emphasis on proteins and small molecules. A molecular
              biotechnology course was first offered during the summer of 1997, and a
              molecular-biology lecture course is being offered for the first time during the
              spring, 1998 semester. Thus, ESU students have had little exposure to
              techniques in molecular biology and biotechnology.  Proposed collaborative
              efforts between the chemistry and biology departments aim to address this
              deficiency by redesigning key laboratory courses, incorporating the new DNA and
              protein workstations and related equipment items. These enhancements will
              better prepare our students both for graduate work and for careers as teachers,
              researchers, industrial employees, and health care practitioners.
