Title       : Improvement of Undergraduate Education through Interdisciplinary Anatomy and
               Physiology Laboratory Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9851360

Award Number: 9851360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23512              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Healey mhealey@spfldcol.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Torre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Wargula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Tsoumas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Post  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Springfield College
	      263 Alden Street
	      Springfield, MA  011093797    413/748-3654

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Springfield College is limited in its current ability to offer cadaver anatomy
              to all undergraduate students who would benefit from this science experience.
              Currently, only students majoring in Physical or Occupational Therapy can
              regularly use the human cadaver laboratory.  This project extends this learning
              opportunity to all undergraduate students enrolled in science majors and
              science-based professional and pre-professional programs through an
              interdisciplinary approach that integrates hands-on dissection with interactive
              computer-based instruction. Students in the College's Biology, Physical
              Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Athletic Training, and Physician Assistant
              programs work in laboratory study teams to share information, insights, and
              skills. Through this team approach, undergraduate students engage in
              interdisciplinary study as they study the interrelationships of body organ
              systems from a morphological and biochemical view, with differing foci
              appropriate to each of their disciplines.  Requiring students to use
              critical-thinking skills in an interdisciplinary team approach is an essential
              part of this project.  Students develop skills in forming hypotheses that cross
              disciplinary borders, seeking solutions and defending the outcomes. This
              interdisciplinary project is a significant improvement for our undergraduate
              science education as it brings together basic and applied science majors in
              shared learning experiences. The integration of hands-on and computer-assisted
              learning accommodates all students as well as nontraditional students and
              students with differing learning styles. The resulting science curricula at the
              College provides the unusual opportunity for undergraduate science majors to
              learn anatomy and physiology hands-on with human cadavers.
