Title       : Digital Video Analysis and Dynamic Modeling in Undergraduate Physics
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9851235

Award Number: 9851235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24569              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Teese teese@muskingum.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Muskingum College
	      
	      New Concord, OH  43762    614/826-8211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                In this project, the Muskingum College Physics Department is developing a new
              curriculum for the algebra-based and calculus-based introductory physics
              courses as well as introducing new experimental techniques in the upper-level
              laboratory courses. The Workshop Physics curriculum that is currently being
              used for introductory courses at Muskingum College is being modified to include
              new modules that make use of dynamical modeling techniques and digital video
              methods for data collection. This project provides a digital videocassette
              camcorder and computer workstation for each group of three students in the
              laboratory. Students in the introductory physics courses use the camcorders to
              photograph experiments in projectile motion (including the effects of air
              resistance), center-of-mass motion, one and two-dimensional collisions, waves,
              fluid flow and electrostatic forces. They transfer the images to the computer
              and compare them to results of their model calculations made with spreadsheet
              or Dynamic Analyzer software. The curricular materials developed in this
              project are being made available for use at other colleges and universities.
              Students in the advanced physics laboratories use a new triggered video camera
              with one of the digital camcorders to study three-dimensional motion, do
              high-speed photography and record spectroscopic information. The
              three-dimensional motion analysis experiments include sports-related
              activities, which are be aimed at eventual use in introductory courses .
