Title       : Student-designed experimental investigations and integrated symposium for the
               undergraduate neurobiology, ethology, and physiology laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9851445

Award Number: 9851445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46460              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice Mills acmills@acad1.mtsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy Jetton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middle Tennessee St Univ
	      1500 Greenland Drive
	      Murfreesboro, TN  37132    615/898-5005

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Over the next few years the Neurobiology, Ethology, and General Physiology
              courses at Middle Tennessee State University will be restructured with the
              following Goals in mind: 1. to increase student involvement in design of
              laboratory experiments; 2. to improve student skills in critical thinking and
              presentation; 3. to develop the mental process of distilling biology down to
              the cellular and molecular level then reassembling it into organ system and
              organismal levels; 4. to integrate three separate courses into a student
              symposium; 5. to update the technologies currently being used in the lab
              exercises. Expected outcomes of these goals include improved interest in and
              success at learning, and an increased ability to retain the "big picture" of
              organismal function while still comprehending the smaller-scale details.
              Instructors will provide background information and procedural guidance, rather
              than simply prescribing a set of experiments with known outcomes. The
              instructor's role will shift to one of advisor and encourager, allowing
              students to experience the true process and nature of science as it is
              experienced by professional researchers. We will encourage students to continue
              their experiments beyond the scope of the one-semester class, leading to
              undergraduate theses. The focus of the equipment request is to establish
              Macintosh computer-based physiological data acquisition and analysis work
              stations, many of which utilize MacLab hardware and software. Students in the
              General Physiology course will explore the physiology and homeostasis of organ
              systems using a comparative approach. Students in the Ethology course will gain
              practical experience in studying the cellular physiological basis of behaviors.
              Students in the Neurobiology course will explore cellular phenomena of the
              nervous system, including the bases for resting potentials, action potentials,
              and synaptic potentials, and organismal phenomena such as motor control and
              sensory perception. A laboratory component for Neurobiology h as never been
              taught at MTSU, thus its implementation will require a substantial capital
              equipment investment. The MacLab system was chosen for its reputation,
              versatility and "user-friendliness."
