Title       : Scientific Computation for Interdisciplinary Data Analysis and Technological
               Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9851642

Award Number: 9851642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64132              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Clay kclay@grcc.ctc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin L. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Filson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Whitfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Green River Cmty College
	      12401 South East 320
	      Auburn, WA  980923699    206/833-9111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The faculty of Green River Community College are creating a new program
              requiring realistic computerized data analysis in all courses in geology,
              physics, and chemistry. The program requires all students to participate in
              scientific computing using data from industry and their own labs, to be done in
              a new central computer laboratory and in laboratories electronically connected
              to the center. The confinement of data analysis and computation to lab period
              will be eliminated, making entire courses into active science courses.     
              Most science students develop problem solving skills for a limited range of
              problems modeled by homework assignments from traditional texts, but when
              presented with problems in real data analysis even talented students are often
              at a loss. Vocational students and non-science majors are even less likely to
              gain exposure to the real world of scientific data or to use a computer as
              anything other than a word processor. Businesses have identified the need for
              computer skills as one of the greatest problems in the workplace and education
              research has identified a need for direct exposure to investigative science
              with real data and applications. A coordinated program of computerized data
              analysis meets both needs.      This project involves all physical science
              students in the daily analysis of scientific data. Computers are used as
              natural components of scientific exploration. Less able students utilize peer
              tutors to boost their computer skills. All students collect data from
              experiments or industrial collaborators and analyze data cooperatively in the
              central computer laboratory. Interdisciplinary courses blend computers,
              physics, and chemistry, geology and the environment, and other sciences with
              subjects outside of the sciences as well.      Students in this program can
              strengthen their computer skills, their scientific literacy, their cooperative
              study skills, and their appreciation for the relevance and interconnectedness
              of science. Vocational students and non-science  majors benefit along with
              future scientists and engineers. Gains in our understanding of science
              education could have benefits well beyond the boundaries of this college.
