Title       : ILI: Distributed Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9851485

Award Number: 9851485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongchi Shi shi@cecs.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yi Shang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anupam Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Jurczyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                As the computational environment in the "real world" becomes increasingly
              distributed with the advent of the National Information Infrastructure, this
              area has to become a part of the undergraduate computer science curriculum.
              There is a need to have laboratory facilities to support teaching in this area.
              This project will establish a dedicated laboratory for distributed computing
              instruction, consisting of one server and twelve workstations connected via a
              high-speed ATM switch. The proposed system mimics the environment that the
              students are likely to encounter in their workplaces in a few years. In
              addition to the existing three undergraduate courses in this area (Networking
              I, Operating Systems I, and Science and Engineering of the Web), a new course
              (Introduction to Distributed Systems) will be introduced in the regular
              curriculum. The courses in this area cover most aspects of distributed systems,
              from low-level network protocol and programming (often at the packet level) to
              system programming at the operating system level to the application level for
              web-based distributed computing. The facility will enable a laboratory-oriented
              approach to teaching the theory and practice of distributed computing and
              algorithm development. Unlike the existing general-use computing facilities
              provided by Campus Computing and Engineering Computing Network, our proposed
              facility will provide students system-level access to the equipment. This will
              enable them to do experiments that are not possible with general-purpose
              computing facilities, and allow instructors to create model syllabi that will
              be made available to other institutions.
