Title       : Enhanced Environmental Biology Literacy for all Undergraduate Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9851312

Award Number: 9851312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison Morrison-Shetlar aims@gsaix2.cc.gasou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia T. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southern Univ
	      P.O. Box 8005
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A growing body of literature amply documents the low levels of scientific and
              environmental literacy among the American public. To address this issue we are
              providing a framework in which all Georgia Southern University (GSU)
              undergraduates can achieve basic environmental and scientific literacy. We are
              developing an environmental biology course that will be part of GSU's new core
              curriculum. All students who wish to obtain a degree from GSU will complete
              this core curriculum including science majors, non-science majors, and future
              K-12 teachers. The new Biology course utilizes environmental issues to
              introduce and discuss relevant scientific concepts and the Biology department
              expects to have an estimated annual enrollment of 2325 students. The main focus
              of this proposal is to provide equipment to allow development of innovative
              hands-on laboratory activities related to local, regional, and global
              environmental problems. Expected project outcomes include: graduates who are
              able to engage in environmentally-aware behavior and informed citizenship;
              improved scientific and environmental knowledge; and appreciation of the
              connections between science and "real-world" problems.  This proposal requests
              funding for equipment necessary to develop new, unique and  meaningful
              environmental exercises for a large number of GSU students. The project has
              produced laboratory exercises that are available for adaptation by other
              institutions. Dissemination of the work is through presentation at national
              meetings, faculty development workshops, publication of laboratory materials
              and professional articles, and a project web site. This model is a unique one
              that can be easily adapted by other institutions and, therefore has excellent
              potential outside the university.
