Title       : Lightwave Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9851108

Award Number: 9851108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37321              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Henry henry@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Exciting and important advances in applied optics should play a much more
              significant role in the undergraduate science and engineering curricula. With
              this need in mind the curriculum at the University of Arkansas has been
              designed to provide a series of four courses in modern optics for science and
              engineering students: Optics and Laser Physics, Applied Non-Linear Optics, and
              Fiber and Waveguide Optics. Students in Optics and Laser Physics learn the
              fundamentals l-f both physical and wave optics and they develop specific skills
              in the design, construction, and analysis of state-of-the-art laser systems.
              These skills are further developed in Applied Non-Linear Optics where students
              investigate concepts and devices finding widespread applications in science and
              technology. All three of these courses at Arkansas combine both classroom and
              strong "hands-on" laboratory experiences to enhance student interest and
              maximize the learning experience.     The Fiber and Waveguide Optics course
              develops a foundation in the generation, modulation, transmission and detection
              of laser light, all of which are integrally related and vitally important for
              the continued development of advanced fiber optic systems. This project
              reinforces the enthusiasm shown by science and engineering students in this
              course with an opportunity to develop their talents and interest into specific
              skills. The Fiber and Waveguide Optics laboratory explores several key aspects
              of fiber optics to develop skills in (I) Propagation in Fibers and Waveguides,
              (ii) Semiconductor Lasers, Amplifiers, and Detector; (iii) Optical Modulators,
              and (iv) Fiber Optic Systems. In each area, the equipment gives the students
              experience with actual techniques used throughout the fiber optics research
              community.
