Title       : Computers for an Introductory Interdisciplinary Data Analysis Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9851321

Award Number: 9851321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura P. Eisen eisenl@trinitydc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hollis E. F. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      Franklin & Mich Ave N E
	      Washington, DC  20017    202/939-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal requests funds to obtain computers and computer interfaced
              probes and sensors for  an interdisciplinary science course that emphasizes
              data acquisition and analysis. The course is  intended to prepare first year
              college students for furthcr study in the natural sciences. Under-  graduate
              science courses are increasingly structured so that students discover important
              concepts  from experimental data. In order to discover the underlying concepts,
              however, students must be  able to interpret the data, which requires certain
              mathematical, analytical, and critical thinking  skills. In the absence of
              these skills, students are unable to discover the underlying relationships, 
              and, as a result, cannot acquire an understanding of the relevant concepts.
              This course is designed  to help students to develop the required skills in the
              context of familiar everyday problems, so that  they are not trying to master
              new skills and learn difficult concepts at the same time. Each exercise  will
              engage students actively to help them achieve specific learning objectives that
              will be useful in  other science courses. Students will then be expected to
              apply the skills that they have learned to a  related problem. Introductory
              exercises will emphasize numbers, measurement, and experimental  error.
              Subsequent activities will focus on the use of graphs to look for algebraic
              relationships  between variables, as well as on the use of standard curves and
              controls. Computer and calculator  based data acquisition will be utilized
              extensively. A final project will incorporate the diverse skills  learned in
              the separate exercises. Selected activities will be used in math and science
              courses de-  signed for non-science majors, so that the project will help to
              increase the scientific literacy of a  wide range of students.
