Title       : Inductively Coupled Plasma Spectroscopy in the Analytical and Physical Chemistry
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9851358

Award Number: 9851358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38400              (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Grossman weghc@cunyvm.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Atomic analysis is of very great importance in analytical chemistry. Of the
              available techniques, inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy has become
              the most widespread due to its wide applicability. Chemistry students at Hunter
              do not at present have the opportunity to use ICP equipment in their
              undergraduate labs. The objective of this proposal is to give Hunter students
              that opportunity. Our plan is to introduce experiments which will allow
              students extended use of a state-of-the-art ICP spectrometer with the most
              advanced data collection capability. Students studying Physical Chemistry will
              have the opportunity to investigate the idea of temperature, one of the most
              fundamental concepts in science, in some depth. In addition to using modern
              instrumentation, they will be able to make use of current computer-based data
              reduction methods. Students in Analytical Chemistry courses will learn the
              capabilities and limitations of ICP-based analyses and be able to compare ICP
              methods to others. Their experience of analytical methodologies and modern
              equipment will be substantially extended.  Spectroscopy is a major area of
              chemistry, and atomic spectroscopic data are important components of regulatory
              and public health decisions. Adoption of the materials developed in the project
              will result in students who have a more realistic idea of modern chemistry, and
              who are better prepared for graduate training or available jobs in chemistry.
              Those who go on to teach will be better able to convey to their students the
              impact of chemistry on their lives.
