Title       : Integration of Phase Contrast and Fluorescence Microscopy into the Undergraduate
               Curriculum and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9851260

Award Number: 9851260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Sorger trs@alpha.rwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy M. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia F. Marston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Roger Williams College
	      Old Ferry Road
	      Bristol, RI  02809    401/255-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                In keeping with the overall direction of research in the life sciences,
              molecular approaches have been widely implemented in the biology curriculum at
              Roger Williams University. For example, students currently maintain mammalian
              cells, mollusc embryos and plant calli in culture. They generate and label
              antibody and nucleic acid probes in order to detect specific polypeptides,
              genes, and mRNAs in extracts from these cultures. At present, we lack the
              ability to undertake detailed examination of these cells by phase contrast
              microscopy or to localize specific polypeptides and nucleic acid sequences by
              epifluorescence. In order to address these needs, we propose to acquire a
              high-resolution inverted phase contrast/fluorescence microscope. Acquisition of
              this instrument will help our students to gain a better understanding of
              important concepts in biology including: (i) the relationship between the
              structure and function of cells and tissues, (ii) the generation of patterns in
              development. and (iii) evolutionary changes in populations. To enhance the
              teaching of these concepts, new experiments based on phase contrast/
              fluorescence microscopy will be incorporated into seven existing biology
              laboratory courses. The addition of phase contrast / fluorescence microscopy to
              the experimental strategies available to our students will increase the scope
              and depth of ongoing undergraduate research, and give students hands-on
              experience with techniques that have become indispensable in many areas of cell
              and molecular biology.
