Title       : Upgrade Materials Testing Lab to Materials Science Lab for an Industrial
               Technology-Based Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9851515

Award Number: 9851515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59083              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yury S. Lerner yury.lerner@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott C. Helzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammed F. Fahmy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa J. K. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project is integrating Materials Science into market-driven curriculum
              that is introductory in nature for undergraduate Manufacturing Technology and
              Electromechanical students, pre-service Technology Education teachers, and
              in-service Technology Education teachers in the State of Iowa.  The specific
              objectives of the project are to: 1. Upgrade the existing materials testing
              laboratory to reflect the current state of materials science in industry. 2.
              Integrate the fundamentals of Materials Science in lower-level courses for
              Technology Education (pre-service teachers), General Industry & Technology,
              Electromechanical Systems and Manufacturing Technology program majors. 3.
              Provide activity-based learning experiences in quantitative microstructural
              evaluation utilizing Image Analysis methodology, mass spectrometer and
              microhardness readings for chemical composition and mechanical properties
              testing of industrial materials in mid-level undergraduate courses. 4.
              Facilitate upper-level student research activities in materials testing and
              development. These objectives are being accomplished through the purchase of an
              Image Analysis System, a table-top optical emission spectrometer, retrofitting
              an existing universal testing machine, and purchasing a new microhardness
              tester.  As a result of this project, the faculty will be able to introduce
              Materials Science concepts earlier in the curriculum, offer improved laboratory
              experiences for pre-service technology teachers, develop industry-appropriate
              student research projects, and open new avenues for independent study projects
              requiring utilization of contemporary research techniques for mechanical and
              microstructural testing of industrial materials.
