Title       : Introduction of Advanced Instrumentation in Science Classes Primarily Serving
               Allied Health and Education Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1998      
File        : a9851077

Award Number: 9851077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roxanne H. Burns   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Fenk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to introduce the exciting modern techniques of
              biology and  chemistry to a non-science major student population. This group of
              students includes future health care workers and science teachers. The roles of
              these professions are changing as allied health paraprofessionals are asked to
              assume more responsibility for care giving and science teachers are held
              accountable for the science literacy of the nation. If we expect these students
              to meet these challenges, educators must look to providing high quality
              preparation. At Kent State University, East Liverpool Campus, we are changing
              to meet these new demands. The introduction of a strong core curriculum in the
              sciences for all of these students is in progress. We expect to provide
              experiences that, at most institutions, are reserved only for science majors.
              This proposal addresses the need for high quality instrumentation in
              laboratories to be used by these student populations. It takes an
              interdisciplinary approach melding biology and chemistry to enhance student
              understanding of fundamental levels of the organization of life, the cell and
              the molecule. In support of this goal, we require that further instrumentation
              be acquired. This proposal describes the need for fluorescent microscopy
              equipment with imaging capabilities, a medium pressure chromatography/gel
              filtration apparatus, and high performance liquid chromatography with mass
              analysis capabilities. Planned uses of this instrumentation to improve the
              science experience for allied health and education majors as well as science
              majors will focus on student laboratories. The laboratory activities will meet
              three criteria. First, they will reinforce lecture topics with direct
              experience. Second, their exploratory nature will promote critical thinking and
              encourage students to teach each other in a collaborative manner. Third, they
              will allow students to perform real experiments with the techniques of modern
              science laboratories. By following this plan, we expect t o dramatically
              enhance the undergraduate science experience at our campus.
