Title       : "An Integrated Approach to Instruction in Electrochemistry and Liquid
               Chromatography: A LabVIEW-Based Pulsed Amperometric Detection System"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9851571

Award Number: 9851571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark B. Jensen jensen@cord.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Concordia College Moorhead
	      901 South 8th Street
	      Moorhead, MN  565603532    218/299-4321

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Traditional courses in analytical chemistry typically devote a significant
              amount of time to the study of both electrochemical methods and analytical
              separations. While most students have little difficulty understanding and
              applying the basic principles of separation techniques, the fundamentals of
              electrochemistry tend to remain much more abstract. Unfortunately, most
              traditional electrochemistry laboratory exercises do little to make the subject
              come alive for the student. The laboratory project outlined in this proposal is
              designed to provide students with a dynamic interactive platform for
              instruction in electrochemistry and chromatography by focusing on the
              development of an electrochemical detection scheme for liquid chromatography
              (LC-EC). A four-week laboratory sequence emphasizing the development of an
              LC-EC method for carbohydrate determinations will be designed for our
              senior-level instrumental analysis course. (A one-week exercise based on
              applications of this method for quality control will be incorporated into our
              sophomore-level introductory analytical course.) At the heart of this project
              is a LabVIEW-based data acquisition interface. Each electrochemical experiment
              will be controlled by a LabVIEW program, commonly referred to as a virtual
              instrument, which gives students complete control of all electrode potential
              and timing parameters. After an initial focus on the fundamentals of cyclic
              voltammetry, the voltammetric behavior of glucose will be applied to the
              development of a detection scheme for carbohydrates in a flow-through system.
              Students will be led to discover that a pulsed potential sequence is needed in
              order to obtain a reproducible response. A multi-step potential waveform (E vs.
              t) will be developed to include both formation and dissolution of a surface
              oxide layer, allowing the student to visualize electrochemical processes at the
              molecular level. This waveform will then be applied to the quantitative
              determination of carbohydrates separated by anion-exchange li quid
              chromatography.
