Title       : Enhanced Science Education Through the Use of Modern FTNMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9851315

Award Number: 9851315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90004              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony L. Mega tmega@whitworth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Cherry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen A. Stevens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitworth College
	      300 W. Hawthorne Rd.
	      Spokane, WA  99251    509/777-3701

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project will enhance science education through innovative use of an FTNMR
              Spectrometer at Whitworth College. Education students and lower division
              science students will be enabled to more concretely grasp chemical principles
              through hands-on experience with this powerful technique. More sophisticated
              experiments will also be carried out by chemistry majors. A unique feature of
              the proposal is the emphasis on collaborative efforts between science faculty
              and education faculty. Prospective K-12 teachers and other students with
              relatively limited chemistry background will carry out NMR laboratory exercises
              geared to their level. In these experiments, students will identify common
              chemical structures and follow the course of a metabolic pathway through the
              use of FINMR. K-12 teachers will carry out similar experiments in summer
              workshops hosted jointly by Whitworth faculty in the science and education
              departments. Participants in the workshops will be encouraged to bring their
              students back to the campus for "laboratory field trips" focused on the NMR
              spectrometer which will be located prominantly within the newly remodeled Eric
              Johnston Science Center. Chemistry students will also benefit tremendously from
              the project. These students will be introduced to practical use of the
              spectrometer in their very first laboratory courses. They will use the
              spectrometer to identify reaction products generated in small quantities and to
              monitor the course of chemical reactions. Upper division chemistry students
              will gain the background necessary to carry out more. sophisticated
              experiments. They will identify stereoisomers of a coordination complex,
              analyze the intricacies of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction, and utilize
              multi-pulse lD and 2D NMR techniques to determine the structures of
              monoterpenes. Finally, the spectrometer will also stimulate faculty- directed
              undergraduate research projects.
