Title       : New Physics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9851177

Award Number: 9851177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Espinola tespinol@guilford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven S. Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rexford E. Adelberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Guilford College
	      5800 West Friendly Avenue
	      Greensboro, NC  274104108    919/292-5511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Guilford College Physics Department proposes to drive its upper-level
              curriculum with experiments in modern physics. The Department has been
              undergoing curriculum revision for several years beginning with its
              introductory courses and systematically moving through the entire physics
              sequence. The guiding principle underlying the revision is to better
              accommodate our students who, as a whole, have a wide spectrum of career goals
              and interests. Central to our new curriculum is the development of Portfolio
              Development courses with an emphasis on modern physics. By offering a
              substantial collection of Theory and Practice modules, students will have the
              opportunity to more effectively tune their education to their interests.
              Currently, our first-year course introduces our students to modern physics
              rather than to the more traditional topics of classical mechanics and
              electricity & magnetism which we instead begin during the second year. The
              second-year lab is designed to mirror the way that research in physics is
              actually done with students designing experiments, writing proposals giving
              conference-style talks and submitting papers in journal format. The physics
              major culminates in a required senior thesis. We have the necessary lab
              equipment to support the first and second year programs. However, due to a
              severe lack of working equipment, we do not have a viable experimental program
              to incorporate with 3rd- and 4th-year theoretical course work. We are proposing
              to create several main centers of study (e.g., atomic, nuclear, optical, low
              temperature solid state, etc.) all based on the LabView system. These centers
              will provide the back bone of our upper-level curriculum in modern physics .
              Within each of these centers, we will offer a substantial number of modules
              from which the students will select those that interest them. To complement
              these experiments, students will study the associated theoretical material
              either as part of an upper-level course or as a portfolio development course.
