Title       : A Collaboration Laboratory for Computer Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1998 
File        : a9851282

Award Number: 9851282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51600              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Sigle jsigle@pilot.lsus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Mitchell  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Louisiana State Shreveport
	      8515 Youree Drive
	      Shreveport, LA  711152301    318/797-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                LSU-Shreveport serves a commuting student body in the third most populous area
              of the state. This proposal seeks to initiate a significant step toward the
              University' s future in the support of distributed education--computer mediated
              collaboration over the Internet. The convergence of several technologies for
              supporting real-time collaboration over LAN and the Internet makes it possible
              to take this step now as part of a campus-wide plan. This proposal seeks to set
              up a cluster of multi-user NT servers which will host simultaneous two-way
              video conferences and video play-back services by which remote students will be
              able to collaborate with on-campus students and faculty.    The creation of the
              Campus Collaboration Network will influence the development of instruction
              across the campus and it will grow out of the teaching laboratories established
              by the Computer Science Department. While campus LAN connections will permit
              students to access a server or participate in a computer-based laboratory from
              appropriately configured computers anywhere on campus, the initial focus of the
              project will be the linking of two physically distanced rooms so that large
              section hands-on instruction can be accomplished. Lecturers will employ
              electronic white boards and other multimedia technology which will not only be
              transmitted to student computers but will be captured by the video servers for
              later review. Whatever can be done on campus can also be extended to remote
              locations with the same technology and the Internet. Local high school students
              or community college students will be able to take computer science courses
              from their school libraries with students being live participants in the class.
              With the adoption of commercial collaboration hardware and software standards
              and the growing employment of this technology around the state and the nation,
              students and faculty will be in position to collaborate in real time with
              others around the world, thereby enriching their educational experiences.
