Title       : Integrating Modern Coordinate Metrology into the Industrial and Manufacturing
               Systems Engineering Curriculum Through an Enhanced, Automated, and CAD-Directed
               Coordinate Measuring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9851082

Award Number: 9851082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64535              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwan-Ywan Lai glai@kettering.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Aylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura L. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Winston F. Erevelles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Coordinate Measuring Machines (CMMs) are one of the most powerful and widely
              used metrological instruments in the manufacturing industry. There is virtually
              no workplace whose dimensions cannot be measured with a properly equipped CMM.
              The objective of this proposal is to enhance an existing CMM in the Metrology
              laboratory by acquiring a Motorized Probe Head, an Automatic Probe Exchange
              System, an Analog Scanning Probe, and a Valisys CAD/CAM software package. The
              enhanced CMM system will allow for the integration of modern, automated, and
              CAD-directed coordinate metrology into the Industrial and Manufacturing Systems
              Engineering (IMSE) curriculum. It will directly impact students, with
              particular attention given to underrepresent groups, enrolled in the freshman
              course, IMSE-101 Manufacturing Processes, and upper level courses such as
              IMSE-384 Numerically Controlled (NC) Systems, IMSE-407 Polymer Processing, and
              IMSE-480 Computer Integrated Manufacturing (CIM) Systems. The tasks of the
              project are to (1) fully automate the CMM system to allow for flexible
              inspection and integration in a CAD/CAM/CIM environment, (2) electronically
              connect the CMM with NC, CIM, and Polymer Processing laboratories to allow for
              real-time inspection feedback to close the production loop of these processes
              via the Valisys software, and (3) establish a CAD-directed inspection system to
              allow for intelligent inspection through the CAD/CAM system to verify design,
              combine tolerancing with soft gaging, simulate inspection procedures, and
              integrate the CMM with emerging technologies such as reverse engineering, rapid
              prototyping, and rapid tooling. Several laboratory experiments have been
              planned and will be implemented in the aforementioned IMSE courses. The
              enhanced CMM system will also be used to develop a new course in metrology,
              geometric dimensioning & tolerancing, and quality. It will provide students
              with opportunities for conducting undergraduate research and independent study,
              and publishing theses and technica l papers.
