Title       : An Investigative Laboratory to Accompany a New Introductory Mixed-Majors Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9851458

Award Number: 9851458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald P. French dfrench@okway.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                In response to student need, faculty concerns, and the National Science
              Education Standards for pre-college education, OSU's life-sciences departments
              are restructuring their present introductory curriculum and creating a combined
              majors and non-majors course emphasizing collaboration and inquiry in both
              lecture and laboratory. This project will provide the equipment to make
              possible new and revised laboratories involving computer-assisted data
              collection and group report writing in each laboratory. To allow students time
              to design, conduct, and report on experiments during lab, we are extending our
              labs to three hours and creating pre- lab activities for students to conduct in
              our Learning Resources Center and on the WWW. Students will be presented with
              "scenarios" in lecture that will introduce concepts in the context of popular
              issues or current research conducted at OSU and guide students toward questions
              to be addressed in the laboratory. Students will learn to apply overarching
              concepts (e.g. surface-to- volume ratio, cost-benefit analysis) in multiple
              contexts involving different levels of organization and be expected to provide
              quantitative data to answer problems or test hypotheses. This process will
              allow students to discover rather than verify concepts. Students will use
              digital spectrophotometers and a variety of physical and chemical sensors to
              investigate problems at the cellular, organismal, population and ecosystem
              levels. Students will create digital-video-logs of investigations and engage in
              molecular genetics experiments for the first time. Students will share data and
              information using computer-data and video networks. This project builds on
              lessons from a previous ILI grant. Approximately 900 students will be affected
              each semester, including approximately 150 K- 12 education majors. We will
              examine the impact of this course using test scores, attitude surveys, direct
              observation of students, and interviews with students and faculty.
