Title       : Parallel and Distributed Computing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9851118

Award Number: 9851118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39197              (Estimated)
Investigator: P. K. Subramanian   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raj S. Pamula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Mathematics and Computer Science at California State
              University, Los Angeles, wishes to establish a parallel computing environment.
              This will be accomplished by connecting a SUN SPARC station (as the main
              server) to an existing laboratory of 25 IBM compatible microcomputers, all to
              be connected by a network. The SUN SPARC station is a multiprocessor computer
              initially with four processors, but can be upgraded to six processors. The
              server will be dedicated to the teaching of courses in parallel and distributed
              computing, using shared memory and message passing interface architectures.
              These architectures have emerged as the most viable of various parallel
              architectures. Parallel and Distributed processing is now recognized as an
              important area in computer sciences, enabling the solution of problems with
              hundreds of thousands of variables, hitherto considered impossible to solve in
              real time. At present we offer only an introductory course parallel computing
              with minimal computing facility. For most students, parallel and distributed
              programming concepts remain abstract and difficult to understand if lecture
              material is not followed by laboratory exercises that crystallize the concepts
              and help in successful assimilation of the material. The hardware and software
              to be bought will alleviate this problem. Additionally, with such a laboratory
              setup we will also be able to teach other courses in parallel computing in the
              future. The experience gained through this practical approach will not only be
              beneficial to computer science students but also attract students from other
              disciplines such as mathematics, physical sciences and engineering.
