Title       : Fluorescence Across the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9851660

Award Number: 9851660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34878              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Betts betts@kutztown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth A. Kroa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rudolph C. Mayrhofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kutztown University
	      
	      Kutztown, PA  19530    215/683-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Fluorescence spectroscopy is currently being used at the forefront of chemical
              research. Unfortunately, this technique has not received proportional exposure
              in the typical undergraduate chemistry curriculum. The primary objectives of
              this proposal are to increase the applicability of fluorescence in the
              curriculum, and prepare chemistry students to deal with more sophisticated
              chemical problems and techniques that are representative of current technology.
              In the process of addressing these issues. students will also be more prepared
              to participate in undergraduate research, and the probability that their
              research results will be publishable under current standards will increase.  A
              series of novel. fluorescence-based, laboratory experiments will be developed
              that will highlight fluorescence as a contemporary research method in
              environmental., analytical, physical and biochemistry courses. These laboratory
              exercises will gradually increase in complexity as students progress through
              the chemistry curriculum. The increasing complexity of fluorescence experiments
              implemented over a four year curriculum will force students to retain material
              from previous courses. Several of the experiments proposed are to: probe
              cyclodextrin host-guest complexation. follow the curing of epoxy, elucidate
              polymer dynamics, measure enzyme kinetics of aldehyde dehydrogenase in human
              saliva, and detect 0, by fabricating a fiber-optic sensor after repeatedly
              using an analytical technique over several years. students will be able to meet
              challenges that are not possible if they only have one or two chances to use
              it. Students will be provided with a means to master this techniques, rather
              than just be introduced to it. By spiraling fluorescence throughout the
              curriculum, students will be better prepared for undergraduate research.
              industrial positions, and graduate school.
