Title       : Instrumentation and Laboratory Enhancement in Biomedical Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9851052

Award Number: 9851052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19776              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fabrice Manns fmanns@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pascal Rol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Marie Parel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Milne  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                We are requesting funds to purchase instruments that will be used to improve
              our undergraduate biomedical optics laboratory and curriculum. Our overall
              objective is to develop a two-semester undergraduate laboratory course in
              optics and lasers emphasizing their applications in medicine to better train
              undergraduate students at solving practical design and engineering problems in
              biomedical optics. In addition to classical optical teaching experiments, the
              laboratory courses will include representative design problems in medical optic
              and laser applications, with an emphasis on medical laser and light delivery
              systems and laser-tissue interactions. The laboratory courses will serve as a
              practical yet instructional introduction to optics, fiber optics, lasers and
              their application in the medical sciences. The courses are intended for
              sophomore or junior undergraduate biomedical engineering students. By providing
              this introductory practical experience, we will be able to improve the content
              of two existing classes on biomedical optics currently offered to advanced
              undergraduate students. We expect that this project will improve the
              achievements of our undergraduate students later involved in design projects in
              biomedical optics and also serve as a model for undergraduate programs in
              biomedical optics currently being developed at other universities nationwide.
              The results of the project so be used to develop additional undergraduate
              teaching materials and exercises in biomedical optics that may be others
              outside of our institution.
