Title       : FVTC Natural Resource Technician - GIS/GPS Integration Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9851586

Award Number: 9851586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Cecka cecka@foxvalley.tec.wi.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rick Buser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Litwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Sedlar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Hannemann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fox Valley Technical Col
	      1825 North Bluemound Drive
	      Appleton, WI  549132277    414/735-5600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project integrates GIS/GPS technology across the curriculum of the Fox
              Valley Technical College (FVTC) Natural Resources Technician associate degree
              program. As a unique program in Wisconsin's two-year technical college system,
              FVTC educates over 200 students annually from throughout the State to work as
              technicians in areas such as soil conservation, environmental protection,
              wildlife management, and forestry preservation. Without GIS/GPS laboratory
              equipment, the Natural Resources program is at a continuous improvement
              stalemate - all meaningful curriculum development responding to occupational
              skill demand involves GIS/GPS technology. The most serious indicator of need is
              the fact that job placement of graduates has been negatively impacted due to
              lack of contemporary technology skills.     Project objectives focus upon staff
              development for the six program instructors to learn GIS/GPS technology for the
              development of laboratory learning activities in program courses including:
              Soil Conservation, Outdoor Recreation, Common Topics, and Surveying. Laboratory
              activities will include authentic data collection and analysis projects that
              provide environmental information for use by the Wisconsin Department of
              Natural Resources and other land use and conservation agencies.    
              Professional authenticity and relevancy of the curriculum will be evaluated by
              practitioners in a variety of natural resource occupations. The integrated
              curriculum will be shared with interested associate degree educators in
              collaboration with GIS/GPS vendors and related conferences. A Science Teacher
              Institute for K-12 teachers will enable GIS/GPS projects to be developed for
              elementary and secondary students.
