Title       : Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry: A Firm Foundation For Open-Ended Projects
               Throughout The Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9851183

Award Number: 9851183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22852              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erica Harvey elh@fscvax.wvnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry N. Baxter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Ruoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew J. Scanlon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairmont State College
	      Locust Avenue
	      Fairmont, WV  26554    304/367-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A computer-controlled gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (GC-MS) system with an
              autosampler and searchable library of mass spectral data is being used to
              provide a powerful tool for sample separations and analysis to support
              open-ended laboratory projects throughout the curriculum, including
              student/faculty research activities.  The department is committed to the
              inclusion of open-ended, hands-on laboratory projects at all curricular levels,
              culminating in a series of advanced courses in which students participate
              extensively in experimental design, instrument maintenance, methods development
              and even grant-writing.  Students have access to the GC-MS instrument from the
              earliest stages of their college careers. Upper-level students develop and
              refine methods to be used for open-ended laboratory experiments in the freshman
              and sophomore courses. Additionally, junior and senior level students carry out
              advanced open-ended projects of their own design that utilize and explore the
              full capabilities of a hyphenated separations-analysis instrument.  The
              institution has committed to funds for student travel to disseminate results
              from the project.
