Title       : Laboratory Improvement in Earthquake Engineering: A Modern Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9851198

Award Number: 9851198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39935              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley J. Dyke sdyke@seas.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The tragic consequences of recent seismic events have stressed the importance of
              understanding the dynamic behavior of civil engineering structures such as
              buildings and bridges. Structures which are not able to withstand such severe
              dynamic loads suffer tremendous damage, or even  complete collapse. This
              problem is of great social and economic importance, both in the U.S. and
              abroad. Recently developed techniques in structural control offer exciting
              opportunities to mitigate the effects of earthquakes. This technology has the
              potential to revolutionize earthquake engineering, especially in vulnerable
              existing buildings which are characteristically difficult and expensive to
              retrofit.             Currently civil engineering undergraduates are seldom
              provided with an understanding of the principles of structural dynamics or
              exposure to the innovative new structural control methods.  Thus, the primary
              objective of the educational plans described herein is to systematically
              integrate these topics into the civil engineering curriculum. The requested
              equipment will allow this objective to be met by 1) integrating a series of
              "hands-on" experiments in structural dynamics and control throughout the
              curriculum, and 2) offering opportunities for undergraduates to participate in
              ongoing research programs. Students will be expected to tie the theoretical
              concepts discussed in class to the experimental observations. The plans are
              designed to provide exposure to structural dynamics and control in the freshman
              year, and then expand this knowledge through the senior year. Additionally,
              experiments in passive and active structural control will allow undergraduates
              to further explore the implications of various design and mitigation
              strategies. Moreover, students  at all levels will learn the fundamentals of
              using modern equipment and instrumentation, including sensors, actuators, and
              data acquisition/analysis systems.
