Title       : Curricular Modules: 3D and Immersive Visualization Tools forLearning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9851136

Award Number: 9851136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46117              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bridget Baird bbbai@conncoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Loomis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea Wollensak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Many scientific principles are dynamic in nature but are commonly presented
              through static two-dimensional media such as textbooks and blackboards, leaving
              the students to make the connection between the two. In several science courses
              we are experimenting with the use of 3D animations to increase the students'
              understanding of these concepts. Early indications are that the students using
              these techniques have developed a much greater understanding of the concepts.
              With funds from this grant, we will expand the number of courses that use this
              approach and develop this method further by using immersion and virtual
              reality. We will accomplish this by bringing together students and faculty from
              different disciplines to the Center for Arts and Technology at Connecticut
              College to research, design, and implement new learning modules. These modules
              will present scientific concepts in a 3D, immersive environment for use in the
              classroom. Specific subjects for which we will develop modules include human
              physiology, graph theory, introductory physics, organic chemistry and
              biochemistry, cell biology, and math and science education in elementary
              schools.  Created by cross-disciplinary student and faculty teams, these
              modules will be developed with sophisticated graphics and clear information
              design in an innovative visual context. Each module will be presented in three
              forms: immersion in a virtual reality environment, a CD-ROM for a UNIX
              workstation, and a 3D Web version. We will test the pedagogical effectiveness
              of these modules in the classes for which they have been developed, and then
              disseminate them to the wider educational community.
