Title       : Multi-Modal GPS Technology in a Field-Based Geology Curriculum, Central
               Washington University and Heritage College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9851534

Award Number: 9851534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62205              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Meghan Miller meghan@cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A collaborative curriculum teams undergraduates at Central Washington
              University and Heritage College for training in a variety of Global Positioning
              System techniques as applied to critical regional problems in active tectonics.
              The centerpiece technology has broader applications, providing students with
              skills for research and the workplace. Field teams conduct air photo
              reconnaissance of the Toppenish Ridge anticline and its frontal fault, one of
              the most active structures in the Yakima fold belt with excellent geomorphic
              exposure. Teams select areas for detailed geomorphic mapping using differential
              GPS and conduct field studies. They also reoccupy an existing GPS geodetic
              network that forms a profile across the active structure; it has been occupied
              once in 1995, thus, the annual occupations by students will provide critical
              new constraints on this important structure. Finally, students provide
              geo-referencing for existing imagery using hand-held GPS. They present the
              results of these three inter-related projects on a GIS system, using imagery or
              air photos as a context for detailed geomorphic mapping and as a backdrop for
              an active fault map with a GPS determined velocity field.  Enhanced, innovative
              technical training and strengthening multiculturalism are the curricular goals.
              The project provides students with a broad base of GPS technical skills in a
              the context of student research in process-driven science. Undergraduate
              research fields expand to include those suitable to GPS technologies. Students
              will gain insight into observations and errors, and understanding of how those
              uncertainties propagate from observations to results. Finally, it seeds
              collaboration between CWU, a regional comprehensive university, and Heritage
              College, which serves a strong Native American and Hispanic constituency in
              central Washington. In addition, five other academic programs at CWU and
              Heritage will benefit from use of the equipment towards common technical goals.
