Title       : Infusing Technology into the Psychology Curriculum: A Model Laboratory to
               Promote Scientific Thinking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9851492

Award Number: 9851492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22621              (Estimated)
Investigator: Williams J. Lammers billl@mail.uca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elson M. Bihm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John l. Goswick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Arkansas
	      201 Donaghey Avenue
	      Conway, AR  720350001    501/450-3451

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The purpose of this project is to infuse technology into the psychology
              curriculum to   (1) develop scientific thinkers who use analytical thinking,
              critical thinking, collaborative thinking, and concept development,   (2)
              create an opportunity for students to conceptualize and conduct their own
              research, using the technological tools of scientists in the field of
              psychology, (3) create excitement and enthusiasm for the scientific process.   
               At the University of Central Arkansas, each psychology major takes a sequence
              of three courses that provide the scientific foundations for the field of
              psychology: Psychological Statistics; Experimental Psychology, and Experimental
              Psychology Laboratory. The proposed curriculum changes will involve active
              learning of the scientific process by making a research laboratory an integral
              part of each of these courses. Specific learning objectives include:   (1) 
              better understanding of the underlying theoretical constructs of statistics
              (through the use of visual-modeling software),  (2) analysis and data
              interpretation skills (using statistical software),   (3) skill in using
              software to graph and visualize results,   (4) understanding of the basic
              principles of research design,   (5) developing research ideas and hypotheses, 
               (6) conducting a literature search using digital technology,   (7)
              understanding classic research studies by using modem technology to replicate
              them,   (8) using software to program experiments and collect data, and   (9)
              methods of organizing and disseminating research findings (through the use of
              technology).     In other words, students will learn the scientific process by
              doing what scientific researchers are actually doing and by using the
              technological tools that are actually being used.
