Title       : Using Computers to Expand Reform Beyond Calculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9851405

Award Number: 9851405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34291              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Christine Stevens stevensc@slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael May  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell D. Blyth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project  is extending the pedagogical changes and appropriate use of
              technology that characterize calculus "reform" to courses in linear and
              abstract algebra, geometry, and computer science. The major focus is on
              proof-oriented courses in introductory linear algebra, abstract algebra, and
              advanced linear algebra, where the objective is to use technology to develop
              students'          intuition and conceptual understanding while supporting,
              rather than supplanting, an axiomatic treatment of the subject. Such a
              treatment is important for all mathematics majors, including future secondary
              school teachers, whose requirements for certification include a familiarity
              with abstract algebra and axiomatic systems. Instructional materials use a
              variety of software to foster visualization and illustrate the broad
              applicability of relevant theorems. In-class activities and student projects
              utilize specialty programs like Group Analyzer that are easy to use but of
              limited range, as well as more comprehensive software packages like GAP and
              Maple, which are designed for professional use but can be adapted for use by
              students who are still learning the mathematical concepts they involve. Some
              existing linear algebra materials known as ATLAST are being adapted to Maple.
              The project is also developing materials for teaching informal geometry to
              future elementary and middle school teachers. These materials use existing
              software packages to develop preservice teachers' understanding of the abstract
              concepts underlying the concrete activities that their students will be
              performing in precollege classrooms. The computer science course addressed by
              the project primarily serves students majoring in the sciences, engineering,
              and education. New pedagogical strategies are being incorporated, and new
              materials are giving students experience with large programming projects
              related to their major discipline.
