Title       : Rapid Prototyping in a Capstone Design Class
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9851495

Award Number: 9851495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15037              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ehud Kroll   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The objective of this project is to incorporate rapid prototyping technology
              into a mechanical engineering capstone design course. Rapid prototyping is a
              relatively new technology which allows producing physical models directly from
              computer-aided design files. Until recently, this technology was too expensive
              for small educational programs to afford. However, a paper-cutting and gluing
              process now allows the manufacture of reasonable parts at a very low cost. As
              opposed to using rapid prototyping for visualization only at a freshmen-level
              engineering graphics class, we will use this technology to enhance an advanced,
              senior-level design course in several ways. First, the design process
              implemented by the students while working on their projects will be augmented
              by physical models which can convey both function and form. Second, the
              students' perspective on design will be broadened by incorporating many
              life-cycles concerns early in the design process. Third, design communication
              will be vastly improved by the models, and finally, the students will acquire a
              sense of reality, responsibility, and excitement which can only be obtained by
              turning a paper- or computer-based design into a tangible product. The
              familiarity of students with rapid prototyping techniques is an important
              benefit too. Our program has strong ties to local industry, with about half of
              the students working full- or part-time while attending school. We shall
              explore the advantages offered by incorporating model-building in the capstone
              design class and disseminate the results so that other universities may benefit
              from them.
