Title       : Laboratory Techniques in Behavioral Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9851456

Award Number: 9851456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34490              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. McCoy jmccoy@ocean.st.usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Larsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project addresses the need for an interdisciplinary laboratory course to
              prepare students for graduate programs and careers in behavioral neuroscience.
              The course will give student majors from a number of different departments an
              opportunity to gain "hands-on" experience with both behavioral and
              neurophysiological techniques. The techniques will be taught by instructors
              from both the Department of Psychology and the Department of Biological
              Sciences. Laboratory exercises include computer simulations of single-cell
              electrophysiological recordings from the giant squid axon, computer-assisted
              tutorials in neuroanatomy, administration of drugs by peripheral routes,
              stereotaxic surgical procedures, and histological analysis.     The course will
              be offered as an elective targeted for a variety of life science majors.
              Videotaped laboratory procedures (developed and obtained as a consequence of
              this course), demonstrations, and computer software on structure-function
              relationships of the nervous system will improve several other psychology and
              biology courses.      The behavioral neuroscience laboratory supported by the
              equipment requested here will be utilized as both a teaching and research
              laboratory, with faculty research projects involving undergraduate assistants.
              To disseminate information to other four year undergraduate institutions, we
              will conduct workshops and student presentations at the state psychological
              association. Information will also be disseminated via poster presentation at
              the annual meetings of the Society for Neuroscience and via a Web page for
              undergraduates interested in behavioral neuroscience.
