Title       : Northern Arizona University Archaeology Program, Undergraduate Materials
               Analysis and Imaging Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9851101

Award Number: 9851101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33231              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelley A. Hays-Gilpin george.gumerman@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Gumerman IV  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Familiarity with current technology looms as a critical criterion for success
              in the job search of newly graduated archaeology B.A.s. The Department of
              Anthropology at Northern Arizona University proposes an Undergraduate Materials
              Analysis and Imaging Laboratory (UMAIL) for undergraduate anthropology student
              instruction and research in archaeology: The UMAIL will serve undergraduate
              anthropology majors as an interactive classroom and provide resources for
              undergraduate student research and independent study.     The lab also will
              help prepare pre-service K-12 teachers to incorporate anthropology exercises
              and examples in natural and social science lesson plans. In 1996, the
              Department of Anthropology re-structured the Bachelor's Degree program into one
              of the most demanding undergraduate programs in the nation. The new curriculum
              revolves around a series of core laboratory courses that provide undergraduate
              students with intensive, well-rounded, hands-on laboratory training in the four
              fields of anthropology: archaeology, socio-cultural anthropology, biological
              anthropology, and linguistic anthropology.     NAU's archaeology laboratories
              contain extensive comparative collections of prehistoric artifacts and ecofacts
              for student use. The lack of laboratory equipment, however, looms as a barrier
              to learning and use of collections. We propose to outfit our undergraduate
              teaching laboratory with up-to-date microscopes and graphics imaging equipment.
              UMAIL will provide hands-on science laboratory experience to as many students
              as possible through our new curriculum, special seminars and workshops, and
              training sessions for students associated with the Navajo Nation Archaeology
              Department and Hopi Cultural Preservation Office. The goal of this plan is to
              graduate anthropology B.A.s with scientific professional skills and experience
              necessary to compete in today's job market.
