Title       : GPS/GIS/Image Analysis Technology for Field Research in Biology and
               Environmental Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9851507

Award Number: 9851507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Buckley Buckley@Maine.Maine.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah A. Sloane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Barton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Maine Farmington
	      224 Main Street
	      Farmington, ME  049381911    207/778-3501

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Funding is requested for global positioning system (GPS), geographical
              information system (GIS), and image analysis technology for student use in
              field oriented courses in biology and environmental science. This technology
              will be incorporated into a number of courses that all require a variety of
              spatial analysis applications (e.g., lake bathymetry, habitat analysis,
              endangered species distribution mapping, lichen community dynamics, landscape
              analysis of old growth forest, and avian bioenergetics). The overall objective
              of this project is to foster problem solving skills, critical thinking, and a
              richer appreciation for the scientific process by involving all science and
              science-education majors in real-world, field research problems, rather than
              contrived classroom "studies." The natural attraction that students exhibit
              toward field research will be encouraged through the combination of
              state-of-the-art, computer interfaced technology and hands-on examination of
              ecological problems that were previously logistically difficult or technically
              impossible using available alternative methods. Students will engage in both
              course-related and independent field research projects, which will be original
              and/or applied, and may last for a semester, several semesters, or a number of
              years and involve several cohorts of students. Student involvement in all
              phases of research will be reflected in greatly increased student authorship of
              publications and project reports for local organizations and governmental
              agencies. Thus, it is expected that the addition of the GPS/GISrlmage analysis
              technology will enhance our field oriented courses and independent student
              research opportunities, and it will provide effective and highly visible tools
              for the science faculty to increase student motivation and interest in careers
              in science and science teaching.
