Title       : Laboratories in Biomolecular and Cellular Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9851346

Award Number: 9851346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74780              (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Truskey gtruskey@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Stimulated by advances in molecular and cellular biology, a new and evolving
              research activity within biomedical engineering is the application of
              engineering at the bimolecular, cellular and tissue levels. The overall goal of
              this research is to produce natural or modified therapeutic biomolecules and
              the design of hybrid tissues and organs. As a result of the importance of this
              developing activity, the objective of this proposal is to integrate
              biomolecular, cellular and tissue  engineering into the undergraduate
              curriculum. We propose to achieve this objective by modifying and expanding the
              laboratory component of three required courses in biomedical engineering and
              two electives and to provide increased opportunities for independent study
              coursework in this area.  Laboratory projects will complement class material by
              directly demonstrating fundamental concepts and illustrating relevant
              biomedical examples and applications of the material using modern
              instrumentation and techniques. This equipment will also be available for use
              in undergraduate independent study research. Matching funds will be provided by
              the School of Engineering and the Department of Biomedical Engineering at Duke
              University. Additionally, one  of the Co-investigators will work to increase
              the presence of underrepresented groups in independent study research.
              Co-investigators on this project teach the courses which will be revised and
              supervise independent study research by undergraduates in bimolecular, cellular
              and tissue engineering.
