Title       : Modern Manufacturing Capability for the Engineering Projects in Community
               Service (EPICS) Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9851200

Award Number: 9851200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Jones jonesjd@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Coyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leah H. Jamieson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Davies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering Projects in Community Service (EPICS) is a program in which teams of
              students earn academic credit for long-term projects that solve engineering
              problems for local community service organizations. The EPICS program is
              distinguished from many traditional engineering design courses in several
              important ways:    1. It is a large team experience (typically 10-12 students
              per team).    2. It is cross-disciplinary: a single team may include students
              from up to three engineering disciplines as well as, in the case of two current
              teams, Sociology students.    3. It is multilevel: teams are a mix sophomores,
              juniors and seniors, with plans to include freshmen starting in the Spring 199~
              semester.    4. It is a long-term design experience: a student participates for
              several semesters, so problems of significant scope can be tackled.    5. It
              pairs each team with a local community agency as a real customer.    6. It
              involves students in a true define-design-build-test-deploy-support experience.
                 EPICS projects involve diverse technologies including digital electronics,
              electromechanical systems, computer aided design and manufacturing,
              manufacturing processes, composites, rapid prototyping technologies, energy
              management systems, human-computer interfaces, computer networks, and wireless
              communication.  This proposal requests $55,000 from NSF (with $55,000 in
              matching funds from Purdue) to help develop a modern manufacturing facility for
              the EPICS program. The goal is to enable student teams to fully implement and
              test their designs. The proposed computer numerical controlled (CNC) lathe and
              CNC mill would allow students to learn modern computer controlled manufacturing
              techniques and provide hands-on experience with state-of-the-art manufacturing
              equipment.  The addition of a modern manufacturing capability is essential to
              the continued development of EPICS as a multidisciplinary program. It will
              further enable the program to become a national model of how community and
              customer awareness an d skills in communication teamwork, leadership, project
              management, and system design can be taught to engineering undergraduates.
