Title       : Inquiry-Based Science Experiences for Pre-Service Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9851394

Award Number: 9851394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46836              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon J. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Henrik Kibak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia G. Trumpbour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Monterey Bay Fdn
	      100 Campus Drive
	      Seaside, CA  939558001    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The National Science Education Standards (NRC, 1995) recommend that science
              courses should foster curiosity and critical thinking. Students should be
              guided to USE scientific knowledge and ideas in extended scientific inquiry to
              answer their own questions. Within that pedagogical framework, students need to
              master the fundamental concepts and processes of life, physical, and earth
              sciences and should understand the role of science and technology in society.
              The overall objective of this project is to provide a series of learning
              experiences that fully  engage the curiosity and enthusiasm of future K-8
              teachers while they develop the ability to  understand and use scientific
              knowledge and concepts to answer questions. An additional goal is  to help
              students discover that math is essential to accurately describe what they see,
              hear, or  measure.  To help future K-8 teachers understand scientific concepts
              and processes and develop critical  thinking skills, all of our classroom, lab,
              and field activities involve student participation and  shared responsibility
              for the specific questions to be addressed. Computers and interactive  software
              will be used to help students answer "what if" questions about things they
              cannot see  easily, such as atomic structure, chemical bonding, genetics' and
              some aspects of cell biology.  Computer software will also provide alternate
              modes of self-assessment to foster student  understanding. Most importantly, we
              have developed a series of lab/field research modules that  1) are rich in
              disciplinary and interdisciplinary subject matter content;  2) can be adapted
              "on the spot to address whatever questions students formulate;  3) use
              instrumentation of varying sophistication;  4) require mathematics to describe
              data;  5) help students appreciate the scientific process and the relation
              between technology, science,     and society.
