Title       : Enhancement of Psychobiology and Animal Learning Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9851131

Award Number: 9851131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23308              (Estimated)
Investigator: Iver H. Iversen iiversen@unf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Eisler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Florida
	      4567 St Johns Bluff Rd S
	      Jacksonville, FL  322242646    904/646-2666

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project plans to enhance undergraduate laboratory instruction in
              Psychobiology and Animal Learning. The project seeks to improve the competence
              of students in using modern computer technologies as research tools, and to
              expand opportunities for hands-on learning and independent research by students
              using computer-based teaching technology. This will be accomplished by
              establishing two interrelated laboratories.     A new Psychobiology laboratory
              will enable students to conduct research covering a broad array of integrative
              brain-behavior questions using contemporary methodology. Planned experiments
              include examination of vertebrate neuroanatomy, the behavioral effects of
              direct alterations of central nervous system activity through brain lesions,
              drug administration, and electrical brain stimulation, and development of
              computerized behavioral recording and analysis techniques.     This project
              also includes a substantial upgrading of our Animal Learning laboratory through
              modernization of operant equipment and computers. This will permit greater
              student exposure to diverse experimental designs, and will promote development
              of skills using state-of-the-art computer-based research technology including
              programming of computerized data collection procedures. Planned experiments
              include standard operant conditioning experiments such as shaping, schedules of
              reinforcement, and discrimination with emphasis on observational techniques and
              data analysis.     Together, these laboratory improvements will expand the
              current curriculum by providing the equipment necessary for the desired level
              of scholarship thus contributing to efforts toward preparing students for the
              increasing technical and intellectual challenges that they will encounter in
              the future. Furthermore, the enhancement of the current curriculum will attract
              talented students to careers in science and will promote science literacy in
              general among Psychology majors.
