Title       : A Computer Lab For an Integrated, Introductory Mathematics and Computer Science
               Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9851349

Award Number: 9851349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47997              (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Ruch mth dkr@shsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Klespis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory D. Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sam Houston St University
	      P O Box 2026
	      Huntsville, TX  773412026    713/294-1111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This two-year project will develop and implement a 6-hour integrated,
              introductory college course in mathematics and computer science. Conducted in a
              PC laboratory setting, this course will be activity driven, with the professor
              as facilitator rather than knowledge dispenser and  lecturer. The course will
              teach teamwork and communication skills, and a sense of scientific inquiry
              through student projects and lab activities. Students will develop computer
              software  skills and judgment in using them within a context of mathematical
              content and problem  solving to increase their quantitative literacy. The
              course will customize and extend exemplary introductory courses in mathematics
              and computer science  5 , and adapt successful curricular  reform principles
              used by the PIs in calculus and other courses.   Freshman students from
              mathematically weak and technologically disadvantaged backgrounds will be
              encouraged to take this course, giving them a "jumpstart" in their collegiate
              experience. In particular, the Mathematical and Information Sciences Department
              will work with the Sam Houston State University cluster program for at-risk
              students.  The project will be evaluated on the basis of student retention,
              attitudes, and success in subsequent computer science, mathematics and science
              courses. Comparisons with the current general education classes in mathematics
              and computer science will be made.  The project materials and evaluation will
              be disseminated through a series of conference presentations, publications, and
              web sites.
