Title       : A Technology Transitions Lab for Pre-Service Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9851412

Award Number: 9851412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54394              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Teitloff tteitlof@ksumail.kennesaw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marian C. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela J. Drummond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anita S. Vanbrackle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara W. Ferguson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kennesaw State University
	      1000 Chastain Road
	      Kennesaw, GA  301445591    404/429-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is addressing the need for teachers of K-12 mathematics to make
              appropriate choices in the use of technology. The typical mathematics course,
              however, most often solves each problem with a single type of technology, thus
              depriving pre-service teachers of an opportunity to analyze the pros and cons
              of different technologies. This is a serious omission, but Kennesaw State is
              seeking a solution by establishing a Transitions Laboratory -- a classroom
              where pre-service teachers can make the transitions between different
              technologies quickly and efficiently  and thus become better prepared to make
              technological choices later. Prospective teachers in the Transitions Laboratory
              are using different technologies within the context of the same problem, then
              comparing and discussing what each technology brings to it. The laboratory is
              equipped with a wide array of manipulatives, four different types of
              calculators, laptop computers, and Internet access.  It serves eight
              mathematics methods and content courses ranging from the early childhood to the
              secondary mathematics level. A set of five to ten transitions modules are being
              developed for each of these courses. Focusing on a single concept or problem,
              each transitions module prompts the students to perform a series of
              mathematical investigations while using a range of  different technologies.
              Students write a report comparing and contrasting the advantages and
              disadvantages of each technology and saying which technology they would choose
              if they were the teacher. By exposing the prospective teachers to a wide range
              of technologies and then asking them to critically analyze their experiences,
              the Transitions Laboratory is producing teachers with the competence and
              confidence to make appropriate use of technology in mathematics instruction.
