Title       : Developing Visual and Auditory Experiments for a Perception Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9851199

Award Number: 9851199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22962              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh J. Foley hfoley@skidmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Ann Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidmore College
	      815 North Broadway
	      Saratoga Springs, NY  12866    518/580-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Our department is convinced that students will learn more about the science of
              psychology if they can enroll in a greater number of  laboratory-based courses
              than the two we currently offer.  We also believe that increased laboratory
              experiences will provide our students with more active involvement in
              substantive areas of the discipline, which should lead to increased mastery of
              the material they are learning.             To accomplish these goals, we are
              interested in adding computer-driven laboratory components to several courses,
              beginning with the perception course. In order to do so, over the next eighteen
              months we will develop a set of twelve computerized visual and auditory
              laboratory exercises. These exercises will serve as the core of the laboratory
              component of the perception course, which will change from a 3-credit
              non-laboratory course to a 4-credit laboratory course.             Because of
              the increased student demand on our undergraduate computer facility that will
              be created by the laboratories and because of the computer-intensive nature of
              some of the laboratory exercises, we need to increase the number and power of
              the computers to which students have access. In addition to the perception
              course, the improved facility will support the laboratory component of the
              experimental psychology course and allow us to add laboratory components to the
              statistics courses and the cognition course in the near future. Students would
              continue to use the facility for statistical analyses in a range of courses.   
                       We believe that many faculty who teach perception would be able to
              make use of the exercises that we develop--even if their courses do not have a
              specific laboratory component.  We will announce the availability of these
              exercises in several places, including TIPS (the Teaching in Psychological
              Science list serve) and use the World Wide Web and various electronic media to
              disseminate the laboratory exercises that we develop.
