Title       : Establishment of a Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics Laboratory at the
               University of Wisconsin - La Crosse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9851544

Award Number: 9851544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott T. Cooper cooper@mail.uwlax.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Abler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin La Crosse
	      1725 State Street
	      La Crosse, WI  546013742    608/785-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The current trend towards a more mechanistic or molecular understanding of
              living systems has unified many diverse fields of biology. Because of this, all
              biology majors now need to be aware of advances that previously were only
              taught in advanced genetics and molecular biology courses. In response to this
              need, the Department of Biology and Microbiology at the University of
              Wisconsin-La Crosse is incorporating new exercises into the laboratories of to
              two required courses, Genetics and Cell Biology. In addition we have created a
              new track for biology majors in Cellular and Molecular Biology. Finally, the
              department approved the remodeling of a herbarium into a modern Cell Biology
              and Molecular Genetics Laboratory for undergraduate instruction. The  equipment
              supplied by this award is being used in the courses taught in the Cell Biology
              and Molecular Genetics Laboratory. These include the laboratory sections of
              Genetics and Cell Biology as well as two electives, Molecular Biology and Plant
              Growth and Development. The improvements in these courses are giving all
              biology majors experience in many of the most current technologies used in
              research and industry today. These include cloning, tissue culture, molecular
              diagnostics, and the expression of recombinant proteins. In addition, students
              are now able to perform experiments on topics that were previously only covered
              in lecture, such as developmental biology, cellular differentiation and RFLP
              analysis. The equipment is dramatically reforming core courses which serve over
              400 students a year.
