Title       : Integrating Mathematics and Science Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9851309

Award Number: 9851309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21674              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara E. Reynolds ber@stritch.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel P. Meer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susmita Acharya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cardinal Stritch Univ
	      6801 N Yates Road
	      Milwaukee, WI  532173945    414/410-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project has five components:    It will coordinate the development of
              mathematics concepts in college algebra and calculus courses with the schedule
              of laboratory experiments and theoretical components in chemistry, physics, and
              biology courses so that students are more likely to understand the
              interdisciplinary connections.    It will provide data-collection &
              data-analysis stations near the chemistry, physics, and biology laboratories so
              that students can perform more experiments in these courses; this equipment
              will be compatible with computing equipment in a math-science classroom
              computer lab to facilitate coordination between the mathematics and science
              courses.    It will establish a math-science classroom computer lab reserved
              exclusively for targeted mathematics and science courses to give students in
              these courses better access to computing facilities.    It will develop a
              course, "Applied Mathematics in the Natural Sciences," which will be both
              cross-listed with other departments (Mathematics, Chemistry, Biology, Physics)
              and team-taught by faculty from the Mathematics, Chemistry, and Biology
              Departments. This sophomore-level course will give students experience in
              designing and conducting an experiment, collecting data, doing appropriate
              mathematical analysis of their data, then re-designing and  up-dating the
              experiment based on initial results, and finally drawing conclusions. We will
              explore the possibility of publishing the lab manual for this new course, and
              disseminating it to a national audience.      This project will form the basis
              for developing a Minor in "Mathematics for Science Majors," to encourage
              Chemistry and Biology majors to strengthen their mathematical preparation by
              taking additional mathematics courses.    As a result of this project, we
              expect that both science and mathematics majors will have a deeper
              understanding of the connections between mathematics and the natural sciences.
              Science majors will learn to use mathematics as an important tool in their s
              cientific investigations and, because of this, will take additional courses in
              mathematics.  We also expect the number of majors graduating in Chemistry,
              Biology, and/or Mathematics to increase because we have been able to retain
              more students who come to our University interested in these majors, and
              because we have attracted more undecided first-year students and non-majors to
              consider a major in one of these fields.
