Title       : Computer-Mediated Instruction in the Undergraduate Curriculum to Enhance
               Ethnographic Cultural Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9851120

Award Number: 9851120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Parman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lori K. Sheeran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The purpose of the project is to provide computer equipment that will support
              the integration of computer-mediated instruction in the undergraduate
              curriculum in anthropology to enhance ethnographic cultural analysis. Serving a
              large multicultural student body on a commuter campus, the department seeks to
              make "culture" a construct more accessible; to support "virtual" fieldwork
              experience and opportunities to formulate and test hypotheses about culture; to
              help students learn how to record observations and analyze them using web based
              instructional examples that train students in the use of qualitative and
              quantitative programs; and to support opportunities for increased communication
              and collaboration in an electronic environment. The request is for 30 computer
              workstations with three twelve-port 100 MB switches. one Windows NT server, and
              two networked printers to equip an Ethnography Computer Lab that will a)
              provide access to computer programs (including Ethnograph, NUD.IST, and
              Anthropac), databases (the electronic version of the cross-cultural database of
              primary ethnographic materials, the Human Relations Area Files, called eHRAF),
              and instructional modules relevant to ethnographic cultural analysis; and b)
              provide networking opportunities (e-mail and web-based chat rooms) that meet
              the needs of commuter students and support the development of collaborative
              projects in the undergraduate learning environment. The infrastructure for a
              fully networked computer lab was made possible by an ARI (Facilities
              Modernization) grant.
