Title       : Equipment for Investigative Laboratories in Animal Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9851206

Award Number: 9851206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30776              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Janik janikds@uwec.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project will substantially bolster the investigative component of three
              courses in the Biology Department at the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire:
              Animal Biology (Biology 102), Human Anatomy and Physiology (Biology 303) and
              Animal Physiology (Biology 317). In Biology 102 students will be introduced to
              sensory physiology in the context of an investigative experience. Several
              conventional laboratory exercises will be enhanced by the proposed equipment in
              Biology 303. In Biology 317 the equipment will be used for two laboratory
              modules- one examining neural function and the other examining muscular
              function. Each module will last several weeks, starting with an introduction to
              the equipment and some of the basic phenomena and principles. In subsequent
              weeks, the modules will progress to an exploratory phase in which students will
              either probe the biological preparation or research the biological literature
              to develop hypotheses about some aspect of the preparation's function. Students
              will then prepare written proposals that will incorporate experimental
              protocols to test their hypotheses, along with some background information from
              the biological literature and a plan to evaluate their data. They will then
              perform their experiments and write reports in the form of a scientific paper.
              The equipment will not only provide students the opportunity to explore
              important, and well-studied, principles in animal function in a hands-on
              fashion, but also involve them in the scientific enterprise by allowing them to
              explore biological phenomena at a level that is beyond the scope of their text
              book. Through their participation in these investigative labs, students will
              use and develop various skills that are important not only in science, but
              other areas as well. They will develop writing skills, quantitative reasoning
              using plotting and statistical inference, problem solving, and gain confidence
              in their ability to address complex problems in science and deal with
              sophisticated instrumentation.
