Title       : Computing-Enhanced Experiential Learning in the IntroductoryStatistics Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9851559

Award Number: 9851559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann R. Cannon acannon@cornell-iowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tony J. deLaubenfels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell College
	      
	      Mount Vernon, IA  52314    319/895-8811

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project enhances our popular introductory statistics courses. We plan to
              increase participatory learning activities for students and better incorporate
              student use of computer-based tools that are pervasive in the practice of
              statistics. The college's innovative One-Course-At-A-Time (OCAAT) academic
              schedule provides a flexible setting for developing and implementing the
              proposed project.    We are equipping a statistics classroom with one computer
              for each two students and one computer for the course instructor, each supplied
              with appropriate statistical software. More than just a computer lab, the use
              of computer-based statistical software will be thoroughly integrated into our
              statistics courses, especially through use in exploratory data analysis class
              activities. Seven to nine statistics course sections will be offered each year
              in the computerized statistics classroom. This will enhance the learning of
              statistics for over 150 students annually. Over half of Cornell
              students--social science students, future teachers, natural science students,
              and other liberal arts students--will benefit from the improved instruction
              during their academic careers.    During the first year of the project we will
              establish and equip the classroom; modify our introductory statistics courses
              by increasing student use of software tools in data analysis and incorporating
              hands-on activities (designed and tested elsewhere) into classroom instruction;
              begin using statistical software in examinations; and publish on-line course
              materials on our Web site. During the second year of the project we will
              develop our own activities and fine tune the integration of technology into
              course work and examinations. When the project is complete, we will have
              developed a model introductory statistics course for a liberal arts college.
              The results of our work will be of special interest to schools that offer
              introductory statistics courses in a condensed format, including summer school,
              workshops, and on-line courses.
