Title       : Improvement of Computing Facilities for Undergraduate Education in the Marine
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9851243

Award Number: 9851243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29793              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn L. Van Alstyne kathyva@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian L. Bingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne L. Strom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Sulkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gisele Muller-Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Western Washington University (WWU), with support from NSF, serves a broad
              undergraduate audience through the Shannon Point Marine Center (SPMC) and its
              marine science curriculum. At present, this includes 1) WWU science majors who
              may pursue graduate education; 2) community college students who are assessing
              their interest in pursuing marine science as a major; and 3) advanced
              undergraduates participating in SPMC National undergraduate Marine Education
              Center (NUMEC) programs. NUMEC allows students from around the United States to
              study at a marine center within the context of their on-going undergraduate
              programs at their home institutions.  All of our programs provide
              undergraduates with unique opportunities to become educated in the most recent
              concepts in marine science, to be trained in state-of-the-art techniques used
              in marine research, and to engage in supervised, independent research. A
              critical component of this training absent at SPMC is instruction in the use of
              sophisticated data analysis and presentation techniques. We are requesting
              funding for computer equipment needed to establish a local area network (LAN)
              at SPMC that would be linked to mainframe computers at WWU. We are also
              requesting 6 new personal computers dedicated to student use that would allow
              us to incorporate training in state-of-the-art data analysis and presentation
              techniques in our NUMEC programs. The new computer network also would
              facilitate communications between remotely located students and faculty and
              allow SPMC to produce and use World Wide Web based materials in our teaching
              and for community outreach projects.
