Title       : Computation and Visualization for Astronomy and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1998       
File        : a9851012

Award Number: 9851012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin D. Weinberg weinberg@owl.astro.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal S. Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric V. Linder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Physics and Astronomy of the University of Massachusetts at
              Amherst, together with the Five College Astronomy Department, are currently
              engaging in an initiative to modernize the undergraduate curriculum and ensure
              that students obtain training fundamental to entering a wide variety of careers
              in the industrial and academic sectors. The keystone of this initiative is the
              integration of computational physics and astronomy elements and skills into all
              levels of the undergraduate program, both for the widely subscribed service
              courses in physics and astronomy and the required courses for majors. Students
              will be exposed to the roles and techniques of scientific computation and
              visualization throughout their undergraduate experience from interactive
              laboratory demonstrations and homework assignments on the introductory levels
              to data interfaces and numerical simulations in the advanced courses.  To
              enable full realization of these objectives we are creating a physics and
              astronomy student computation and visualization laboratory. The equipment 
              allows computational laboratory projects to become an integral feature of the
              courses, offers students a solid introduction to the types of computational
              problem solving and data analysis used daily in modern scientific and
              technological projects, and enables hands on experience in high performance and
              parallel computing and graphical visualization. Students learn physics through
              multiple methods (verbal mathematical, graphical, observational) and are able
              to engage in active exploration through multiple environments (text, equations,
              static and animated graphics, and simulations of conditions, experiments, and
              observations). A key product of this program is the generation and export of
              laboratory and lesson project modules for the national educational community.
