Title       : Seeing is Believing: Unification of Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1998      
File        : a9851242

Award Number: 9851242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37846              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Malcolm Campbell macampbell@davidson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Kimmel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda C. McNally  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Williamson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia C. Peroni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Davidson College
	      #6 Jackson Ct.
	      Davidson, NC  280357149    704/894-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The objective of this proposal is to enable the Davidson College Biology
              Department to implement its new mission and vision statements (see appendix V)
              and to unify the cell and molecular curriculum. Students will use phase
              contrast microscopes to make quantitative measurements, design experiments with
              appropriate controls, interpret and communicate their results. This "hands-on"
              approach will extend to non-majors laboratory courses (a graduation requirement
              for all students) as well. Furthermore, students will conduct independent
              research with the microscopes and image analysis equipment allowing them a more
              realistic experience to learn the unknown by conducting experiments. The
              unification of the curriculum is based upon using isocitrate dehydrogenase
              (IDH) as a model enzyme in all cell and molecular laboratory courses. This
              unification will enable students to see how different approaches to a common
              protein can extract different kinds of information. For example, where and when
              is IDH expressed in a developing embryo? To answer this question, students will
              use phase contrast microscopy and image analysis to measure the expression of
              IDH as determined by the formation of a colored product. This will be
              integrated with experiments in introductory biology, genetics, and biochemistry
              so students can see the synergy between disciplines that students often think
              of as separate and unrelated--"seeing is believing." In addition, the unifying
              concept has initiated several collaborations among faculty to develop new
              investigatory labs. The immediate impact will be on students who take these
              courses and begin to see biology as a continuum of knowledge that is
              interrelated. The long-term impact will be on other biology departments which
              can use our innovations to unify their curricula too. The ultimate outcome will
              be a population of students who learn by doing experiments that are exciting
              and informative and which reveal an understanding of biology that is larger
              than can be provided by individual c ourses
