Title       : Technology Center for Teacher Preparation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9851342

Award Number: 9851342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Schovanec schov@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Gilliam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Presently, in the State of Texas, less than fifty percent of mathematics
              instructors at the  secondary level are board certified. This is one reason the
              Department of Mathematics at  Texas Tech University regards teacher preparation
              as a critical part of its teaching mission.  Over the past several years the
              department has developed a rigorous program to address  the mathematics content
              needs of all preservice elementary and secondary teachers. One of  the
              important objectives of this program is to familiarize prospective K-12
              teachers with the  technology that is relevant to mathematics instruction at
              their particular grade level.     This project is enabling the department to
              establish a PC multi-media laboratory. With our current facilities students are
              not able to access any instructional materials on CD-ROM format or those that
              utilize a combination of audiovisual features. Furthermore, the Unix
              environment of our current laboratory does not allow students to develop the
              technological skills required in the teaching profession. The laboratory will
              provide a consistency in the technological training that will enhance the
              relevance of our teacher preparation program. With the new facility, the
              curriculum will be enhanced by the introduction of additional technology that
              is relevant to the educational experience in K-12. For example, Geometer's
              SketchPad, or Cabri Geometry will be incorporated into the teacher preparation
              curriculum.      Beyond its impact on the existing program, the multi-media
              laboratory will significantly enhance the department's ability to develop
              cooperative programs with local public schools. Teachers from area schools will
              be invited to demonstrate technology that they use in their classrooms. In
              addition, there will be a series of workshops for inservice teachers. In these
              workshops teachers and students will view, evaluate, and compare various
              software appropriate to their instructional needs. This experience will not
              only benefit the participants, but will guide our  department as modifications
              of the content and structure of our teacher preparation program are made.
