Title       : Innovative Table Top Classroom Demonstrations and Lab Experiments for Courses in
               Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9851063

Award Number: 9851063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15704              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Lambert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project describes a suite of experiments for improving experiential
              learning opportunities for students in thermodynamics and heat transfer
              courses. The courses in question are not only offered for mechanical (ME) and
              aerospace (AE) engineering students, the traditional audience, but also for
              electrical (EE) and computer (CMPE) engineering majors. This is in response to
              the growing need for more integrated inter-disciplinary engineering education
              to prepare undergraduates for systems engineering approaches to problem
              solving.  Some of the proposed experiments are intended for the traditional
              delivery mechanism, i.e., a formal laboratory. Other facilities are suited to
              demonstrations in classroom lecture settings, a proven method for boosting
              student interest in a topic. All of the apparatus described herein provide
              students with physical insights into abstract topics, such as heat, which is
              invisible.  Nearly all of the experiments are to be constructed by senior
              mechanical engineering majors. There are several benefits afforded by this
              plan. First, over the two year course of the project, the students constructing
              the apparatus will gain invaluable design experience and practical know-how.
              Second, future students will be provided access to state of the art, innovative
              experiments that are superior in many respects to commercially available
              facilities. Third, the ME Department will save a considerable amount of money
              in re-equipping the ME 114 laboratory. Fourth, the designs, manuals, and
              software resultant from this project can be disseminated nationally to assist
              other engineering schools in developing relatively inexpensive, innovative,
              interesting experiments and demonstrations in thermodynamics and heat transfer.
