Title       : Improvement of the Chemistry Curriculum and Undergraduate Research with Energy
               Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9851311

Award Number: 9851311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42675              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Benvenuto benvenma@udmercy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian P. Buffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The University of Detroit Mercy serves a diverse student body, is committed to
              excellence in undergraduate education, and has recognized the need for constant
              improvement of undergraduate laboratory instruction with well thought out,
              relevant experiments and state-of-the-art instrumentation. The Department of
              Chemistry will acquire an energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometer, to
              be integrated into the General and Analytical undergraduate laboratory
              curricula. A detailed plan for this integration is set forth. The Department is
              implementing research-based projects in teaching laboratories that will impact
              several undergraduate courses, including the general chemistry laboratory
              routinely taken by freshman students who will go on to science and engineering
              majors and careers. These experiments are interdisciplinary in nature,
              connecting chemistry and archaeology, as well as chemistry and the materials
              science of metals (which is well suited to the Detroit area, home of the
              nation's automobile industry). This new spectrometer will increase
              significantly the department's ability to train its undergraduate students, a
              large percentage of whom are women and minorities, in modem analytical
              techniques that are attractive to employers. Addition of this instrument to the
              undergraduate laboratories will attract more students into the undergraduate
              labs, and expose those students to the use and understanding of a powerful
              analytical tool.
