Title       : Integration of Investigative Molecular Biology Laboratory Exercises into the
               Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9851221

Award Number: 9851221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34591              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Runge stever@mail.uca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Arkansas
	      201 Donaghey Avenue
	      Conway, AR  720350001    501/450-3451

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A major deficiency in many undergraduate science courses is the lack of
              inquiry-based laboratory exercises. Students typically are inundated with vast
              quantities of information and learn how to carry out specific techniques in the
              laboratory, but learn very little about the process of science. Historically,
              molecular biology has received little attention in the Biology Department
              curriculum at UCA. To improve this situation, a molecular biology teaching
              program will be implemented as opposed to a stand alone molecular biology
              course. In doing so, molecular biology will be integrated into our curriculum
              in such a way that experiences in advanced courses will build upon concepts and
              techniques learned in previous courses. Biology majors, health science majors,
              and pre-service biology teachers will perform inquiry-based molecular biology
              experiments in two lower division courses. The exercises are designed to
              facilitate learning of fundamental concepts and investigative techniques such
              as pipetting and elecerophoresis in the freshman course that lead directly into
              a simple cloning and plasmid mapping project to be performed in the sophomore
              level genetics course. Biology majors will build upon these experiences in a
              senior level Experimental Molecular Biology course with a laboratory designed
              as a semester-long, discovery-based gene cloning project. Pre-service biology
              teachers will use concepts and techniques that they have learned to develop
              "take home" molecular biology laboratory exercises to be used in their
              secondary level classrooms. An emphasis will be placed on hypothesis
              formulation, independent learning, and analytical thinking at all levels.
              Acquired equipment will also be used by students conducting undergraduate
              research projects. The proposed project will allow students seeking a variety
              of careers to experience the excitement of observation and discovery.
              Descriptions and evaluation of these curriculum innovations will be
              disseminated through publication in educational journals, d evelopment of a
              laboratory manual, and posting on the World Wide Web.
