Title       : Mathematics Computer Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9851196

Award Number: 9851196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 15,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31267              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon Axler axler@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Meredith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to improve the calculus sequence at San Francisco
              State University by making modern symbolic and numeric calculation an integral
              part of the course.  Our Mathematics Department is committed to including
              mathematical computing as part of  calculus. We propose to revamp our calculus
              sequence so that student use of Mathematica becomes a key part of the course. 
              However, the present computing facilities of the Mathematics Department are not
              capable of supporting most modern mathematical software. Thus we propose to
              re-equip our computing  facility with new computers that can run Mathematica. 
              Our philosophy for using Mathematica in calculus is that the existence of such
              software changes what and how we teach. For example, knowing how to integrate a
              rational function by using the partial fraction decomposition is no longer a
              marketable skill because Mathematica can perform the calculation with ease.
              However, understanding what an integral is and knowing  which integration to
              perform is more important than ever now that huge computational power is
              available. Thus we envision shifting the calculus course away from algorithmic
              skills and toward more problem solving, more applications, and a deeper
              understanding of the objects being manipulated.          Mathematica will allow
              us to drop some training in computations that are better performed by machines
              than by people. With the time freed by dropping a few such topics, we expect to
              spend more time emphasizing the key ideas and applications of calculus. Thus
              the use of Mathematica will make our calculus course more demanding, not
              easier. In return, we expect  to produce students who can use their calculus
              (and Mathematica) skills in other courses and in their professional lives.
