Title       : A Decision Tool for Post-Earthquake Transportation Opera- tions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1990     
File        : a9005042

Award Number: 9005042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Anderson                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Siamak A. Ardekani ardekani@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A lesson learned time and again from major                                     
              urban earthquakes is that the management and                                   
              operation of transportation facilities play                                    
              significant roles in the overall earthquake                                    
              preparedness, response, and recovery.  The                                     
              scope of this study is to extract lessons                                      
              from the October 17, 1989 San Francisco                                        
              earthquake in terms of the transportation                                      
              needs encountered and actions taken.  The                                      
              data obtained will be integrated into a                                        
              microcomputer-based decision tool with                                         
              capabilities in graphical network editing and                                  
              zooming, traffic control and diversion                                         
              strategies, and mass transit resource                                          
              management and operations.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Similar studies following the 1985 Mexico                                      
              City earthquake have led to the development                                    
              of TEDSS, the Transportation Emergency                                         
              Decision Support System.  TEDSS fulfills a                                     
              number of crucial transportation needs                                         
              pertinent to Mexico City conditions.  These                                    
              include real-time network editing                                              
              capabilities, emergency vehicle dispatch, and                                  
              street clean-up prioritization.  The recent                                    
              San Francisco experience has shown                                             
              intermediate needs such as route diversions,                                   
              response to modified travel patterns, and                                      
              changes in transit demand and routes to also                                   
              be highly significant in recovery efforts and                                  
              return to normalcy.  These functions will be                                   
              added to TEDSS making it more adaptable to                                     
              the U.S. needs and conditions while other                                      
              TEDSS functions unsuitable to U.S. conditions                                  
              are deleted.  In the course of modifying                                       
              TEDSS, efficient data structures, graphics                                     
              modules, heuristics algorithms, and a higher                                   
              order programming language will be employed                                    
              to increase the software speed and capacity                                    
              to handle larger regional street networks.
