Title       : Characterization of Ubiquitin Pathway in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1992      
File        : a9005062

Award Number: 9005062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy Callis jcallis@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Post-translational modifications of proteins regulate                          
              important physiological and biochemical processes.  One such                   
              modification is the covalent attachment of the protein                         
              ubiquitin.  Only a small subset of the roles of ubiquitin-                     
              protein conjugation has been characterized in eukaryotes.                      
              Ubiquitin's most well-studied role is as a reusable tag                        
              marking proteins for proteolysis.  In plants, it has been                      
              found attached to the photoreceptor phytochrome and the coat                   
              protein of Tobacco Mosaic Virus.  The purpose of this                          
              research is to explore the function of ubiquitin in                            
              physiological processes in higher plants.  The biochemical                     
              analysis examines the subcellular localization of ubiquitin-                   
              protein conjugates in Arabidopsis.  The molecular analyses of                  
              ubiquitin gene expression in higher plants involve 1)                          
              isolation of the remaining member(s) of the ubiquitin                          
              extension gene family from Arabidopsis, 2) determination of                    
              the regulation of expression of different members of the                       
              ubiquitin extension gene family and 3) definition of the                       
              promoter regions for the ubiquitin extension genes by                          
              deletion analysis and site-directed mutagenesis and re-                        
              introduction into plants.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Ubiquitin is a protein that is widely distributed in plant,                    
              animal, yeast and bacterial cells.  It is one of the most                      
              highly conserved proteins known, having only three amino acid                  
              differences between the human and higher plant protein.  It                    
              serves a number of important biological roles in the cell,                     
              the most fully characterized being its role in marking                         
              proteins for breakdown, especially abnormal proteins.                          
              Current understanding of the regulation of the ubiquitin                       
              pathway is rudimentary.  Therefore, the goal of these studies                  
              is to provide fundamental information on the regulation of                     
              the ubiquitin pathway and the regulation of their genes in                     
              higher plants.***
