Title       : Structure and Function of the Arabidopsis thaliana Phytochrome Photoreceptor
               Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1993      
File        : a9005897

Award Number: 9005897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Sharrock sharrock@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,9145,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal addresses the question of how the light cues                     
              that control plant physiological and developmental processes                   
              are perceived.  Currently, the only plant regulatory                           
              photoreceptor that has been isolated is the red/far red                        
              light-responsive chromoprotein phytochrome.  Preliminary                       
              studies show that three to five divergent phytochrome                          
              apoproteins are encoded by a phy gene family in Arabidopsis                    
              thaliana and that similar phy gene families are present in                     
              many, perhaps all, flowering plants.  It is proposed that in                   
              vivo attachment of a light-absorbing chromophore to the phy                    
              polypeptides generates a multi-component red/far red-sensing                   
              photoreceptor system.  The goals of this project are to:  1)                   
              determine the sequences of all of the A. thaliana                              
              phytochromes from phy gene and cDNA clones, 2) analyze the                     
              regulation and localization of the phy mRNAs, and 3) assign                    
              functions in photoregulation of plant growth and reproduction                  
              to specific phytochromes by analyzing A. thaliana                              
              photomorphogenic mutants.  This investigation addresses                        
              fundamental questions concerning the complexity of plant                       
              photoreceptor systems and the mechanism of the initial steps                   
              of plant light perception.                                                     
                                                                                             
              A large number of plant cellular and developmental processes                   
              including gene expression, growth rate, cellular                               
              differentation, and timing of reproduction are responsive to                   
              the light  environment.  Physiological experiments indicate                    
              that there are at least three major pigment systems active in                  
              perception of light cues, one of which is the red/far red                      
              light-responsive pigment known as photoreceptor phytochrome.                   
              Biochemical and immunological studies suggest that there is                    
              more than one form of phytochrome.  Since no specific                          
              physiological function has been assigned to any of the                         
              phytochromes, it is clearly possible that each carries out a                   
              specific role in light perception.  Up to this time, however,                  
              it has been very difficult to identify unambigously these                      
              individual pigment proteins and determine their functions.                     
              The isolation of DNA clones corresponding to these proteins                    
              and the development of specific molecular probes to                            
              distinguish among them will lead to rapid advances in this                     
              field and a better understanding of their role in plant                        
              growth and development.*** //
