Title       : Regulation of Fatty Acid Synthesis in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1993    
File        : a9005290

Award Number: 9005290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Ohlrogge ohlrogge@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha A. Post-Beittenmiller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Fatty acid synthesis is required for several diverse roles in                  
              plants including an essential housekeeping function in the                     
              synthesis of membranes in every cell, and specialized                          
              developmental and organ-specific functions in the production                   
              of seed storage oils and surface protective waxes.  The long                   
              term goal of this project is to understand how plants                          
              regulate fatty acid biosynthesis at both biochemical and gene                  
              expression levels to meet these diverse roles.  This research                  
              provides information on three fronts:  1. Identification of                    
              the rate determining/regulatory steps which provide short                      
              term control over rates of fatty acid synthesis.  2.                           
              Examination of the structure, organization and regulation of                   
              fatty acid synthase (FAS) genes is to be done using acyl                       
              carrier protein (ACP) as a model.  3. Evaluation will be made                  
              of the possible physiological role of multiple ACP isoforms                    
              by over-expression of their genes and antisense inhibition of                  
              their expression in transgenic plants.                                         
                                                                                             
              In addition to their major role in the structure and function                  
              of all cell membranes, plant fats represent a vast renewable                   
              resource.  Annual world production of plant oils is                            
              approximately 60 million metric tons with a value of more                      
              than $20 billion.  In the U.S., about two-thirds of all plant                  
              oil is consumed by humans and animals.  In the American diet,                  
              plant oils have gradually tended to replace animal fats and                    
              now accout for 15-20% of total calories consumed.  In                          
              addition, plant oils are employed in the manufacture of a                      
              range of specialty products including lubricants, plastics                     
              and detergents.  Despite the major economic and nutritional                    
              significance of plant fats, there has been comparatively                       
              little research into the regulation of their biosynthesis.                     
              This research investigates the expression of certain genes                     
              required for fat synthesis by plants as well as points of                      
              metabolic control in one specific case.***//
