Title       : Holocene and Modern Geomorphic Response to Wildfires and Climate Change in
               Northeastern Yellowstone National Park
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1990       
File        : a9005058

Award Number: 9005058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Wells   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
              The extensive 1988 Greater Yellowstone Area (GYA) fires constitute             
              a landscape disturbance of rare magnitude, and one with important              
              ecological, geomorphic, and climatic implications.  In order to                
              provide a longer-term perspective on this event, we propose to                 
              investigate the history of Holocene sedimentation in northeastern              
              Yellowstone, using actualistic study of modern fire-related and                
              prefire sedimentation as a guide for interpretation of the                     
              stratigraphic record.  A detailed, highly datable record of                    
              Holocene fire-related sedimentation events is preserved in alluvial            
              and colluvial deposits of the Soda Butte Creek drainage.  Initial              
              radiocarbon dating of these events suggests a link with times of               
              Holocene climatic change.  Comparison of the timing of fire-related            
              events with paleobotanical and climate proxy records can elucidate             
              the relative importance of changing vegetation and hydrological                
              regime, wildfire effects, and intrinsic thresholds in this                     
              geomorphic system.  We will also examine historical records of                 
              meteorological and regional atmospheric conditions associated with             
              both extensive fires and large hydrological events in the GYA, and             
              attempt to develop analogs for climate associated with fire-related            
              sedimentation.  This research will help to assess the short-term               
              geomorphic response to the 1988 GYA fires, as well as indicate                 
              possible consequences of potential global warming and climatic                 
              change for landscape stability in the GYA ecosystem.
