Title       : X-Ray Crystallography of PvuII Endonuclease and Its Complexes with DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1992      
File        : a9005579

Award Number: 9005579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Anderson proposes to use X-ray crystallography to                          
              determine the three-dimensional structure of the restriction                   
              endonuclease R-PvuII from two crystal forms of the free                        
              enzyme already in hand that diffract X-rays to 2.5 A.  He                      
              will collect data, and then screen a number of heavy atom                      
              reagents to find several isomorphous derivative crystals.                      
              Derivative data will be used in multiple isomorphous                           
              replacement or with other published techniques to calculate                    
              phases and produce an initial electron density map.                            
              Conventional methods will be used to fit a model of R-PvuII                    
              into the map and to refine the structure.  Cocrystals of                       
              R-Pvull will be grown with oligodeoxynucleotides carrying its                  
              recognition site, to solve the structure of the protein-DNA                    
              complex.  Dr. Anderson will crystallize and determine the                      
              structure of catalytic and binding mutants of R-PvuII,                         
              provided by the collaborators, both in the presence and the                    
              absence of DNA.  The proposed work will permit a detailed                      
              study of the structure-function relationship of R-PvuII, and                   
              will contribute significantly to the understanding of                          
              R-PvuII, of restriction enzymes, and of protein-DNA                            
              interactions.
