Title       : Isotopic Studies of Late Paleozoic Cyclical Sedimentary Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1990      
File        : a9005030

Award Number: 9005030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ethan L. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Yancey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
                   Research objectives are the development of a detailed and                 
              semi-continuous isotopic record for the late Paleozoic Era and                 
              the testing of its accuracy, and 2) the application of isotope                 
              stratigraphy to paleoenvironmental analysis with the specific                  
              goal of determining the origin of late Paleozoic cyclical                      
              sedimentary deposits.  These two objectives are inseparable since              
              understanding the depositional environment is vital for                        
              interpreting the isotopic record.  The study employs stringent                 
              measures to avoid sampling diagenetically altered material.                    
              Brachiopod shells are separated from shale matrix, embedded in                 
              epoxy, and thin-sectioned.  Photographs of these thin sections                 
              are taken under cathodoluminescence and plane light, and used as               
              a map to sample non-luminescent calcite from the thin section                  
              with a dental pick.  Electron microprobe elemental analysis of                 
              select shells is used to confirm the use of cathodoluminescence                
              to identify altered shell.  The study will concentrate on a                    
              limited number of brachiopod species, thereby minimizing or                    
              eliminating biological effects on isotopic composition.                        
              Sedimentological and paleontological data will also been                       
              collected, providing independent evidence for paleoenvironmental               
              change.  PIs will analyze brachiopods from late Pennsylvanian                  
              deposits in New Mexico, Oklahoma, Kansas and Missouri to examine               
              lateral variations in isotopic composition 1) to test the                      
              possibility of using 13C to correlate strata and 2) to define                  
              lateral and temporal gradients in ocean paleotemperature and                   
              chemistry.  PIs will also extend the isotope stratigraphy of the               
              late Paleozoic in Texas to examine paleoenvironmental changes in               
              the epicontinental seas of Texas and to provide a detailed and                 
              accurate isotope stratigraphy which can be used as the standard                
              for other studies of stable isotopes in late Paleozoic fossils.                
              Project will apply innovative techniques to analysis of global                 
              environmental change in a period of earth history much like                    
              today's.  Analyses of global change in this time of climatic                   
              change may reveal information about the causes, rates and                      
              consequences of climate change.
