Title       : Directory Services for a Nationwide Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1990    
File        : a9005028

Award Number: 9005028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Priscilla Jane Huston                   
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42423              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research concerns the problem of discovering,                        
              identifying and locating resources in a nationwide network.  The               
              research is based on two fundamental tenets.  The first is that                
              users should be able to identify a resource with a set of                      
              attributes or properties that describe the resource.  For                      
              example, rather than having to know the name or address of a                   
              processor, the user should be able to state that he or she wants               
              a processor that has a particular architecture, runs a certain                 
              operating system, supports a given software package, and is                    
              reachable via a specific communication protocol.  It should be                 
              the naming system's responsibility to locate a resource that                   
              matches such a description.  The second tenet is that the naming               
              system for a nationwide network will be highly decentralized.                  
              The primary reason for this decentralization is not the problem                
              of scale so much as the problem of autonomy.  Such a network is                
              expected to consist of a collection of autonomous systems, each                
              of which is responsible for managing and naming its own                        
              resources.  For example, the National Research and Education                   
              Network spans thousands of autonomous organizations.  The naming               
              system for such a network probably will be decentralized                       
              proportionally.The researchers are investigating methods for                   
              identifying resources with a set of attributes, and exploring                  
              techniques for searching a large, high decentralized name space.               
              This effort is based on their experience designing and using two               
              experimental naming systems:  Profile and Univers.
