Title       : Control of Breeding Cycles: Integration of Environmental Cues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9005081

Award Number: 9005081
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Wingfield jwingfie@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Vertebrates have diverse reproductive cycles spanning continua from            
              brief to prolonged breeding seasons, and from precisely timed to               
              opportunistic reproductive periods.  Variations in the timing of               
              gonadal maturation and onset of breeding require that individuals of a         
              population or species adjust secretion of reproductive hormones in             
              response to environmental signals.  Dr. Wingfield proposes to develop          
              a mathematical model to describe the type of breeding cycle for a given        
              population.  Of particular interest are the degrees of constancy and           
              contingency within a particular breeding cycle.  The more constancy            
              within a cycle (e.g. the environment is in a state conducive to                
              breeding most of the time), then less environmental information is             
              required to regulate secretion of reproductive hormones and thus               
              optimize breeding.  As contingency in the cycle increases (e.g. the            
              environment shows major changes in suitability for breeding within a           
              year), more environmental cues are required to time onset of breeding.         
              The PI has chosen several avian species, with varying degrees of               
              constancy and contingency in their reproductive cycles, as tests of            
              this model.  The responses of each species to environmental signals            
              known to influence reproductive function (e.g. annual change in                
              daylength, temperature, availability of food) will be tested.  Their           
              effects on gonadal development, and secretion of reproductive hormones         
              will be measured.  Ultimately, the effects of these environmental cues         
              on gene expression for hormones within the brain, that act as a link           
              between the environmental and internal processes, will also be                 
              determined.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The proposed research is designed to explore the possibility of a              
              unifying theory that can be used to predict how all vertebrates (and           
              perhaps all organisms) integrate signals from the environment in order         
              to optimize reproduction.  It may also be possible to use this model           
              for processes other than reproduction (e.g. migration, growth etc.)            
              The research will provide new insight into the mechanisms by which             
              environmental signals are transduced into internal processes (such as          
              hormone secretion) that regulate reproductive function.  This may have         
              considerable impact on our knowledge of reproduction in general, and           
              could provide a firm base for approaching problems of how to breed and         
              protect endangered species and populations.
