Title       : Mesoscale Motions Over the Plains from MST Radar Observations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1993   
File        : a9005979

Award Number: 9005979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243458             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory D. Nastrom nastrom@stcloudstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Cloud State University
	      740 Fourth Avenue South
	      St. Cloud, MN  56301    320/255-2122

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The object of this research is to investigate the                         
              application of observations from MST/ST radars to aspects of                   
              mesoscale circulation.  In particular, observations from the                   
              Flatland radar located near Champaign, Illinois, will be used to               
              explore three issues.  The first issue is that there is a need                 
              for better understanding of the relationship between the space                 
              and time scales of vertical motions, especially relating to the                
              interpretation of measurements of vertical motions by ST radars                
              and the synoptic or sub-synoptic scale circulation.  Coupled with              
              this issue is a need to identify the source of the apparent                    
              downward bias in measured vertical velocities.  Second,                        
              measurements taken with a five-beam configuration are now                      
              available and will be used to study gravity waves.  Case studies               
              and statistical summaries of features such as the vertical flux                
              of horizontal momentum will be used to characterize the source                 
              mechanisms of mesoscale motions and the effects of varying                     
              background weather conditions.  Also, they will help interpret                 
              the variance spectrum of horizontal motions.  Third, the data                  
              from Flatland will be combined with other mesoscale observing                  
              systems located nearby, such as the microbarograph array operated              
              by NOAA and the Urbana ST radar, to provide physical insights of               
              mesoscale processes not possible with a single radar.//
