Title       : Characterization of the Involvement of the Osmotin Gene in Adaptation to NaCl by
               Glycophytes and Halophytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1992      
File        : a9005216

Award Number: 9005216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ray A. Bressan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Cellular adaptation to high salinity by plant cells can be reversible,         
              indicating that the regulated expression of specific genes is                  
              controlling this adaptation.  The osmotin gene is one of the most              
              thoroughly studied genes that have altered expression during exposure          
              of adaptation to NaCl.  The overall objective of this research is to           
              better characterize the structure and function of the osmotin gene.            
              Gene transfer studies will be used to determine the specific                   
              physiological role of osmotin in adaptation to NaCl.  Molecular                
              techniques will also be used to examine the regulatory structure of the        
              osmotin gene to determine the mechanisms that control its expression           
              under natural conditions.  Specifically, cis-acting DNA sequences and a        
              transacting factor will be examined.                                           
                                                                                             
              Salinity stress is an important constraint on agricultural production,         
              particularly in irrigated systems.  The long term goal of this research        
              is to understand the basic mechanisms involved in the process of               
              cellular adaptation to salt by examining specific genes expressed              
              during adaptation.  Understanding of the regulatory properties of such         
              genes will eventually lead to understanding how to manipulate salt             
              tolerance in plants, including important crop species.
