Title       : Transmetalations Mediated By Organocopper Reagents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9005758

Award Number: 9005758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259291             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce H. Lipshutz lipshutz@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              This research is being funded by the Organic Synthesis Program.                
              Dr. Lipshutz will continue his very productive studies of                      
              organometallic reagents based upon complexes of copper.  These                 
              have the potential for producing highly selective synthetic                    
              tools that can be used in the synthesis of the reactive                        
              molecules that are found in nature.                                            
                                                                                             
              This research describes, in part, a number of new synthetic                    
              methods which take advantage of the efficiency and mildness of                 
              higher order cuprate-based transmetalation processes of                        
              organotin compounds.  Tolerance to a variety of functional                     
              groups within the stannane precursor itself will be studied,                   
              looking to form highly functionalized cuprates.  Allylic                       
              reagents are to be examined with respect to substitutions at                   
              both tetrahedral and trigonal centers.  Moreover, cyclic                       
              allylic stannanes are considered, as is the chemistry of allyl                 
              cuprates in the presence of carbon monoxide en route to direct                 
              1,4-acylations of alpha,beta-unsaturated ketones.                              
                                                                                             
              As part of a program in polyene construction, new lynchpins                    
              will be developed which will take advantage of site-selective                  
              transmetalations made possible by differences in relative rates                
              between vinylstannanes.  Applications to synthetic problems in                 
              the leukotriene and pheromone areas will be pointed out.  The                  
              possibility of using oxidative "decomposition" of higher order                 
              cuprates, in a synthetic sense, to effect biaryl couplings will                
              also be studied.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The last portion of the research involves spectroscopic                        
              investigations of several species.  One concerns the nature of                 
              the new reagent derived from CuI/LiCl/Bu3SnH, believed to be                   
              (X)HCuLi.  Another will be an in-depth study of Yamamoto's                     
              reagent.
