Title       : Prehispanic Chiefdoms in the Valle de la Plata, Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9005883

Award Number: 9005883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25232              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Robert                  
              Drennan has conducted wide-scale archaeological site survey and                
              limited test excavations in the Valle de la Plata which is                     
              located in the Alto Magdalena region of Colombia.  This area is                
              particularly famous for the remarkable corpus of sculpture                     
              attributed to the "San Agustin culture."  These                                
              characteristically are associated with stone tombs and include                 
              grinning human faces with feline fangs and larger than life-size               
              human figures.  Because these materials were usually recovered                 
              through looting, their original context is often unknown.  In the              
              course of his research, Dr. Drennan has traced the rise of San                 
              Agustin culture from the first millennium B.C., through ca. 700                
              A.D. when production of statues and tombs reaches a peak, and                  
              into a later period when variation in burial custom indicates                  
              marked status variation.  Through this process he is able to                   
              trace the rise of social differentiation and the development of a              
              large-scale chiefly society.                                                   
                                                                                             
              In his current project, Dr. Drennan will continue this work.  He               
              will analyze ceramics collected, expand a soil study to determine              
              agricultural potential, analyze the relationship between                       
              settlement distribution and agricultural resources, date                       
              radiocarbon samples, and identify carbonized plant remains.                    
              Through this work he will gain increased insight into chronology               
              as well as the settlement and subsistence practices of this                    
              prehistoric group.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  Archaeologists                
              who work in Middle and South America are extremely interested in               
              the data which Dr. Drennan will produce.  The results will                     
              increase our understanding of how social complexity develops and               
              chiefdom level societies arise and are maintained.  Finally,                   
              because it includes graduate students, this research will aid in               
              the training of young scientists.
