Title       : Mechanism of Transcriptional Enchancers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9005253

Award Number: 9005253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marietta Dunaway dunaway@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Transcriptional enhancers are a crucial element in eukaryotic                  
              gene expression, yet their mechanism of action is largely                      
              unknown.  The Xenopus rRNA enhancer is an excellent system in                  
              which to probe enhancer mechanism because it can be easily                     
              assayed by injection into oocytes and appears to require only                  
              a small number of proteins for its activity.  When the rRNA                    
              enhancer and promoter are located in trans on the opposite                     
              rings of a multiply-intertwined dimeric catenane, the enhancer                 
              augments transcription.  This result strongly suggests that                    
              enhancers work by looping, and this approach can be used to                    
              further test enhancer mechanism and to better understand                       
              transcription mechanisms.  To test the importance of catenane                  
              structure in trans activation, gyrase network of the promoter                  
              and enhancer, which consist of single interlinks in essentially                
              all combinations, will be prepared and assayed for enhancer                    
              activity.  The importance of enhancer topology will be tested                  
              by linearizing the enhancer after transcriptional activation.                  
              The kinetics of transcription complex formation will be                        
              examined by oocyte injection.  Oligonucleotide-directed triple                 
              helix formation will be tested for its usefulness as a tool in                 
              dissecting transcriptional mechanisms.  The mechanisms of                      
              enhancer action and transcription  of RNA polymerase II genes                  
              in Xenopus oocytes and embryos will be investigated by defining                
              the regulatory sequences of oocyte-specific genes and testing                  
              trans activation of an embryonic enhancer. In a complementary                  
              approach, the interaction of the transcription factor THIS with                
              both the promoter and enhancer will be characterized in more                   
              detail.  The DNasel footprint of THIS suggests that the DNA                    
              wraps around the protein.  This hypothesis will be tested by                   
              determining whether a change in the linking number of a plasmid                
              containing  THIS binding site in the circular permutation                      
              assay.  Enhancer mutants that have changes either in spacing                   
              between sites or promoter THIS binding sites substitution for                  
              enhancer sites will be assayed for transcription.  The                         
              importance of primary sequences and DNA structure in THIS                      
              binding and bending will be explored by combining DMS                          
              protection and interference, ethylation interference and                       
              bending studies with site directed mutagenesis of the THIS                     
              binding sites.  the polypeptides copurifying with THIS activity                
              will be characterized in more detail.
