Title       : Endogenous Electrical Current and Neural Crest Cell Migration in Chick Embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9005176

Award Number: 9005176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The aim of the work described in this proposal is to test                      
              directly the hypothesis that an endogenous electrical field in                 
              the chick embryo acts to guide lumbo-sacral neural crest cells                 
              to their targets in the hind gut. Dr. Robinson will do this by                 
              manipulating the endogenous field during the period of crest cell              
              migration. This field, which is the result of a large current                  
              that leaves the posterior intestinal portal, will be altered by                
              shunting the current which generates it through wounds created in              
              the integument, or by voltage clamping the embryonic                           
              transepithelial potential, thus eliminating or reversing the                   
              endogenous field. The fluorescent dye DiI will be used to trace                
              the neural crest cells during their migration. Dr. Robinson will               
              also do a light and electron microscopy study of tail gut                      
              degeneration in the chick in order to establish that this process              
              is responsible for the currents he detects leaving the posterior               
              intestinal portal. The in vitro effects of an applied electrical               
              field on the proposed endogenous field target cells will also be               
              examined. He will extend his vibrating probe observations to                   
              mouse embryos, particularly some of the mutants that are                       
              available, in order to determine if changes in any of the                      
              endogenous current parameters are indicative of specific                       
              abnormalities. The information gained from these experiments will              
              add substantially to our knowledge of how migratory cells are                  
              guided during development.
