Title       : Endocrine Regulation of Gonadal Function by Lymphocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1992     
File        : a9005182

Award Number: 9005182
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265838             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry G. Kasson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Interactions between the immune and endocrine systems were first               
              postulated nearly a century ago.  Investigations of the interactions           
              between these two important biological systems were sporadic over the          
              next nine decades; however, within the last few years, scientist have          
              begun to realize the importance of these two systems, and their                
              interactions, in maintaining normal body functions and combating               
              disease states.  Dr. Kasson has recently identified a new protein              
              produced by white blood cells of the immune system which communicates          
              important stimulatory information to the reproduction endocrine                
              system.  He thinks that this protein may represent an important factor         
              in immune-endocrine communication and have proposed studies to                 
              investigate the nature and functions of this protein.  Initially he            
              will define the nature and structure of the protein and identify any           
              similarities between this protein and other known proteins.  Latter            
              studies will investigate how this protein interacts with cells of the          
              reproductive system and how it elicits responses in reproductive cells.        
              These studies will provide new information on how the immune endocrine         
              systems communicate and may uncover new insights into how defects in           
              these pathways produce disease states.  A better understanding of the          
              interactions between these two important biological regulatory systems         
              may lead to new therapies to treat disease states involving deficits           
              in immune-endocrine regulation (i.e. autoimmune diseases, diabetes,            
              hyperthyroidism, infertility, etc.)
