Title       : Genetic Regulation of Chlorophyll Synthesis in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9005308

Award Number: 9005308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Timko mpt9g@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Plant photomorphogenesis is a complex developmental process under              
              the control of at least three distinct photoreceptors and involving            
              differential gene expression in both nuclear and organellar                    
              genomes.  During this process a characteristic "greeting" of place.            
              We are interested in understanding the biochemical and molecular               
              genetic control of chlorophyll formation in higher plants.  We have            
              identified cDNAs and/or cloned genomic sequences encoding three                
              enzymes of the chlorophyll biosynthetic pathway.  These enzymes                
              participate in this pathway either as regulatory (e.g., NADPH-                 
              protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase (PCR) or non-rate-limiting steps            
              (e.g., ALA-dehydratase (ALAD), PBG deaminase (PBGD) and are thought            
              to be under phytochrome-mediated photoregulation either in a                   
              positive manner (ALAD), a negative manner (PCR), or to be                      
              unaffected by light (PBGD).  We propose to continue our                        
              characterization of the structure, complexity, and organization of             
              the gene families that encode these three chloroplast proteins.                
              The expression characteristics of the individual family members                
              will be analyzed with respect to light, extent of plastid                      
              differentiation and cell type.  Since substantial evidence                     
              supporting the presence of a dual pathway for tetrapyrrole                     
              formation in higher plants exists, we will determine whether                   
              individual members of these gene families give rise to proteins                
              localized in different subcellular compartments (chloroplastic                 
              versus cytosolic) and if so, whether members of a gene family                  
              giving rise to proteins compartmentalized in different subcellular             
              locations are under different regulatory programs.                             
                                                                                             
              Green plants produce chlorophyll both in response to light in their            
              environment, and as part of their own normal developmental                     
              processes.  The control of chlorophyll biosynthesis is complex, but            
              poorly understood.  This is a proposal to elucidate that                       
              control.***
