Title       : RUI: Ion Channels in Hypoxia and Hypothermia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1990       
File        : a9005911

Award Number: 9005911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce L. Umminger                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79920              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Cameron jcameron@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The objective of this project is to provide new information on the             
              cellar mechanisms that explain the ability of many 'cold blooded'              
              animals to tolerate conditions of low (or no) oxygen and low                   
              temperature.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The ability of many vertebrate animals to withstand environmental              
              conditions that are completely incompatible with human life has                
              intrigued scientist and laymen for centuries.  We now know that some           
              fish, amphibians (i.e., frog larvae) and reptiles (turtles, for                
              example) are capable of surviving days, weeks, or even months buried in        
              the mud at the bottom of frozen ponds, even though there may be                
              essentially no oxygen present at all.  While some species remain in a          
              state of hibernation, during which their metabolism virtually comes to         
              a halt, many other animals remain fully active at body temperatures            
              that would be quickly fatal to humans.  The mechanisms by which these          
              animals tolerate such extreme conditions are very poorly understood.           
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project, then, is to begin to understand the                  
              fundamental mechanisms by which animals that are in many ways similar          
              to humans are able to function under conditions so foreign to our              
              existence.  The key to this understanding may be differences in the way        
              that substances such as calcium and potassium are permitted to move            
              through the walls of cells in crucial organs, such as the brain and            
              heart.  If so, it may ultimately be possible to identify drugs that            
              would expand the resistance of humans to extreme environmental                 
              conditions.
