Title       : The Kinetics of Growth and Product Release from Transformed Roots Using Nutrient
               Mists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1991      
File        : a9005098

Award Number: 9005098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54830              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela J. Weathers weathers@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David DiBiasio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Cheetham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Plants are a major source of fine chemicals (secondary                         
              metabolites) including pharmaceuticals, fragrances, flavors, and               
              pesticides.  Although there has been but limited success in the                
              profitable production of secondary products from plant cultures                
              there is serious interest in the use of plant cell and tissue                  
              culture for the production of these valuable commodities.  Many                
              of these products are produced by roots, so the use of plants                  
              transformed by Agrobacterium, yielding hairy roots, offers great               
              potential for comercial exploitation.  Hairy roots are                         
              genetically stable, grow rapidly, and produce levels of secondary              
              products equal to or greater than the whole plant.  Root hairs,                
              however, are easily damaged in conventional bioreactors.  A                    
              further barrier to the use of these plant tissues on a commercial              
              scale is that most secondary metabolites accumulate within the                 
              plant tissue and are not readily exported into the growth medium.              
              Thus, there is a need for nondestructive methods for culturing                 
              hairy roots and methods by which the products produced by these                
              plant tissues can be recovered for processing while still                      
              retaining the biomass.  The goals of the proposed research are to              
              grow hairy roots of beets (Beta vulgaris) in a new bioreactor                  
              which employs nutrient mists, and to test physical techniques for              
              the reversible permeabilization of cells for release of products               
              into the medium.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will lay the groundwork for development of               
              a unique model system for the large scale growth of plant hairy                
              roots and development of techniques for the recovery of                        
              commercially valuable products (secondary metabolites) from these              
              specialized plant tissues.
