Title       : Phylogenetic Systematics of South American Akodontine Rodents (Muridae:
               Sigmodontinae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9005702

Award Number: 9005702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Patton patton@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Rats and mice of the South American murid rodent radiation                
              (the largely endemic subfamily Sigmodontinae) represent a very                 
              large array of organisms that range in morphologic adaptations                 
              from subfossorial to aquatic to arborel and in habitat from                    
              tropical rainforest of the Amazon Basin to puna grassland in the               
              highest elevations of the Andes.  This adaptive radiation                      
              comprises some 70 genera, most of which are commonly divided into              
              one of five major lineages.  Among these, the akodontines are                  
              among the most diverse and oldest, with fossils of modern forms                
              extending back some 6 million years in Argentina.  Despite the                 
              widely recognized diversification of this lineage, most taxa are               
              both poorly known and defined, and phylogenetic, ecologic, and                 
              life history aspects of their biology are either totally unknown               
              or only barely so.  This is particularly true for the akodontine               
              group, a radiation of some 15 genera and about 50 species largely              
              confined to grassland habitats from the northern Andes to the                  
              Patagonian steppes.  The present research will utilize DNA                     
              sequences, obtained from several genes within the mithochrondrial              
              genome by the technique of the Polymerase Chain Reaction, to                   
              address the following set of general goals:  (1) establish an                  
              hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships among all genera and                  
              most species of the complex; (2) perform a text of the model of                
              species formation resulting from divergence across strong habitat              
              gradients, using selected species inhabiting the steep eastern                 
              slope of the Andes as exemplars; and (3) determine whether or not              
              particular cranial conformations that identify highly derived                  
              taxa within this assemblage share a close common ancestor or                   
              whether this type of cranial structure has evolved repeatedly in               
              separate lineages.  The exciting aspect of this research is that,              
              since DNA can be extracted and amplified from dried skin                       
              specimens already preserved within natural history collections,                
              now extinct or exceedingly rare taxa can be compared in ways                   
              never before available.  Five of the genera of concern, for                    
              example, are each known form very few specimens, most of which                 
              only collected once from very remote areas.  This is, therefore,               
              the first study of relationships within the group to examine all               
              extant taxa in a comparative way.
