Title       : Activation of Phospholipase A2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1992      
File        : a9005374

Award Number: 9005374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney L. Biltonen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon S. Rule  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long term objective of this proposal is to provide a                       
              precise definition of phospholipase A2 activation in                           
              thermodynamic, kinetic, and structural terms.  This definition                 
              is important in developing an understanding of the functioning                 
              and regulation of the enzyme and the nature of catalysis at                    
              membrane interfaces.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The proposed work will focus on understanding the putative                     
              structural changes leading to full activation.  This work will                 
              include definition of the interfacial regions and enzyme-                      
              substrate interaction locus and the evaluation of specific                     
              sites of interaction in thermodynamic, kinetic and structural                  
              terms.  An important aspect of the proposed work will be                       
              thermodynamic characterization of protein-protein interaction                  
              and calcium binding in aqueous solution.  Such characterization                
              is necessary to design and interpret kinetic experiments aimed                 
              at defining the temporal sequence of events of the activation                  
              process.  This project will initially focus on the properties                  
              of three naturally occurring enzymes, phospholipase A2 from                    
              porcine pancreas, from a rattlesnake, and from the water                       
              moccasin.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The principle technique to obtain structural information about                 
              phospholipases will be nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.                
              Reaction microcalorimetry, differential scanning calorimetry,                  
              pH stat techniques, fluorescence spectroscopy, and high                        
              pressure liquid chromatography will also be extensively used                   
              to characterize these systems.  In addition, site specific                     
              mutagenesis of synthetic phospholipase genes will be used                      
              perturb protein interaction sites.
