Title       : Molecular Characterization of Vacuolar H+-Translocating Inorganic
               Pyrophosphatase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9005330

Award Number: 9005330
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. Rea parea@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The primacy of ATP for the energization of primary ion transport               
              is universally accepted.  Cation-translocating ATPases, capable                
              of pumping H+, Na+, K+ and Ca2+, have been found in virtually all              
              living cells and are recognized to be of paramount importance for              
              cellular function.  One notable exception, however, is the H+-                 
              translocating inorganic pyrophosphatase (H+-PPase) of higher                   
              plant vacuolar membrane (tonoplast) which utilizes inorganic                   
              pyrophosphate (PPi), instead of ATP, as energy source.  This                   
              enzyme, the first example of a PPi-dependent H+ pump in any "non-              
              energy coupling" membrane, is a major vacuolar membrane component              
              and capable of generating a H+-electrochemical potential                       
              difference of +200mV.  The tonoplast PPase is therefore                        
              quantitatively significant at both the protein and functional                  
              levels and amenable to molecular characterization.                             
                                                                                             
              This research provides for (i) the determination of the amino                  
              acid sequence of the Mr64,000 substrate-binding subunit of the                 
              enzyme, and (ii) the enumeration of the components constituting                
              the functionally integral pump and elucidation of their                        
              respective roles.  Objective (i) provides insights into the                    
              evolutionary origins of this novel translocase and facilitate the              
              modeling of its organization on the membrane.  Objective (ii), on              
              the other hand, provides an independent test of the models                     
              derived from the sequence data and facilitate identification of                
              the structural                                                                 
              elements responsible for mediating both substrate hydrolysis and               
              H+-translocation.  The ubiquity of the tonoplast PPase in plant                
              cells and the unique status of PPi as the limiting case of a high              
              energy phosphate will make the results obtained of broad                       
              bioenergetic significance.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The vacuolar membrane (tonoplast) of higher plant cells contains               
              an enzyme called a H+-translocating inorganic pyrophosphatase.                 
              This enzyme is ubiquitous in higher plants and contributes to the              
              establishment and maintenance of a transmembrane electrochemical               
              potential difference.  This electrochemical potential difference,              
              in turn, is necessary for the transport of other solutes.  Since               
              little is known about this important enzyme, studies are being                 
              carried out to obtain knowlegde of its evolutionary origins,                   
              organization and physiological functions.
