Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Geology): Geological Studyof the
               Tonghai-Jianshui-Kunming Area, Yunnan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1993  
File        : a9005305

Award Number: 9005305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25686              (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Clark Burchfiel bcburch@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 9200      US CHINA COOP IN BASIC SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1572,9200,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a two year collaborative research project                              
              between B. Clark Burchfiel of Massachusetts                                    
              Institute of Technology and Chen Jichen of the                                 
              Yunnan Institute of Geological Sciences, Chinese                               
              Academy of Sciences.  The project is sponsored                                 
              jointly by NSF and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.                            
                                                                                             
              This is the first phase of a projected four year                               
              study on Cenozoic and active deformation in the                                
              Tonghai.Jianshui.Kunming region of Yunnan Province.                            
              The immediate goal is to document the Cenozoic                                 
              deformation history of an area adjacent to the                                 
              eastern margin of the Tibetan plateau, which is                                
              related to the tectonic development of the plateau                             
              and surrounding regions of China.  The broadest aim                            
              of the project is to develop a better understanding                            
              of the nature of intracontinental deformation in                               
              Tibet, China and southeast Asia.                                               
                                                                                             
              Tibet is the most spectacular example of active                                
              continental collision on earth, and deformation                                
              within Tibet is commonly assumed to provide a model                            
              for convergent intracontinental deformation.                                   
              However, there is little field data available for                              
              Tibet and a wide range of hypotheses have been                                 
              proposed to explain its Cenozoic deformation.                                  
              These various hypotheses have different .. and                                 
              testable .. implications for deformation along and                             
              adjacent to the eastern margin of Tibet, so that                               
              they may perhaps be most efficiently tested by                                 
              geological studies along the eastern margin of the                             
              plateau.  The proposed study of the Tonghai region                             
              should provide a major addition to the sparse                                  
              observational data that document the Cenozoic and                              
              active deformation of Tibet and its environs.  The                             
              PI's will test their hypothesis that the thickened                             
              crust beneath the Tibetan plateau is the result of                             
              distributed north.south to northeast crustal                                   
              shortening within the plateau.
