Title       : Multi-Model Parallel Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1991   
File        : a9005633

Award Number: 9005633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Scott scott@cs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. LeBlanc  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The state of the art in parallel programming is characterized by a             
              wide variety of process models, communication mechanisms, and patterns         
              of sharing and protection.  Experience suggests that no single model           
              of parallelism will suffice in every case.  Unfortunately,                     
              traditional operating systems tend to enforce a single model by                
              embedding it in the kernel.  Overcoming this limitation is the                 
              principal goal of the Psyche operating system.  It is expected that            
              Psyche will allow each programmer to use the most appropriate model            
              for the task at hand, and will open up previously unavailable                  
              opportunities to use multiple models within a single application.              
                                                                                             
              This research focuses on Psyche as a testbed for multi-model parallel          
              computing -- evaluating the extent to which the Psyche user interface          
              makes multi-model programming possible, and determining the sorts of           
              user-level tools, techniques, and conventions that are required to             
              make it practical.  Building on an existing multiprocessor                     
              implementation of Psyche, progressively more complicated user-level            
              programs, beginning with coexisting but independent models of                  
              parallelism and working up to system servers that can interact with            
              many kinds of clients, and applications that use more than one model           
              of parallelism internally will be used in experiments.  In the later           
              phases of this work, expertise in our department's computer vision,            
              robotics, and planning groups will be drawn on for the construction of         
              large, multi-model reactive applications.
