Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Investigations in Probability and Erodic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1992     
File        : a9005118

Award Number: 9005118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. Lalley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research will be conducted in several areas of                       
              probability and ergodic theory: 1) Construction and                            
              fundamental properties of Gibbs states on sequence                             
              spaces with countable alphabets; 2) applications to                            
              dynamical systems with countable symbolic dynamics,                            
              e.g., geodesic flows on noncompact manifolds and                               
              conformal dynamical systems with parabolic points; 3)                          
              related problems concerning statistical regularities of                        
              orbits in flows; and 4) temporal and spatial growth in                         
              branching diffusion processes and branching random                             
              walks.                                                                         
                   This research is a blend of statistical theory,                           
              dynamical systems, and ergodic theory.  There is a broad                       
              class of dynamical systems for which the well-developed                        
              machinery of symbolic dynamics is available.  This class                       
              is characterized by the fact that the associated                               
              symbolic dynamics needs only a finite alphabet (so one                         
              has to deal with finite state Markov processes).  This                         
              research extends this class to those systems for which                         
              an infinitely countable alphabet becomes necessary and                         
              develops the corresponding machinery.  This will provide                       
              the tools for obtaining new results about the clustering                       
              of orbits at limit sets and about the statistics of                            
              closed geodesics on Riemannian manifolds.  The outcome                         
              of this work will be to unite many known results which                         
              were won by very different methods, so unifying, thus                          
              simplifying, areas with quite separate results.
