Title       : SuperQuest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9005922

Award Number: 9005922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard S. Hirsh                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malvin H. Kalos kalos@tc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4066      PART FOR ADVANCED COMP INFRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 4066,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This award supports the second SuperQuest program at the Cornell               
              National Supercomputing Facility (CNSF).  The CNSF is an NSF                   
              supported facility providing access time, education, training and              
              user consulting services to scientific researchers.  The first                 
              SuperQuest program was held in 1989 and was co-funded by NSF and               
              IBM.  The SuperQuest program is intended to encourage computational            
              science and engineering at the high school level.  Teams of                    
              teachers and students from schools around the nation will compete              
              to participate in a comprehensive training/education program.  Four            
              schools will be chosen.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The centerpiece of the program is a three-week institute at                    
              Cornell.  The teachers and their teams of students will be                     
              introduced to the Cornell supercomputing environment, and receive              
              in-depth training in FORTRAN (the primary scientific computer                  
              language), optimization of scientific computer codes, the use of               
              parallel computing, and the use of computer graphics to visualize              
              results.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              In addition, well-known computational scientists and engineers will            
              lecture at the institute.  At the end of the institute, the schools            
              represented by the teams will each receive a configuration of IBM              
              workstations with communication links through NSFnet to the CNSF.              
              After the students and teachers have returned to their home                    
              schools, Cornell staff persons will visit each school at least                 
              twice over the next year to conduct follow-up training.  A Cornell             
              staff person will be assigned as a designated consultant for each              
              school, and each school will be given an allocation of                         
              supercomputing resources at Cornell for continued use over the                 
              coming year.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The SuperQuest program is intended to stimulate the integration of             
              computational science and its tools into high school science and               
              in the long-run have far-reaching effects in enhancing and                     
              extending the educational goals of American students.
