Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Tectonomagmatic and Event- Stratigraphic
               Significance of Lower Paleozoic K-Bentonites in the Iapetus Region of N.
               American and NW Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1990       
File        : a9005333

Award Number: 9005333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren D. Huff warren.huff@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis R. Kolata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   PIs will investigate the tectonic setting, magmatic                       
              originand stratigraphic significance of altered volcanic ash beds              
              (K.bentonites) in the Middle and Upper Ordovician strata                       
              ofBaltoscandia and to compare these data with similar data                     
              fromNorth America.  Preliminary studies strongly suggest these                 
              K.bentonite beds on both sides of lapetus had a common source and              
              acommon tectonic setting.  If this indication proves correct,                  
              themost widespread of these beds will have profound                            
              event.stratigraphic implications for the Ordovician, and                       
              ourunderstanding of Laurentia and Baltica plate positions during               
              theTaconian orogeny will be substantially improved.  Similarly,                
              theabundance of Silurian K.bentonites throughout Baltoscandia                  
              andthe UK indicates ongoing plate.margin volcanism from                        
              Llandoverythrough Ludlow time.  PIs will collect samples of the                
              mostextensive beds from cores and outcrops in Estonia, Sweden                  
              andNorway.  They will add to existing information on                           
              thebiostratigraphic position of these beds and use                             
              chemicalfingerprinting of both bulk samples and selected                       
              phenocrysts tomake accurate correlations with North American                   
              beds.  These willbe compared with trans.Atlantic stratigraphic                 
              relations of K.bentonites suggested by traditional                             
              biostratigraphy and bygraphic correlation using conodonts.  We                 
              will also obtain high.resolution Ar age spectra and U.Pb dates                 
              from biotite and zirconseparates from biostratigraphically                     
              well.constrained K.bentonitesthat will add key ages to the                     
              Ordovician time scale.  Traceelement data will be plotted on                   
              discrimination diagrams tointerpret the tectonic and magmatic                  
              settings of these beds.
