Title       : The Energy and Pollution Intensity of Investment in the Cement Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0136830

Award Number: 0136830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105718             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Angel dangel@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Rock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The newly industrializing economies of East Asia have demonstrated that rapid
              economic growth and integration into the global economy can occur with
              substantial declines in the incidence of poverty and low inequality in incomes.
               Unfortunately, the shared growth "miracles" experienced by these economies
              have occurred with substantial deterioration in urban environments.  Because
              these development and environment outcomes occurred in the context of increased
              openness to trade and investment, they have given rise to concerns that
              openness to trade and investment contributes to pollution havens or the
              movement of "dirty" industries from countries with stringent environmental
              regulations to those with weak regulations.  The predictable result is more
              trade and investment (more globalization) and dirtier environments.  To date,
              there is limited empirical support for the pollution haven hypothesis. 
              Moreover, there is some evidence that openness to trade and investment can
              increase access to newer leading-edge plants and equipment that are less
              polluting because they newer and are imported from developed countries.  This
              provides an important opportunity for significantly less-polluting development.
               While previous research has theoretically modeled both of these outcomes,
              there has been little empirical research on pollution havens.  Moreover, most
              of this empirical research is based on highly aggregated data where the unit of
              analysis is the country rather than the firm or plants where the most important
              environmental decisions are made.  This research project will empirically
              analyzing the impacts of globalization and environmental regulations on the
              environmental performance of manufacturing plants in one particularly dirty,
              rapidly growing, export-oriented industry, the cement industries of China,
              Malaysia, and Thailand.  Research methods will include a statistical analysis
              of survey data collected from about 125 large and medium sized cement plants in
              these countries.  Multiple regression analysis will be used to address three
              key questions:  To what extent is increasing openness to trade and foreign
              investment associated with the adoption of technologies and production
              practices that are less energy, materials and pollution intensive?  Are the
              impacts of openness on environmental performance contingent on the strength of
              regulatory enforcement and community pressure faced by these plants?  Are the
              impacts of openness limited to changes in technology and production processes
              that improve both economic and environmental performance?

Answers to these
              questions are important to both the international community and developing
              countries.  If openness to trade and investment contributes to improved plant
              level environmental performance, the international community can be less
              concerned about pollution haven affects in trade and investment agreements. 
              If, on the other hand, openness contributes to pollution haven effects,
              environmental considerations may have to become part of international trade and
              investment agreements.  Moreover, if openness to trade and investment
              contributes to improved environmental performance, governments in developing
              countries would have additional policy options for insuring that rapid
              urban-industrial growth is less energy, materials, and pollution intensive.  It
              would also provide opportunities to sustain high growth rates while improving
              ambient environmental quality.  But if pollution haven effects are significant,
              this would suggest that governments in developing countries must redouble their
              efforts to increase the stringency of environmental regulations.  It also
              suggests that there may be significant tradeoffs between growth, globalization,
              and the environment.

