Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Adequacy of Voir Dire Questioning for Selecting
               an Impartial Jury
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0136496

Award Number: 0136496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14237              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald C. Dillehay dillehay@unr.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One key to empanelling an impartial jury for a courtroom trial is the process of
              voir dire in which the judge, the attorneys, or both, question potential jurors
              about their background, history, and beliefs in order to determine whether they
              are qualified to serve. To identify biased prospective jurors, attorneys and
              judges must elicit adequate and accurate responses to questions. Social science
              research has shown that jurors do not provide such responses and resist
              admitting to bias. An apparent reason for voir dire's shortcomings is the kind
              and quality of questions asked by attorneys and judges. This research will
              assess the adequacy of typical questioning during voir dire in terms of social
              science standards of questioning and interviewing, and then examine the
              relationship between the adequacy of the questioning and the identification of
              juror bias. The theoretical and methodological significance of this research is
              that it will provide systematic knowledge about voir dire questioning and
              demonstrate a method for the evaluation of that procedure. The broader
              significance is that the research should identify potential improvements in the
              effectiveness of voir dire for empanelling an impartial jury as guaranteed by
              the 6th Amendment. 
