Title       : SALP: A Submerged Autonomous Launch Platform for Drifting Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0136255

Award Number: 0136255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $626497             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Fratantoni dfratantoni@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Frye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Valdes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              P.I. Fratantoni
OCE-0136255

Satellite-tracked surface drifters, acoustically
              tracked subsurface floats, and a growing family of actively ballasted profiling
              floats provide an effective and relatively inexpensive means of describing the
              ocean environment over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. Many
              coastal and blue-water process studies require (or would benefit from) the
              repetitive deployment of drifting instrumentation over periods of days to
              years. At best, reliance on ships and/or aircraft for serial instrument
              deployment can be expensive and logistically difficult. At worst, ship-based
              deployments may be impossible in remote locations, areas of unfavorable weather
              or seasonal ice cover, or in response to episodic events such as severe
              storms.
	To address this problem this proposal outlines an effort to develop
              and field-test a compact, low-cost moored platform capable of launching an
              arbitrary mixture of drifting instruments (e.g. surface drifters, RAFOS floats,
              profiling PALACE floats) over an extended time period. The Submerged Autonomous
              Launch Platform (SALP), deployed at depths as great as 2000 m on a standard
              oceanographic mooring, will enable floats and drifters to be launched (a) by
              time according to a user- defined schedule, (b) by real-time acoustic
              remote-control, or (c) adaptively on the basis of local environmental
              conditions. It is believed that the development of SALP will provide broad
              benefit to the oceanographic community by facilitating intensive and
              cost-effective studies of ocean circulation in rapidly changing, geographically
              remote, or environmentally hostile regions, and will enable investigators to
              address difficult research problems that are presently financially or
              logistically untenable. As a component of an autonomous ocean observing system,
              SALP will allow investigators to project and maintain an interactive presence
              at sea while promoting the eff

