Title       : Topics in Economic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0136887

Award Number: 0136887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248157             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barton L. Lipman blipman@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research consists of three distinct projects.  The first investigates
              decisionmaking in the presence of "temptations," options that the person knows
              he should not choose but finds difficult to resist.  While familiar to anyone
              who has dieted or quit smoking, for example, it is difficult to
reconcile the
              phenomena with the rational actor presumed by standard economics.  There are
              important economic issues linked to such temptations. For example, why do
              people seem to save too little for retirement? Presumably, this is because they
              are tempted to consume too much
when younger.  What is the appropriate role
              for public policy in such circumstances?  This project will develop new
              mathematical models of how agents make decisions in such settings and, as such,
              will cast new light on these questions.

The second project also considers
              more realistic models of decisionmaking, this time by introducing the
              possibility that there are some courses of action available to the
              decision-maker that he does not currently recognize.  Many times, the solution
              to a difficult problem is to think of a new option, not to insist on standard
              ideas.  In writing long term contracts, for example, the agents must recognize
              that they cannot foresee all possible courses of action that might be followed
              in the future.  Yet they need to specify what should be done in specific enough
              terms to ensure proper performance under the contract.   As with the first
              project, this research will develop new mathematical models for studying such
              issues.
 
The third project investigates a very different issue, namely the
              Electoral College. While it has not happened often in US history, the Electoral
              College need not yield the same winner as a popular election would.  Many
              commentators have suggested that this must make the Electoral College inferior
              to popular election and have advocated its abolition.  Surprisingly, there has
              been very little careful investigation of the effects the Electoral College has
              and its costs and benefits. This research will characterize situations in which
              the electoral college is more "efficient" than popular election and when the
              reverse is true.  In fact, certain kinds of regional differences can make the
              Electoral College a very valuable institution.  For example, if the main role
              of the election is to aggregate the information voters have, then it is
              important to control for correlation among voters.  That is, the information
              held by the 10 million voters in California would not constitute 10 million
              "data points" since the information is correlated within the state.  Hence it
              would be important to "rescale" this information before aggregating it across
              states.

