Title       : SGER: Fluorescent Proteins from Pacific Marine Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a0136469

Award Number: 0136469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9175               (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent Pieribone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : John B Pierce Fdn of Conn
	      
	      New Haven, CT  06501    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Green fluorescent protein is a member of a unique family of proteins currently
              identified only in marine invertebrates (corals, sea anemones, and jellyfish). 
              Upon translation, the peptide backbone of these proteins spontaneously form a
              compact, soluble structure that forces the autocatalysis of 3 inner amino acids
              forming a visible light fluorescent chromophore. These are the only known
              proteins that spontaneously produce a visible light fluorophore without the aid
              of exogenous cellular factors.  Scientists have attached the cDNA sequences
              encoding these proteins to a number of proteins of interest in organisms
              ranging from viruses to plants to mammals.  Virtually all organisms studied are
              capable of synthesizing these fluorescent proteins.  Fluorescent proteins are
              now widely used by biomedical scientists as tools to understand the
              localization and function of an impressive array of proteins in a vast range of
              experimental organisms.  As the range of research utilizing these proteins
              grows, the currently available collection of fluorescent proteins presents
              sever limitations on the types of experiments possible. This research will seek
              to identify novel fluorescent proteins from marine animals living in the
              Indo-Pacific Ocean.  Using a combination of underwater fluorescence
              imaging/spectral analysis of reef animals and molecular cloning, this research
              will survey, catalog and characterize fluorescence in the coral reef
              environment.  In addition to providing a large number of new fluorescent
              proteins with differing biochemical and spectral properties for use in
              biomedical research, these studies will help reveal the role of these proteins
              in the ecology of the animals that produce them.


