Title       : Collaborative Research: The Political Economy of Exchange Rate Regimes: Managing
               the Middle in an Era of Global Capital
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2001   
File        : a0136866

Award Number: 0136866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87280              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Leblang leblang@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While many factors contributed to the rash of international currency crises over
              the past decade, many economists point to the use of pegged exchange rates as
              one of the most important. Such compromises between genuinely fixed and
              flexible exchange rates were one of the hallmarks of the post war international
              monetary system established at Bretton Woods, but as international capital
              mobility has grown pegged rates have become increasingly difficult for
              governments to defend. 
This has given rise to the "hollowing out" or
              "unstable middle" hypothesis -that exchange rate regimes will continually be
              driven towards "corner solutions" -arrangements comprised of either relatively
              free floats or hard fixed rates such as currency boards, currency unions, and
              dollarization. There are two versions of this hypothesis, however. One,
              accepted by most economists, is simply that countries will be driven away from
              dead center -the Bretton Woods type narrow band adjustable peg. The other, more
              controversial, version is that to avoid crises, countries must go all the way
              to one extreme or the other. Dissenters argue that smaller movements such as to
              crawling bands would be viable. Advocates can point to examples where such
              regimes have worked well while critics can point to others where they haven't.
              
What is missing from the extant literature is a large-scale study of the
              relationships between different types of intermediate exchange rate regimes and
              currency crises. This is particularly important because there are good reasons
              to believe that many countries will try to avoid corner solutions. An important
              and under appreciated implication of the theory of optimum currency areas is
              that only a minority of countries are likely to be good candidates for firmly
              fixed or highly flexible exchange rates. For very large countries flexible
              rates tend to be preferable and for very small ones fixed rates are usually
              superior. There is a broad middle range of countries, however, where neither is
              likely to be optimal. 
This project will pay special attention to the role of
              politics and political institutions when it comes to managing middle exchange
              rate regimes. From this point of view macroeconomic policy more often than not
              reflects the desires of policymakers and not the equilibrium solution of
              economic models. In a world of increasing capital mobility, policymakers have
              to choose a mixture of exchange rate rigidity and monetary policy autonomy.
              Intermediate exchange rate regimes thus constitute a middle ground where
              policymakers can have some exchange rate flexibility and some monetary policy
              autonomy. However, if the two policies are not related to each other in a
              consistent manner then currency crises are likely to result. The economic
              literature correctly stresses how high capital mobility makes such management
              more difficult. We will develop a political economy analysis that shows how
              political considerations also add importantly to the difficulty of managing
              such intermediate exchange rate regimes. 
In this project we will examine the
              extent to which different types of exchange rate regimes are crisis prone and
              investigate how a number of economic, political, and institutional
              considerations interact with regime choice to increase or reduce the likelihood
              of crisis. We will undertake a large-N Statistical study of (i) the exchange
              rate regime types and their connection with currency crises, (ii) the degree to
              which regimes have to move away from to middle to decrease the likelihood of
              crisis, and (iii) the policies required to effectively "manage" the middle. We
              will pay considerable attention to the classification of various types of
              intermediate exchange rate regimes and will develop a new behavioral measure to
              compare with institutionally based classifications.

