Title       : Beyond the Mineral Sorptive Protection Hypothesis: Protein Preservation in
               Marine Systems via Formation of High-Molecular Mass Aggregates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0136631

Award Number: 0136631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick G. Hatcher hatcher@chemistry.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reno Nguyen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0136631

The focus of this research is a better understanding
              the mechanisms of the preservation of high molecular weight (~ 106 D) nitrogen
              rich macromolecular proteinaceous material in marine sediments and in the water
              column. Some of these molecules persist in sediments that are thousands of
              years old. Proteins, as energy rich biochemical substrates, are normally
              rapidly degraded in the environment by a range of high affinity bacterial
              proteases and enzyme systems, so the persistence of protein-like macromolecules
              for long periods of time in substrate (N) poor sediments remains inadequately
              explained. Preservation through selective sorptive protection in inaccessible
              sediment mesopores, structural modification such as glucosylation, condensation
              or complexation, aggregation and encapsulation in  biochemically resistant
              materials such as membrane or cell wall components are some of the suggested
              mechanisms. Possibly all of these may operate to some extent. This study sets
              out to investigate range of non-covalent interactions entered into by
              polypeptides on mineral surfaces and or encapsulation of representative
              proteins into refractive biopolymers as potential important controlling factors
              resulting in preservation of such molecules. A series of laboratory
              manipulation experiments and protein characterization techniques, using a wide
              range of analytical tools, and applied to sedimentary and particulate
              associated organic matter will be used to examine support for these
              preservation mechanisms. The rates of turnover of carbon compounds in the
              shallow and deep seas is of importance to our understanding of the ocean's
              carbon cycle.



