Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Auctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0136928

Award Number: 0136928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439849             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Kagel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Levin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Auctions are of growing practical and theoretical importance in economics.
              Recent applications of auctions to sales of government assets have had
              spectacular success: Led by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the U.
              S. government has conducted a number of sales of air wave rights raising a
              total of $23.9 billion in selling over 10,000 licenses between July 1994 and
              July 2000.  Even more spectacular, in an auction ending in April 2000, the
              British government raised 22.5 billion pounds ($35.53 billion) from the sale of
              "third generation" mobile phone licenses.  Thus, auctions promise to both
              increase seller revenue and lead to more efficient allocation of assets
              (delivering assets to the buyers who value them the most).  Further, auctions
              play a prominent role in the theory of exchange as they remain one of the
              simplest and most familiar means of price determination in the absence of
              intermediate market makers.  And they serve as valuable illustrations, and one
              of the most prominent applications, of the theory of games (strategic
              interactions) in cases where agents possess private information (i.e.,
              information which rival agents are not privy to).  

In spite of these
              successes there remain a number of open questions regarding optimal auction
              design.  The research will involve both theoretical and experimental studies of
              a number of open questions in auction design.  These include:  
1. Comparing
              the efficiency of alternative forms of the multi-object Vickrey auction, an
              auction structure which, in theory at least, can deliver 100% efficiency when
              alternative auction structures fail to do so. What past research has shown is
              that the details of the auction design canmake it easier for bidders to
              approach the 100% efficiency goal.  We will continue our study of these
              issues.
2. Investigating alternative auction forms for cases where one or more
              bidders place a somewhat higher value on the objects for sale than do rival
              bidders. In cases such as these there is a tendency for the advantaged bidder
              (even when this advantage is very small) to scare off rivals, which can lead to
              unnecessarily low selling prices for the objects in question.  Alternative
              auction forms promise to help alleviate this problem. 
3.  Investigating
              multi-unit demand auctions in which there exist synergies, or
              complementarities, between the items up for auction.  Such auctions create
              numerous problems in achieving efficient auction outcomes. 
4. Understanding
              the effects of bidding in teams, as opposed to individual bidders.  Most past
              auction experiments have focused on the latter, whereas in many real world
              setting bidding is done in teams.  

