Title       : Collaborative Research on Till Deformation: Linking Microstructural
               Characteristics to Strain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0136048

Award Number: 0136048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13663              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Hooyer tshooyer@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UW-Extension
	      104 Extension Building
	      Madison, WI  537061498    608/265-5917

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0136048
Hooyer

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators
              at Iowa State University and the Wisconsin Geological Survey.   Past glaciers,
              including the Pleistocene ice sheets of the Northern Hemisphere, sometimes
              flowed unusually fast, causing ice-mass fluctuations that resulted in severe
              climate change and landscape modification. A leading hypothesis attributes this
              rapid flow to deformation of the thawed glacier substrate. Structures preserved
              in the sediment beds of past ice sheets can provide a time-integrated and
              spatially extensive record of such deformation and can be used to test this
              hypothesis. Microstructures are potentially the most useful indicators of
              deformation, because they evolve systematically and are ubiquitous, even in
              massive till units. Although microstructural characteristics of deformed
              glacier sediments have been described extensively,  there have been no
              methodical efforts to correlate these characteristics to shear-strain
              magnitude. The result is that the degree of bed deformation, and hence its role
              in ice-sheet motion, usually cannot be inferred reliably from the geologic
              record.  Support is being requested to study the evolution of till
              microstructural characteristics as a function of shear strain with a ring-shear
              device that deforms a large sediment specimen to high strains.  The experiments
              will be guided by related studies in structural geology, geophysics, and soil
              mechanics, which indicate that shear-plane orientations, clay-particle fabric,
              and anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility (AMS) change systematically with
              sediment deformation. These microstructural characteristics will be correlated
              with shear strain by conducting experiments to various strains and measuring
              these characteristics after each test. Two basal tills with different
              clay-mineral fractions will be tested and the sensitivity of the results to
              initial consolidation and total normal stress will be studied. Shear planes
              will be identified optically and the extent of Y-shear development relative to
              shears at other orientations, an indicator of shear-strain magnitude, will be
              quantified. Clay-particle fabrics will be measured with an X-ray, pole-figure
              goniometer at the University of Michigan and quantified by computing both
              eigenvalues and March strains.  AMS will be measured at the Institute for Rock
              Magnetism at the University of Minnesota and used to compute AMS magnitudes, as
              well as strengths and directions of fabrics defined by orientations of maximum
              susceptibility. These experiments will help improve models of past ice sheets
              and interpretations of glacigenic sediments and landforms. This research may
              also help solve related problems in structural geology, geophysics, petroleum
              geology and geotechnical engineering, in which deformation of granular media
              and consequent anisotropy are often central issues.










