Title       : Union Dynamics at the Establishment Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0136842

Award Number: 0136842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254610             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Holmes holmes@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The share of workers covered by union contracts has plummeted dramatically in
              recent years.  This research project studies this union decline in three new
              ways.  First, it takes a new viewing angle to observe the process. Previous
              work looks at the process at the industry level or at the regional level.  In
              contrast, this project studies union dynamics at the establishment level. 
              Second, the project collects and creates new data sets.  In particular it will
              recover discarded data on union local organizations (the Labor Organization and
              Reporting System) spanning 1960 to the present and it will publicly archive
              this new data.  Third, the project focuses on a new issue, the role of
              neighborhood or spillover effects.  A neighborhood effect exists when it is
              easier for a union to organize an establishment when neighboring establishments
              are organized. The issue of neighborhood effects is important, because when
              these effects are present, small changes in the underlying economic environment
              can lead to large changes in the extent of unionism. The project will quantify
              the extent to which neighborhood effects can account for why unions collapsed
              in the early 1980s, and why unions are weak in the South, but are still strong
              the upper Midwest and Northeast.

Understanding the process of union decline
              is of direct interest in itself.  But in addition, this process has been
              intertwined with numerous other major trends in the economy.  These trends
              include: the rise in the wage differentiable between skilled and unskilled
              workers, the movement towards the use of temporary workers and the rise of
              outsourcing, and the major shift in manufacturing from the union North to the
              nonunion South.  The research in this project increases our understanding of
              all of these issues.  The research also contributes to the general economics
              literature by making progress in identifying neighborhood effects. 
              Neighborhood effects are thought to arise in many economic contexts including
              technology adoption, education, and even crime.  The procedures developed in
              this  research project have the potential to be applied to these other issues. 
                

 


