Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: Genome Sequence of Magnaporthe Grisea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0136064

Award Number: 0136064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph A. Dean ralph_dean@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce W. Birren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7187,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rice blast disease, caused by the fungal pathogen Magnaporthe grisea, is a major
              threat to food security worldwide.  Decades of intense investigation have
              proven the fungus to be eminently suitable for genetic and molecular genetic
              manipulation, making it the primary model for elucidating the basis of
              phytopathogenesis, including infection related morphogenesis and cultivar/host
              range specificity.  The Magnaporthe research community has established an
              international consortium with the goal of obtaining a complete genome sequence
              of the fungus.  The community has also developed numerous biological resources
              and tools to take immediate advantage of the sequence.  This project represents
              a partnership between North Carolina State University and the  Whitehead
              Institute-Center for Genome Research to generate and assemble the entire genome
              using a whole genome shotgun approach and to perform automated annotation.  The
              rapid availability of this sequence in an annotated form will immediately
              provide new opportunities for integrating research and education of students. 
              The data will promote the discovery of genes and potential anti-fungal targets,
              permit reconstruction of pathways, provide sequence-anchored clone paths for
              use in genetic and functional studies, and enable comparative genomic
              approaches to commence.  Moreover, the data will provide the foundation for the
              discovery and design of novel environmentally sound strategies to more
              effectively manage this and other fungal diseases. This is a Microbial Genome
              Sequencing Award funded through a collaborative activity between the National
              Science Foundation and the Department of Agriculture Initiative for Future
              Agriculture and Food Systems.  This award represents one portion of the
              Magnaporthe grisea genome sequencing project.  The other portion is being
              funded by the USDA.
