Title       : Measuring the Impact of Corporate Governance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0136791

Award Number: 0136791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Gompers pgompers@hbs.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Metrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The separation of ownership from control in the modern corporation introduces an
              agency problem between owners and managers.  How do owners of modern
              corporations exercise effective control over managers (agents) when managers
              usually know much more about the day-to-day operation of the firms than the
              owners.  The implications and mitigation of this agency problem have long been
              central issues in the economics literature.  Nevertheless, there is little
              research on the exact quantification of these costs, and many holes remain in
              our understanding of the empirical details of this agency conflict. Many of the
              difficulties with this important area of empirical research stem from the use
              of measures of corporate governance that suffer from endogeneity problems or
              that capture only limited aspects of a firm's complex governance structure. 
              The project uses a measure that accounts for the complexity of firm-specific
              corporate governance in a novel way. Taking advantage of the variation in
              state- and firm-level governance structures that arose in response to the
              takeover wave of the 1980s, the investigators have constructed a "Governance
              Index" to proxy for the balance of power between shareholders and managers. The
              project uses this index as the basis for analysis of the effects of corporate
              governance. The investigators have begun research on the implications of
              governance for firm value and have found effects that are statistically
              significant and economically large. They find that the addition of governance
              provisions that add to managerial power (i.e., reduce shareholder rights) is
              consistently associated with lower levels of firm value.  While the causality
              of this relationship is not yet established, there are several reasons to
              believe that the direction of causality runs from governance to value.
              Furthermore, the magnitude of this empirical relationship defines the large
              economic value at stake and motivates a detailed further investigation. The
              primary benefit of this research lies in its potential to further scientific
              understanding about the source and magnitude of agency problems in
              organizations. Furthermore, the results are expected to yield concrete policy
              implications regarding the effects of governance rules on corporate value and
              performance. These results will not only be relevant on the level of
              investor-management relations, but they should also contribute to the economic
              foundation of the debate on takeover regulation in local and national
              legislatures, both in the U.S. and abroad. Finally, this work develops a novel
              measure of governance that should be a useful input in many other studies. A
              preliminary version of the index has already been released to other
              researchers, and all of the data will be made available as soon as possible.
              

More specifically, the planned work includes a series of four integrated
              projects. First, the investigators continue their research into the
              relationship between governance and firm value and refine their previous
              results. Second, they study the origins of variation in governance structures
              and search for an instrument to allow for truly causal inference. Third, they
              investigate the microfoundations of the costs of poor governance by studying
              its effects on investment, managerial turnover, wages, employment, and
              productivity. Fourth, the investigators study the relationship between the
              governance structures summarized in the index and other corporate governance
              mechanisms including executive compensation contracts, board independence, and
              ownership structure. 


