Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) Version 1.1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0136311

Award Number: 0136311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Rockwell Richard.Rockwell@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative project will extend, enhance, and promote the Data
              Documentation Initiative (DDI) specification.  The DDI is intended to be a
              Publicly Available Standard for the content, presentation, transport, and
              preservation of metadata about data sets in the social and behavioral sciences.
               Written in XML, the lingua franca of the World Wide Web, Version 1.0 of the
              DDI specification was published in March 2000.  Among the changes and
              extensions planned for Version 1.1 of the specification are more robust
              mechanisms for describing aggregate/tabular data and complex file types, such
              as hierarchical and relational files.  In addition, the project will conduct
              training at meetings of professional associations to familiarize researchers
              and others with the project and to encourage them to adopt this method for
              documenting social science datasets.  The project also will focus on refining
              the instructions for employing the standard and providing a set of best
              practices to demonstrate optimal usage.  Finally, project participants will
              explore a new approach to documentation.  This approach likely will have at its
              core a diagram that defines the relationships among elements.  It also will
              have attributes of a social science codebook.

This project has the potential
              to improve the conduct of social science research in several ways.  First, the
              DDI model provides a comprehensive set of codebook elements designed to
              incorporate all of the information a potential data analyst must have to
              conduct analysis accurately and efficiently.  The proposed refinements will
              render the standard applicable to all types of social science data.  Training
              and outreach to the research community will help to ensure that the content
              standard is widely applied, and best practice activities will promote uniform
              element usage.  Second, the specification is structured in such a way that a
              single core document can be adapted to produce several other documents,
              including data definition statements for the major statistical software
              packages, bibliographic records, study abstracts, etc.  The documentation
              author need only make changes in one place.  Third, the project promotes data
              interoperability by creating a Web-based nonproprietary documentation standard
              that permits seamless exchange of files among data users and data providers. 
              Finally, the shared specification provides the necessary infrastructure for
              porting data into online analysis systems, thus putting more social science
              data on the desktops of a wider community of users.

