Title       : Source, Trophic Opportunities and Fate of Billfish Larvae in the Diverse Pelagic
               Habitats of the Straits of Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0136132

Award Number: 0136132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1976498            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Cowen rcowen@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. Leaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Su Sponaugle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Billfishes are a complex of large pelagic fishes that occur in the tropical and
              subtropical waters of the world's oceans. They are top predators in the pelagic
              food web and, simultaneously, the most sought-after fishes for saltwater
              anglers. These oceanic "giants" support a multi-million dollar sportfishing
              industry and comprise a significant bycatch of tuna longline efforts.
              Unfortunately, human activities have led to significant declines in billfish
              stocks; blue marlin are thought to be at less than 40% of that necessary to
              sustain fishing at maximum sustainable yields. Despite their critical
              ecological status, the biological information available on these organisms is
              extremely limited.
	Focusing on the early life history stages of billfishes is
              a tractable means of obtaining valuable biological data. For example,
              collection of early larval stages can be used, in conjunction with data on
              circulation, as a means of determining when and where spawning occurs.
              Investigation of the pelagic habitat variables associated with the occurrence
              of billfish larvae may provide insight into environmental conditions required
              for spawning and early survival. Even in their early life history, billfishes
              are likely important constituents of the pelagic food chain, especially as
              predators on zooplankton and larval fishes. 
	The overall objective of this
              study is a seasonally resolved understanding of the annual cycle of billfish
              spawning, larval growth, feeding, and transport within the complex environment
              of the Straits of Florida. As top predators, billfishes play a critical yet
              undefined role in the pelagic food web. Here we examine the early life history
              of billfishes within the oceanographic context of the Straits of Florida (SSF).
              The SSF is a complex system of discrete, interacting water masses and pelagic
              environments. Preliminary data suggest that billfish larvae occur predictably
              in three distinct patches across the SSF. The project is designed to 1)
              identify the sources of the three distinct larval billfish patches within the
              SSF; 2) determine how the these patches differ in terms of the trophic and
              growth environment of the billfish larvae; and 3) investigate the transport
              fates of larval billfishes from these different patches.
	The fieldwork is
              divided into three separate study components: The first study will address the
              temporal qualities of cross-Strait features (i.e., water mass distribution,
              larval billfish patches, and zooplankton community structure). Monthly sampling
              (consisting of ichthyoplankton and zooplankton tows, CTD, fluorometry, and ADCP
              measurements) over two years will be linked via otolith aging studies and
              circulation patterns to estimates of spawning locations. Further otolith work
              on larval growth rates will be coupled to zooplankton work on community
              composition and dynamics to identify trophodynamic differences among patches.
              The second study will expand the spatial scale of our efforts to examine the
              along-Strait dynamics relating to the formation, maintenance, and fate of
              larval billfish patches. A single cruise will be made during the second year
              and will include the same suite of measurements as above as well as
              ARGOS-tracked drifter measurements. The third study during year 3 will
              incorporate Lagrangian techniques to track larval billfishes from hypothesized
              spawning sites through the Straits of Florida system to link these trajectories
              to the observed cross-Strait spatial patchiness and ultimate fate of the
              discrete patches. Sampling will consist of a similar set of measurements
              conducted at stations normal to the track of a group of drifters.  
	Results
              of the proposed study will provide critical new information regarding the early
              life history and ecology of these important pelagic predators as well as the
              interaction between different water masses and the trophodynamics of pelagic
              food webs. A further understanding of the formation, maintenance and fate of
              particular chl. a/zooplankton/larval fish patches also will provide insights
              into understanding the role of upwelling and water mass exchange across frontal
              boundaries and shallow banks.

