Title       : Collaborative Research: Nutritional Investments in Children, Adult Human Capital
               and Adult Productivities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0136616

Award Number: 0136616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jere R. Behrman jbehrman@ssc.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal objective of this research is to advance understanding of the
              significance of early childhood nutrition for education and health and for
              economic productivity of adults in developing countries.  Previous empirical
              studies on these important topics are limited because they do not have data
              that follows individuals from infancy and early childhood to adulthood and
              because they do not deal persuasively with estimation problems that arise
              because nutrition reflects past behaviors and because some characteristics,
              such as innate healthiness and ability, are not observed.  This study is
              examining rich data collected by the Nutrition Institute for Central America
              and Panama (INCAP) in rural Guatemala to investigate the impact of childhood
              nutrition for individuals who are 25-40 years old when data are collected in
              2002/3, but who were 0-7 years old during the initial longitudinal data
              collection in 1969-1976.  These special data and appropriate estimation
              techniques are used to test three groups of hypotheses: (1) Controlling for
              relevant community, household, parental, and individual characteristics, better
              nutritional status in young children is causally and positively associated
              with: (i) school achievement and intellectual functioning; (ii) adult
              migration, health, and labor productivity; and (iii) spouse characteristics and
              assets acquired through marriage. (2) Through its effects on accumulated
              physical and intellectual capital, better nutrition during early childhood is
              causally and positively related to: (i) higher occupational mobility; (ii)
              higher productivity in agricultural and non-agricultural employment; (iii)
              greater consumption; and  (iv) higher levels of material well being. (3) The
              economic rate of return to resources used to improve childhood nutrition,
              incorporating costs in addition to impacts and their respective time patterns,
              is high in such a context.

The overall significance of the project is very
              substantial. Malnutrition is pervasive in developing countries, currently
              affecting about a billion people and is thought of have major negative effects
              on education, health and economic productivities.  But there have been no
              previous economic analysis of effects of early childhood nutrition on adult
              education, health and economic productivities using data that follow
              individuals from early childhood into adulthood. Therefore the project
              estimates are very informative about the magnitudes of effects of early
              childhood nutrition and of a range of health and educational policies on adult
              health, education and productivity. They, thus, strengthen the knowledge basis
              for policy formulation that might improve significantly the welfare and the
              productivity of many of the poorest people in developing countries.

