Title       : Resistances to Using Linear Models in Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0136259

Award Number: 0136259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robyn M. Dawes rd1b@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Parole boards must ask themselves a crucial question: should the prisoner
              before them be released, or is he or she likely to commit another crime?  While
              statistical prediction rules (SPRs) have been shown to be the best way of
              combining information about such prisoners to predict recidivism, parole
              officers tend to rely on their own intuition for combining the information to
              make their decisions.  College admissions officers make similar sorts of errors
              each year, by basing admissions on criteria such as one-on-one interviews,
              instead of statistical models that can predict success in college based on past
              performance, often incremented by tests that have been specifically designed to
              predict performance.  Nothing predicts without any inaccuracy, but the
              conclusion that SPRs are more accurate than intuition is well established, by
              over 150 studies comparing the two prediction modes.  The proposed project asks
              a related question, one with important public policy implications:  Why do
              people believe that they can make better decisions than can statistical models?
               One hypothesis to be investigated is that while SPRs automatically specify how
              poorly they predict when they specify how well, people overestimate their own
              ability to predict outcomes and hence reject the statistical models.  Moreover,
              such overestimation may be based in part at least on the cognitive factor that
              our belief in our ability to predict is partially based on our ability to
              "explain" ("fit") situations in retrospect ("I could have told you he'd kill
              again, given his behavior as a child").  By understanding these biases of
              overestimation and retrospection, we can begin to devise effective methods for
              convincing people to rely more on statistical prediction rules and less on
              their own judgment, thereby befitting clients to whom accuracy of prediction is
              important, often vital.

