Title       : Charitable Giving: A Field Test of Rebates and Matching Subsidies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0136684

Award Number: 0136684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Grossman pgrossman@stcloudstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine C. Eckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St. Cloud State University
	      740 Fourth Avenue South
	      St. Cloud, MN  56301    320/255-2122

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Economic theory suggests that an individual's charitable giving would be the
              same under appropriately paired rebate and match subsidy rates.  For example, a
              20 percent rebate subsidy and a 25 percent match subsidy both result in an
              effective price of $0.80 to give $1 to a charity.  With equal prices of giving,
              and assuming other determinants of giving are the same, the level of giving
              should not differ with the subsidy type.  Contrary to theory, results from
              research conducted in a laboratory setting indicate that giving differs
              significantly across the two types of subsidies.  This project is a field
              experiment examining subsidized giving to four diverse nonprofit institutions
              designed to test the validity of the laboratory results.  The lab experiment
              has a number of weaknesses that can best be overcome with a field study.  In a
              laboratory setting, a subject plays with money provided by the experimenter;
              i.e. "house money."  When playing with house money subjects may make choices
              that are different from those they would make when allocating their own money. 
              In the field study, subjects will be making decisions affecting their own money
              and choices made should be a more accurate measure of their true preference. 
              The subject pool available for lab experiments is highly constrained -- with
              respect to age, income, marital status, and experience -- relative to the
              general population.  A field study permits a more representative sample of
              potential donors and more statistically reliable results. 
	The importance of
              this research is evidenced both by the frequent proposals to reform the United
              States federal personal income tax, and by the number of matching gift programs
              operated by corporations in both the United States and Canada. Two tax reform
              proposals that have received attention are a flat-rate income tax and a
              consumption tax; both proposals include the elimination of many, if not all,
              currently allowed deductions. The current Bush reform involves a reduction in
              marginal tax rates at higher income levels, reducing the effective subsidy to
              charitable giving.  Any of these reforms is likely to leave such organizations
              with lower levels of funding.  Assuming public sentiment favors the continued
              support of nonprofit and charitable organizations, alternative methods of
              subsidizing charitable giving should be explored.  In addition, if these
              results are confirmed, they suggest that replacing the current system of tax
              rebate with an equivalently-costly matching subsidy system could increase
              contributions to charitable organizations.  The impact of corporate matching
              gifts programs on giving to nonprofits and charitable organizations also has
              not been carefully examined.  This is especially true in light of the fact that
              matching gift programs are becoming increasingly common features of corporate
              philanthropy.

