Title       : Collaborative Research: FABRIC AND TEXTURE CHARACTERISTICS OF MICRO-PHYSICAL
               PROCESSES IN ICE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0136047

Award Number: 0136047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin D. Waddington edw@ess.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0136047
Waddington

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal
              Investigators at the University of Washington and Ohio University.   Detailed
              knowledge about the interactions between micro-structure of ice and its
              deformation is needed to assess the integrity of stratigraphic layering and the
              depth-age relationship in ice cores, which is essential for interpreting the
              paleoclimate record.   The Principal Investigators will use micro-structure to
              study fabric, the orientation distribution of crystal c-axes, and texture, the
              size and shape of crystals.  Numerical modeling of ice deformation is a useful
              tool in understanding these interactions.  Accurate modeling of ice deformation
              is complicated by factors, such as the fabric, grain size, dynamic
              recrystallization, stress level, and precise knowledge of initial conditions. 
              For example, ice fabric evolves as the ice is strained and the deformation
              depends on the fabric. This complicated feedback mechanism must be understood
              to correctly model ice deformation.  In another example, the usual assumption
              is that the initial fabric is isotropic or random, but there are excellent
              examples of near-surface ice in the ice cores that are apparently not
              isotropic. One must know the initial fabric to calculate the deformation rate
              in ice sheets.  Dr. Wilen will combine results of his new automatic fabric
              analyzer (AFA) with predictions of detailed ice deformation models (Dr.
              Thorsteinsson) to refine and better constrain such models.  The AFA gives new
              information in thin sections because the precision and number of measured
              c-axis orientations are greatly improved. The Principal Investigators will
              analyze existing data and collect new data on fabric and texture from ice cores
              to address questions regarding near-surface fabric, deformation mechanisms,
              dynamic recrystallization, and potential sources of layer disturbances.  The
              data will be used to constrain models of fabric evolution and recrystallization
              processes.  With the more refined models, scientists can address different
              questions and important problems related to ice deformation and ice cores. For
              example, the recent agreement between the climate records from the Greenland
              Ice Core Project (GRIP) and Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2) ice cores of
              the upper-90%, and the disagreement in the lower-10% emphasizes the need to
              understand and predict the mechanisms and probable depths of disruption in
              these and future deep ice cores. Evidence suggests that the stratigraphic
              disturbances arise from the anisotropic nature of ice crystals at a variety of
              scales. To properly model the deformation of anisotropic ice, the influence of
              fabric on deformation must be well known.


