Title       : STS Fellowships: Science Consultants, Fictional Films, and the Scientific
               Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0136119

Award Number: 0136119
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce V. Lewenstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES Proposal 0136119
Bruce Lewenstein/David Kirby, Science
              Consultants, Fictional Films, and the Scientific Process
Cornell
              University

This project is a postdoctoral fellowship.  David Kirby, the
              fellowship holder, is pursuing a combined educational and research  program
              focused on the role of science consultants in the production of mainstream
              entertainment films.  The primary goals are to:  1) learn the theory of science
              studies; 2) learn methods for researching issues of science communication
              through the media, including interview methods and historical analysis; 3)
              begin the transition from a career in basic science to a research and teaching
              career in science studies; and 4) broaden the domain of "Public Understanding
              of Science" to include science presented in entertainment media.   Kirby is
              trained as an evolutionary and molecular geneticist  and seeks preparation for
              a career as an academic researcher unsing a multi-disciplinary approach to
              address the ways science and technology are communicated through media.

The
              postdoctoral training component of the project consists of taking core theory
              and methods courses, participating in the vibrant intellectual life of
              Cornell's Department of Science & Technology Studies, and working closely with
              specific faculty members.  In addition, the fellowship holder will serve as an
              assistant editor for the journal "Public Understanding of Science."

The
              research activities include literature searches, archival research, document
              collection, film viewing, and analysis related to mainstream films with science
              themes.  The primary case study is the Jurassic Park series, and will include
              oral interviews.  A related research element concerns the commidification of
              scientific information.  Here attention is given to one individual
              entrepreneur, Donna Cline, and a science consulting company, Takeoff
              Technologies. 

