Title       : Large-Scale Computer Network Experimentation Through Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0136939

Award Number: 0136939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Fujimoto fujimoto@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George F. Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mostafa H. Ammar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
The study of computer networks, while a relatively young science, is no
              different from any scientific inquiry and as such needs to be built on top of a
              theory-validated-by-experiment foundation.  In this award we focus on the use
              of computer-based simulation which provides the greatest flexibility in
              creating a general experimentation environment.  Simulation offers several
              important challenges, however.  First is the fact that the Internet is an ever
              changing, highly heterogeneous environment that is typically very difficult to
              model.  Second is the question of how to faithfully reflect the large scale of
              the Internet in a computer-based simulation.  We are primarily interested in
              addressing this latter challenge in this research.  Our interest in large-scale
              network simulation is motivated by the fact that we view network simulation as
              an important tool to understand the true effect of a new protocol, mechanism,
              network service, or application when widely deployed on a large network such as
              the Internet.  It is clearly problematic to simply extend conclusions derived
              from small simulations and make inferences regarding effect and behavior when
              extended to a large scale.

While simulation of networks at the scale of the
              Internet remains infeasible today, there has been considerable progress made in
              the last few years in increasing the scale capability of network simulations. 
              Our work uses this improved scaling capability as a starting point.  This award
              represents an effort to go beyond the question of how to perform a large scale
              simulation run and address the question of how to perform a large-scale
              simulation experiment.  A simulation experiment typically consists of multiple
              related runs and is also defined by a specific validation and/or evaluation
              objective (e.g., what will happen if an ISP enables a certain queue management
              algorithm in all its routers).  We note that our work focuses primarily on
              packet-level discrete-event simulation, as opposed to other approaches that
              allow scaling through aggregation and approximation.  Our goal is to understand
              the limits of faithful packet-level discrete event simulation as a vehicle for
              experimentation and validation.

With the goal of investigating the question
              of how to perform large-scale simulation experiments we focus on two principal
              areas of research:

  
1.  We will develop and analyze techniques that allow
              for the efficient execution of multiple network simulation runs. A key
              observation is that the multiple runs that make up an experiment are often
              related.  Exploiting this fact, we will develop techniques to allow
              computations from one run to be reused in other runs, thereby reducing the
              amount of time to complete a set of runs. Our preliminary work demonstrates the
              feasibility of this approach. We note that while many of our basic ideas can be
              applied to simulations in general, the specifics of their efficient
              instantiation is very much domain dependent.  Much of the research in this
              project will focus on exploiting this idea in the context of network
              simulations for specific, important classes of network protocols and
              architectures.  We consider two specific approaches, one based on the use of
              updateable simulations and the other based on simulation cloning. 

2.  Our
              second area of research uses as a starting point a presumed ability to perform
              large-scale network simulation experiments. The main question we ask is how
              large should a simulation experiment be in order for one to reach correct
              ``Internet-scale" conclusions? This is admittedly a very hard question to
              answer. We feel, however, that recent advances in large-scale network
              simulations have made it possible to finally begin to address this question. 
              We are now capable of considering the effect of non-trivial scaling of a
              network simulation on the results derived from it. The goal of this work is to
              develop and analyze a systematic, well-motivated approach for answering the
              "how large is large-enough?" question.  We present a strawman approach which
              will represent the starting point of our investigation.  We also provide
              experimental evidence demonstrating how scale can affect simulation results.

