Title       : Genetic Conflicts of Interest, Fluctuating Asymmetry, and the MHC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0136023

Award Number: 0136023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Gangestad sgangest@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark V. Flinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randy Thornhill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent research indicates that women's mating preferences change across the
              menstrual cycle. Women's preference for the scent of men who exhibit
              developmental instability, as revealed by low fluctuating asymmetry, is
              enhanced in the days leading to ovulation, as is women's preference for
              masculine male faces. A working interpretation of the findings is that women
              experience heightened attraction to indicators of benefits that could be
              heritably passed on to their offspring when they are fertile. Traits that
              indicate such benefits could be ones that may be generally associated with
              health (e.g., low fluctuating asymmetry), complement a female's set of genes
              (e.g., complementary major histocompatibility complex [MHC] alleles), or
              diversify offspring (e.g., diverse MHC alleles). The research is designed to
              test four hypotheses: 1) If women's preferences shift during the fertile period
              toward indicators of heritable benefits, which in-pair partners may not
              possess, women should experience greater attraction to men other than their
              primary partners during these days. Overall, women should not experience the
              same increase in attraction to their primary partners during this period. 2)
              Men may have evolved to be more attentive of their partners during these times.
              3 & 4) Women's greater interest in men other than a primary partner and men's
              increased attention to their partners may be conditional; it may depend on
              whether a primary partner possesses heritable benefits (e.g., low fluctuating
              asymmetry, complementary MHC alleles, diverse MHC alleles). Six studies will
              assess these predictions in two cultures. One set of studies will assess
              changes in a sample of 200 romantically involved U.S. college students. The
              other set will examine the changes in a remote village on the Caribbean island
              of Dominica. The latter study will also examine whether female or male partner
              cortisol or the male partner's testosterone change across women's cycle. The
              aim of this program of research is to increase our understanding of the factors
              that affect partner choice, the dynamics and stability of relationships, and
              fertility.

