Title       : Collaborative Research: Velocity Field, Force Budget, and Basal Conditions of a
               Soft-Bedded Glacier, Breidamerkurjokull, Iceland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0136112

Award Number: 0136112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137743             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin D. Waddington edw@ess.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0136112
Waddington

This is a collaborative proposal between Principal
              Investigators at the Universities of Washington and California-Santa Cruz. 
              Scientists from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) will be involved.  Other
              participants are scientists from the University of Iceland and Eidgenossische
              Technische Hochschule (ETH).  The Principal Investigators
 will  address the
              glacier-scale physics of soft-bedded ice motion by testing the hypothesis that
              the force balance and the rate of motion of Breidamerkurjokull on the
              Vatnajokull ice cap, Iceland is controlled by the underlying till bed and not
              by other factors such as sticky spots, longitudinal stretching/compression,
              marginal shear)  Understanding the physics that govern ice motion is needed to
              make predictions on the future behavior of mountain glaciers and ice sheets in
              the context of the ongoing climate change and sea-level rise.
              Breidamerkurjokull, an outlet glacier draining, has played a significant role
              in developing a new paradigm of glacier motion, in which the ice itself rides
              passively on top of a deforming till bed. This innovative mechanism has been
              used to explain a wide array of glaciological phenomena such as fast ice motion
              and high rates of glacial sediment transport. Much of what is known about
              subglacial till deformation is derived from borehole and laboratory experiments
              where the process is studied at short length scales of ~0.1 to ~ 1 meters (m).
              However, to improve models of soft-bedded glaciers, an understanding of the
              physical factors controlling the ice-flow rate over much longer spatial scales
              of ~100 to ~1000 m is required This one-year
project will involve collection
              of new data on ice surface velocity and topography (spatial resolution of <100
              m) and bed topography (spatial resolution of several hundred meters). The
              fieldwork will include surveys with ice-penetrating and ground penetrating
              radar and Global Positioning System. Additional data will be generated from
              satellite imagery using Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry. The data will
              be used to calculate the spatial distribution of basal shear stress and basal
              resistance beneath Breidamerkurjokull employing the force-balance and
              transfer-function inversions, respectively. This research should improve the
              current understanding of ice-till interactions and of their control over flow
              of ice masses and may help predict whether modern ice masses will harm local or
              global societal interests through, for instance, changes in the global sea
              level or surges of mountain glaciers.

