Title       : Political Cues and Internet Use: Elite Communication Strategies and the Use of
               the Internet for Information Seeking and Political Participation.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a0136826

Award Number: 0136826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Valentino nvalenti@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent Hutchings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The central question of this research program involves the changing relationship
              between masses and elites in the information age. The investigation explores
              the impact of exposure to political cues via traditional mass media, on the
              extent and nature of on-line political participation, information seeking and
              learning. Specifically, the investigators assess  the impact of cognitive
              heuristics in campaign advertising and news coverage on the information seeking
              and participatory strategies citizens employ. Particular attention is paid to
              the effects of threat cues in political communication, as an emerging body of
              research suggests that these cues are especially effective at boosting
              engagement. The researchers also revisit the selective exposure hypothesis that
              was largely abandoned nearly four decades ago, to determine if exposure to
              standard political communication boosts or diminishes the selection of
              attitudinally consistent information via the web. A pilot study provides
              support for these hypotheses. The central communication factors that are
              investigatee as potential influences on Internet searching and behavior are
              advertising tone, the motivation to use the web, the credibility of information
              on the web, and various forms of threat cues. As the Internet evolves into an
              almost limitless information medium, and with barriers to accessing
              disappearing, the mechanism linking existing attitudes to information search
              strategies deserves renewed attention. 
The research design builds upon the
              innovative methodology employed in a pilot study. In this experiment, conducted
              in the fall of 2000, adult subjects were shown political ads sponsored by
              candidates Bush and Gore that were constructed in the Media Lab. In these ads,
              the researchers manipulated the dimension used to organize the candidate's
              policy stands: one version emphasized partisan conflicts while others
              highlighted ideological, character, or group representation distinctions. After
              viewing the ads, subjects were told they could visit either or both of the web
              pages of the presidential candidates to learn 
any additional information that
              interested them. The web pages were patterned after the candidates' actual web
              sites and were standardized so that the information was organized similarly on
              each site. Subjects' movements on the websites and the time spent on each link
              were tracked electronically. This realistic yet unobtrusive measure of search
              behavior represents a significant improvement over survey measures of
              self-reported information seeking. 

In recent years, scholarly evidence for,
              and popular concern about, downward trends in civic engagement, participation,
              and trust in government have been growing. At the same time, there are those
              who predict that the landscape of political communication is approaching a
              major transformation as the Internet rapidly extends its reach. Some have
              argued these technological advances will reverse the downward spiral in
              engagement, while others predict even more isolation and passivity. Mostly
              absent from the debate thus far is the possibility that the political effects
              of the Internet will be, at least in part, contingent on the behavior of
              elites. Since communication strategies will certainly evolve to maximize the
              impact of campaigns in the age of the Internet, researchers must begin to
              explore how citizens react to those messages in terms of the vast interactive
              medium at their fmgertips. 
Most observers would agree that as barriers to
              acquiring information and participating on the Internet continue to drop,
              elite-mass interactions will change significantly. The question that remains is
              how. A rigorous and detailed study of these phenomena is not only warranted,
              but vital for understanding public awareness and political behavior in the near
              future. 

