Title       : Collaborative Research: A Quantitative Assessment of Mineral Ballasts in Carbon
               Export and Remineralization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0136318

Award Number: 0136318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart G. Wakeham stuart@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0136370 / OCE-0136387 / OCE-0136318


Sinking particulate
              matter is the major vehicle for exporting carbon from the sea surface to the
              ocean interior. During its transit towards the sea floor, most particulate
              organic carbon (POC) is returned to inorganic form and redistributed in the
              water column. This redistribution determines the surface concentration of
              dissolved CO2 , and hence the rate at which the ocean can absorb CO2 from the
              atmosphere. The ability to predict quantitatively the depth profile of
              remineralization is therefore critical to predicting the response of the global
              carbon cycle to environmental change.  

In this study, researchers at the
              State University of New York at Stony Brook, the University of Washington, and
              the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography will collaborate with colleagues in
              Monaco and France to test the hypothesis that minerals produced by organisms,
              or introduced into the surface ocean by winds, critically influence carbon
              export to the deep ocean and sediments.   They will carry out a multi-tracer
              approach to explicitly consider different mineral "ballast" types, along with
              the associated organic matter and radioisotopes.   Their first hypothesis is
              that ballast minerals physically protect a fraction of their associated total
              organic matter, which persists to predominate over the unprotected fraction in
              the lower (>1000 m) part of the water column. Understanding the mechanistic
              basis of such processes will require an understanding of organic-mineral
              interaction at the compound-specific level.  They hypothesize secondly that the
              ratio of organic carbon to ballast is key to predicting variability in the
              export fluxes and sinking velocities of organic carbon as estimated using
              radiotracers.  

The overall goal is to develop a seamless description of
              carbon fluxes and associated mineral ballast fluxes throughout the water
              column. To achieve this goal, the research team will measure simultaneously a
              suite of properties that are thought to be indicative of fluxes.  They will
              synthesize these measurements from the top of the water column to the sediments
              using a variety of modeling and statistical techniques.   The strategy is to
              unite the power of several disciplines: (i) organic geochemistry for
              characterizing organic matter in protected and unprotected forms  and
              determining its degradation state; (ii) radiochemistry for assessing processes
              and time-scales involved in particle dynamics and transport; (iii) zooplankton
              ecology for assessing radioisotope partitioning and organic biomarker
              alteration; and (iv) microbiology for its role in organic matter decomposition,
              and (v) modeling and statistical analyses to provide a process-based model of 
              flux out of the euphotic zone to the sea floor.  

