Title       : Collaborative Research: Mesoscale Structure of Boundary Layer Water Vapor
               Budgets and Depth during IHOP: Observations, Modeling, and Implications for
               Convective Initiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0136158

Award Number: 0136158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106511             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Mecikalski johnm@ssec.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Predicting the timing and location of convective cloud development is a
              fundamental challenge in the study of meteorology.  Heterogeneities in the
              atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) particularly in ABL water vapor content and
              depth, lead to preferred locations for convective initiation.  Land surface
              heterogeneity is an important cause of heterogeneity in the ABL.  Hence,
              land-surface fluxes play an important role in ABL development and convective
              initiation.  The minimum scale of land surface forcing that causes
              heterogeneity in ABL properties such as depth and water vapor content and
              consequently leads to preferred locations for cloud formation remains
              uncertain.  Observations and models suggest scales ranging from a few to nearly
              100 km.

This project proposes an observational plan as part of the
              International H2O Project (IHOP).  The IHOP is a large multi-agency,
              multi-investigator project that focuses on the measurement of water vapor and
              water vapor variability.  The goal of this project is to improve understanding
              of convective initiation, increase short-term precipitation forecast skills and
              test the capabilities of various instruments to measure the four dimensional
              characteristics of water vapor.  

The critical observations for the research
              to be performed under this award are maps of surface fluxes of latent and
              sensible heat over a region of at least 300 x 300 km in Oklahoma and Kansas,
              and repeated airborne water vapor DIfferential Absorption Lidar (DIAL)
              observations of ABL depth and lower tropospheric water vapor.  The flux maps
              will be created from a network of surface flux towers, airborne measurements of
              surface fluxes over repeated flight tracks about 50 km in length, satellite
              remote sensing of land surface temperature and vegetation cover, and a land
              surface model.  One airborne DIAL will be coupled with an airborne Doppler
              Lidar, yielding the ability to observe ABL flux profiles via remote eddy
              covariance.  Flights will be focused on the midday hours of 10-15 relatively
              fair weather days in order to capture the preconvective atmosphere with
              DIAL.

Observations will be analyzed to determine the degree of spatial
              heterogeneity in ABL water vapor depth and water budgets and the causes of this
              heterogeneity, focusing especially on determining the spatial scales at which
              land surface heterogeneity is an important factor.  Ten to fifteen days of data
              will be analyzed in an attempt to move beyond a case study approach.

Data
              assimilation will be used to ingest dense, mesoscale observations into a
              high-resolution mesoscale atmospheric model that includes a sophisticated
              land-surface scheme.  The model will be used as an analysis tool to study
              mesoscale surface-ABL-cloud interactions captured in the observations.  Further
              the model will be used to assess the impacts of the DIAL observations, detailed
              land surface flux maps and a new shallow cumulus parameterization on forecasts
              of ABL heterogeneity and convective initiation.

Products will include ABL
              depth maps, ABL water budget estimates and model post-analysis fields
              incorporating all available IHOP observations for the 10-15 days of DIAL
              observations.  Expected results include: an improved understanding of the role
              of land surface heterogeneity in convective ABL development and convective
              initiation; the degree to which model prediction of ABL development and moist
              convection can be improved via dense observations of ABL water vapor content
              and surface fluxes; and the impact of a shallow convection parameterization on
              model performance.

