Title       : Semi-Structural Modeling of Empirical Auction Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0136408

Award Number: 0136408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234209             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Francois Richard fantin+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Each year billions of dollars of goods and services are acquired through
              auctions. By analyzing data that are generated in these transactions, key
              insights can be obtained on critical issues such as auction design. The data
              also may be used to understand the competitive character of these markets and
              bring information to bear on possible collusive behavior and market performance
              as reflected in economic efficiency. "Structural" analysis of auctions
              traditionally is based on game theoretic models that assume perfect
              rationality. Yet, the findings from auction experiments are pervasive and
              consistent: The behavior of auction participant deviates significantly from
              theory prescriptions. The extent of deviation sharply contradicts the
              assumption of perfect rationality that is so fundamental to structural
              analysis. The objective of this proposal is to bridge the gap between
              experimental economics and empirical auction modeling. We will explicitly allow
              bidders to deviate from the theoretical solutions of an inherently
              oversimplified "benchmark" theory model. Such deviations could be non-strategic
              (mistakes), or they may be strategic in the sense that they reflect real-life
              factors that are not appropriately captured by the benchmark model. Traditional
              bid functions, which assign a single bid to a player's valuation, are replaced
              by a full probability distribution for bids, conditional on valuations.

The
              proposal develops operational numerical procedures for the analysis of bids
              under this new class of "semi-structural" models and explains their statistical
              properties. The analytical tools developed in this framework will be applied to
              several real-life situations: (1) Auction data from timber sales in the
              Northwest Pacific will be analyzed, with a specific focus on the identification
              of possible collusive behavior. (2) Data related to school milk procurement in
              Georgia will be analyzed, where issues of market efficiency may be highlighted.
              (3) Internet auctions, where observed behavior sharply deviates from standard
              theory prescriptions, will be used to demonstrate the explanatory power of the
              techniques developed. These empirical studies are expected to provide critical
              new insights in the operations of real-life auctions and result in suggestions
              for corresponding adjustments in their design.

