Title       : Molecular Organization of Yeast Chromosome I - Control of Meiotic Pairing and
               Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0136278

Award Number: 0136278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Kaback kaback@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      New Jersey Medical School, MSB C
	      Newark, NJ  07103    973/972-7090

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              SUMMARY
	Reciprocal recombination (crossing over) between homologous
              chromosomes (homologues) appears to be required for proper meiosis I
              segregation.  The mechanisms that control recombination so that each pair of
              homologues undergoes crossing over are not known.  In Saccharomyces cerevisiae
              and humans, small chromosomes have higher meiotic reciprocal recombination
              rates (cM/kb) than large chromosomes and in S. cerevisiae rates of reciprocal
              recombination have been shown to respond directly to chromosome size.  The
              increased rates of recombination on small chromosomes appear to ensure crossing
              over and have been proposed to be due to crossover interference. Interference
              is defined by the apparent inhibition of additional meiotic reciprocal
              recombination events observed near the site of a crossover. The molecular
              mechanism of interference and how it might respond to chromosome size are not
              known. It was recently suggested that the density of meiotic
              recombination-inducing double-strand break (DSB) sites is greater on small
              chromosomes compared to large chromosomes suggesting chromosome size dependent
              control of recombination and perhaps interference might act by controlling DSB
              formation.  To test this idea, we propose to analyze DSB formation on different
              size chromosome I constructs that were constructed in our laboratory.  It has
              also been suggested that the meiotic synaptonemal complex (SC) is involved in
              mediating interference. Accordingly, a better understanding of the mechanism of
              interference might be gained by investigating the S. cerevisiae SC.  Using a
              functional, fluorescent ZIP1-GFP fusion protein constructed in our laboratory,
              we have shown that SCs undergo dynamic changes in their distribution in early
              and late pachytene.  We now propose to examine the dynamics of SC movements
              using ZIP1-GFP in mutant yeast in order to determine the genes required to
              produce this reorganization.   We also propose to address the relationship of
              this reorganization to crossover interference.  The structure and dynamics of
              the fluorescent SC will be examined using optical sections and fluorescent
              cinema-microscopy and will be enhanced by the construction of additional
              ZIP1-fluorocent protein fusions.  These studies should provide new insight into
              the molecular mechanisms controlling recombination and chromosome synapsis,
              processes that lead to proper meiotic chromosome segregation.

