Title       : Applications of Fourier Analysis to Banach Space Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0136022

Award Number: 0136022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Koldobsky koldobsk@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI plans to study finite dimensional normed spaces and convex bodies
using
              methods of Fourier analysis. The idea is to express different
properties of
              convex bodies in terms of the Fourier transform and then
solve geometric
              problems using Fourier analytic methods.
This approach has already led to
              several results including a
complete analytic solution to the Busemann-Petty
              problem on sections
of convex bodies. The PI plans to develop new connections
              between
the Fourier transform, spherical harmonics and parallel section
              functions
(X-rays) of convex bodies that will lead to new results on critical
              sections
of convex bodies, intersection and projection bodies and to new
              results
of Busemann-Petty type. A significant part of the work will be related
              to
several open problems of the local theory of Banach spaces. This
              includes
several possible Fourier analytic approaches to the slicing problem
              and
the study of the central limit properties of convex bodies.


An
              important direction of the geometry of normed spaces is the study of
geometric
              properties of convex bodies based on the properties of sections
and
              projections of these bodies. This direction has already found
numerous
              applications to engineering and medicine, starting with the
classical theory
              of X-rays and geometric tomography. The goal of this
project is to develop a
              new approach to the study of sections and
projections of convex bodies based
              on methods of Fourier analysis.
New connections between sections of convex
              bodies and the Fourier transform
have been recently found by the PI and have
              already led to an analytic
solution to the Busemann-Petty problem of whether
              smaller bodies can have
uniformly larger central sections. The connections
              with Fourier analysis
and geometric tomography will further relate methods and
              results of the
Banach space theory to different areas of mathematics,
              engineering and
medicine. New techniques for computing the Fourier transform
              will have
independent value and can also be applied to signal processing and
              statistics.
