Title       : An Experimental Analysis of Status Processes and Self-Handicapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a0136242

Award Number: 0136242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17974              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey W. Lucas jlucas2@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jeffrey Lucas
University of Akron

The investigator will complete a pilot
              study that examines why men are more likely than females to self-handicap. 
              Individuals self-handicap when they select actions that they are aware will
              inhibit future performances, usually with the goal of deflecting attention away
              from one's personal abilities. Research on self-handicapping consistently finds
              that men are more likely to self-handicap than women across a variety of age
              groups and settings. Efforts at determining the causes of this difference have
              met with limited success.  There are two potential explanations of the gender
              difference in self-handicapping. One explanation comes from socialization
              theories. These theories indicate that males are socialized to be more
              competitive than females. It may be that males are more concerned with the
              evaluative outcomes of performances and that this leads to more self-
              handicapping behaviors. Status processes also may partially account for gender
              
differences in self-handicapping. In US culture in many situations, men tend
              to have higher status than women do. Theories of status indicate that higher
              performances are expected from high status group members. The investigator will
              conduct a controlled laboratory study to test predictions derived from both
              socialization theories and status characteristics theory. The PI will randomly
              assign male and female participants to high and low status group positions and
              measure self- handicapping behavior across gender and status. Pilot data from
              the study will be used to develop a larger, regular proposal to the National
              Science Foundation. 

