Title       : Timing, Size, and Impact of Snow Avalanches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0136378

Award Number: 0136378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard B. Conway conway@ess.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is a need to improve predictions of the timing of avalanche release,
              impact pressures, and run-out distances to reduce the impact of avalanches on
              human society.  This project will investigate the timing, size and impact of
              snow avalanches using a combined experimental and theoretical approach.
              Specific objectives are to: (i) track the evolution of snow slope stability in
              order to improve predictions of the timing and size of avalanche release; (ii)
              couple output from a model of avalanche release to a dynamic flow model in
              order estimate impact pressures and run-out distances along paths of specified
              geometry; (iii) couple the input of the slope stability model to output from a
              predictive meso-scale climate model and develop tools for forecasting
              avalanches on a regional scale. Model development and verification will be done
              using results from field observations and existing archived databases of past
              weather and avalanche activity. Physical models of avalanche initiation and
              subsequent flow require detailed knowledge of transients as well as a
              three-dimensional description of the evolving mechanical properties of snow,
              which requires extraordinary input data that are not generally available.
              Simplifying assumptions are necessary to develop models that are not only
              realistic but also sufficiently tractable so that they can be used for
              operational forecasting. Guiding constraints for model development are that
              only valid approximations and minimal data inputs are acceptable. Results from
              models of decreasing complexity will be compared with observations to identify
              the simplest workable models that adequately simulate avalanche behavior.
              

Snow avalanches directly affect people by causing injury or death,
              restricting transportation, destroying structures and villages, limiting access
              to areas of activity and altering the natural environment. Although the
              frequency of avalanches has not changed significantly over the past century,
              the hazard has increased as more people live, work and travel in mountain
              regions. Indirect costs to society such as those associated with mitigation,
              litigation, insurance, and loss of both travel and business opportunities are
              also high. The overall goal of this research is to increase public safety and
              reduce costs associated with snow avalanches.


