Title       : The Effects of Legitimacy on Responses to Injustice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0136747

Award Number: 0136747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Hegtvedt khegtv@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cathryn Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0136747
Karen Hegtvedt
Cathryn Johnson
Emory University 

The
              investigators will conduct two experiments that provide a novel combination of
              the justice and legitimacy areas in group processes research. Generally,
              missing from the justice literature is the notion of justice as a collective
              process, albeit one dependent on individual perceptions. This research will
              augment current understanding of reactions to injustice in task groups by
              incorporating collective sources of legitimacy. It also will have implications
              for understanding issues of injustice in concrete instances such as wage
              disputes, environmental conflict, and organizational budget decisions.
              Specifically, the objective of this research is to address two general
              questions: 1) how does the legitimacy of an outcome distribution affect an
              individual's emotional and behavioral reactions to perceived injustice? and 2)
              how does the legitimacy of an allocator and his or her use of fair or unfair
              procedures affect an individual's emotional and behavioral responses to
              perceived injustice? Legitimacy takes two collective forms: authorization
              refers to support by individuals who occupy higher positions within a group
              than the focal person and endorsement refers to similar support from people of
              equal or lower status than the focal person. 

Hypotheses pertaining to the
              two questions above are derived from tenets of justice and legitimacy theories.
              To test the effects of legitimacy and other factors on perceptions of and
              reactions to injustice, two computerized experiments are created. Experiment
              One addresses the effects of legitimacy of the outcome distribution and group
              identification on perceptions of and reactions to an unjust (from the subject's
              point of view) outcome distribution. The design of Experiment One is a 2 x 2 x
              2 factorial experiment that includes: authorization of outcome distribution
              (low/high), endorsement of outcome distribution (low/high), and group identity
              (salience of identity with peers/salience of identity with authorities). The
              dependent variables are perceptions of the justness of the outcome
              distribution,  emotional expressions, and cognitive and behavioral responses to
              perceptions of injustice. Experiment Two examines the effects of legitimacy of
              the allocator and procedural justice on reactions to an unjust outcome
              distribution. Experiment Two is also a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial experiment involving
              authorization of the allocator, endorsement of the allocator, and procedural
              justice (fair/unfair procedures). Computer programs will be developed for each
              experiment to create independent variable manipulations.  Approximately 160
              subjects are required for each experiment (n=20 subjects in each cell). 

