Title       : Control and Observation of Mixing and Fluid Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0136404

Award Number: 0136404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilead Tadmor tadmor@ece.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed research is to develop generic methods for active
              feedback control of complex, non-equilibrium fluid flow. While active control
              of fluid flow has been studied, the use of feedback in non-equilibrium flows is
              largely a new territory. 

A main hindrance to applying off-the-shelf control
              methods is the absence of appropriate models. Existing models tend to either be
              simplistic steady models or, on the other extreme, complex computational fluid
              dynamics (CFD) simulation models, whose mere size and the lack of an invariant
              concept of state space are 
prohibitive in feedback design. The modeling
              challenge goes hand in hand with the development of practical design tools,
              tailored to the needs of fluid flow applications, and utilizing their
              ``redeeming factors". Such factors include the 
formation of few, large
              coherent structures, periodicity of some reference orbits, and useful concepts
              of Hamiltonian energy. 

A focus on periodic characteristics of coherent
              structures, such as the period itself, extrema of relevant indices over a
              period, and, indeed, leading Fourier coefficients (phasors), reduces the model
              to manageable size and incorporates intrinsic filtering. That filtering (both
              spatially and temporally) is expected to reduce effects of chaotic and
              stochastic dynamics, that feasible control methods are  likely to be unable to
              address. Under typical, periodic and low gain actuation, periodic
              characteristics of both the controlled structure and sensor signals are
              expected to be slowly varying. In its simplest form, an observer model would be
              that of fixed period and phasors. Identified algebraic and / or (slow) dynamic
              relationships between periodic characteristics of the sensor signal, the
              actuation signal and those of the controlled structure, together will comprise
              the control-oriented system model and will be used for control design. That is,
              feedback control will translate observed slow variations in the periodic
              characteristics of the system into slow variations in the periodic
              characteristics of the actuation signal. Energy storage expressions for the
              lumped model can be used for feasible control design, such as in regulating the
              total stored energy, or the periodic energy exchange between relevant
              Hamiltonians.
 




