Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Creating Property Rights Over the King's Highway
               -- Institutional Change and the Development of Road Infrastructure in Early
               Modern England.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0136749

Award Number: 0136749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Laurent Rosenthal rosenthal@econ.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research examines the implications of infrastructure
              privatization from a historical perspective.  It investigates an institutional
              change that took place in eighteenth century England, in which responsibility
              for providing road investment was transferred from local units of government to
              private organizations known as turnpike trusts.  The trustees of these
              organizations funded road improvements by levying a regulated schedule of tolls
              on the users of the road, while their counterparts in local government funded
              improvements with local taxes.  The first part of the dissertation will
              determine whether this form of privatization increased the level of road
              expenditure in eighteenth century England.  It will use the funds provided by
              this grant to collect data on the investment behavior of turnpike trusts and
              local governments.  Then it will use this data to compare the expenditure
              levels of local government with the corresponding turnpike trust after a
              privatization occurs.  
     The dissertation research also develops and tests
              a theory that explains why privatization increased the level of infrastructure
              investment in the context of eighteenth century England.  It emphasizes the
              externalities created by inter-jurisdictional traffic and suggests that these
              externalities limited investment under the decentralized system.  It then
              argues that the levying of tolls resulted in the internalization of the costs
              and benefits of road improvement and ultimately encouraged more investment. 
              Besides focusing on externalities, the theory also emphasizes the transfer of
              'control-rights' to private actors with a concentrated interest in
              infrastructure improvement.  It argues that landowners and industrialists
              lobbied for the right to establish turnpike trusts so that they could ensure
              that complimentary transportation investments were undertaken. The second part
              of the dissertation will estimate the contribution of transportation
              infrastructure investment to economic growth in England during the eighteenth
              century.  Data on transportation costs will be collected for several different
              highways, which will contribute to an estimate of productivity growth in the
              road transportation sector.  The project will then econometrically estimate the
              relationship between road investment and productivity growth in this sector. 
              Next, it will broaden the analysis and show that there is a correlation between
              the formation of turnpike trusts and other local investments, including land
              improvements and the adoption of factories and steam engines.  This will lend
              support to the hypothesis that there is a complimentary relationship between
              infrastructure investment and capital investment.  Finally, the project will
              investigate the econometric relationship between transportation investment and
              growth in land rents and wages during the eighteenth century, providing yet
              another assessment of the economic value of these investments in the context of
              the British economy in this period.  

.     


