Title       : Collaborative Research: Spatially Additive and Discrete-Choice Spatial Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0136229

Award Number: 0136229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129984             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. LeSage jpl@jpl.econ.utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The continued growth in the availability and use of spatial data on a broad
              range of phenomena have fueled a drive to develop more effective and
              statistically sound approaches for the analysis of those data.  Because spatial
              data have distinctive characteristics that do not enable the immediate
              application of many statistical approaches because fundamental assumptions that
              underlie the use of those approaches, focused inquiries are required into the
              development of new spatial statistical approaches and careful adaptation in the
              use of extant statistical methods for spatial analysis.  These awards support
              collaborative research by two spatial econometricians on two different kinds of
              spatial analytic modeling approaches.  The first of these approaches deals with
              spatially additive models. Traditionally, the two main methods for analyzing
              spatial data have been (1) to model the conditional mean of the dependent
              variable and (2) to focus on specification of spatial dependence among
              observation.  The spatially additive model is designed to combine the
              specification of the conditional mean with the specification of spatial
              dependence among observations.  The proposed development of spatially additive
              models in this project will be based on recent innovations that allow
              generalized additive models to be extended to spatial analysis.  First, sparse
              specification of spatial dependence, quadratic log-determinant approximations
              and bounds, and computational advances have increased both the speed with which
              spatial estimation can be accomplished and the size of practical problems that
              can be solved.  Second, quadratic bounds and approximations to the
              log-determinant can lead to a standard sequential quadratic programming
              solution that permit quick computation and robust optimization.  These advances
              also allow simultaneous parameter estimation and model selection.  The second
              major line of inquiry for this collaborative project consists of the
              development of multinomial probit estimation methods for regional science
              modeling problems where the sample data exhibit spatial dependence. 
              Multinomial probit models can be applied to problems where the variable of
              interest represents a choice between two or more alternatives.  Estimation
              methods and algorithms that are generally applicable are not currently
              available for the case when the polychotomous dependent variable disturbance
              process in the relationship exhibits spatial dependence.  The methods to be
              developed through this project will address this issue and have application to
              location decisions involving spatial data.  Theoretical issues relating to use
              of multinomial probit models and three alternative estimation strategies will
              be evaluated.  The strategies are maximum likelihood estimation, Bayesian
              estimators based on Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) estimation, and a hybrid
              strategy based on MCMC methods and Expectation-Maximization (EM)
              algorithms.

Outcomes from the project are expected to include theoretical
              development of spatial multinomial probit model specification and estimation as
              well as algorithms and code that will be of value in the toolkit of methods
              available to spatial econometricians, regional scientists, and geographers. 
              The new statistical approaches to be developed through this project will
              complement the approaches developed by these investigators and other leading
              spatial statisticians, thereby further enhancing the range of tools that
              researchers can use to effectively analyze a broad range of spatial databases. 
              Because the investigators will make their results available through
              user-friendly software and documentation, this work should foster continued
              methodological development as well as enhanced capabilities for geographic and
              spatial econometric inquiry.

