Title       : Novel Extreme Composite Materials due to Constituents of Negative Stiffness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0136986

Award Number: 0136986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $798966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roderic S. Lakes lakes@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reid F. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter J. Drugan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Carpick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Novel extreme composite materials due to constituents of negative
              stiffness

R. S. Lakes, R. W. Carpick, R. F. Cooper*, W. J.
              Drugan
Department of Engineering Physics and *Department of Materials
              Science
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706

	The proposed
              research is directed toward the attainment of extreme
material properties by
              relaxing some of the assumptions commonly held about
constituent behavior in a
              composite material.  A composite  material
combines two or more constituent
              phases of different material properties to
achieve a new material with
              enhanced mechanical/transport properties.
Effective mechanical properties of
              composites are determined primarily by
the properties of the materials being
              combined, the interface behavior, and
the spatial arrangement of the phases in
              the composite. Traditionally, the
design variables associated with composites
              include (i) the choice of
constituent materials, (ii) the volume fraction of
              the constituents, and
(iii) the geometry of the phases.
	Recently, one of the
              writers (Lakes) and co-workers showed that
several classes of composites can
              exhibit extreme behavior if one
constituent has negative stiffness. An
              analysis of the possibilities in
viscoelastic composite systems was reported
              in Physical Review Letters.
Peak damping and large stiffness anomalies are
              possible even with a dilute
concentration of inclusions, provided matrix
              damping is small. An
experimental illustration of the behavior of a lumped
              unit cell was
reported in Philosophical Magazine Letters. It disclosed
              singular
mechanical damping tan(delta) [where tan(delta) is the tangent of the
              phase
angle between stress and strain] in a system containing post-buckled
              tubes.
A further experimental illustration of extreme behavior in a
              particulate
composite was reported in Nature. Composites prepared with a
              dilute
concentration of ferroelastic inclusions exhibited large peaks
              in
tan(delta). The inclusions are more effective than diamond in
              increasing
the composite stiffness at selected temperatures. These results
              point to
the possibility of achieving extreme behavior in designed composites,
              and
exceeding conventional bounds based on the assumption of
              positive
constituent stiffness.
	The goal of this research is to explore the
              effects of constituents
of negative stiffness in composite materials. We
              hypothesize on the basis
of some initial theoretical analyses and experiments
              that if one phase has
negative stiffness, the overall stiffness of the
              composite can be made
large. Moreover, we hypothesize that extreme mechanical
              damping effects can
occur if one phase has negative stiffness.
	Multiple
              methods of achieving inclusion negative stiffness are to
be examined.  Also,
              the question of stability of materials and composites
is to be examined in new
              theoretical developments.  For a composite with
extremely high stiffness to be
              useful, it must be stable.
	Composites with inclusions of negative stiffness
              are of scientific
interest in that current understanding of heterogeneous
              media is predicated
on an assumption of each phase to have positive stiffness.
              Our preliminary
theoretical and experimental results indicate extreme effects
              in stiffness
and damping when that assumption is relaxed, so we anticipate
              that the
present work will facilitate the development of new classes of
              materials
with extreme properties, even materials stiffer than
              diamond.




