Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Importance of Relocations in
               U.S. Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0136927

Award Number: 0136927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17655              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Bils bils@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Firms move operations to locations that are more favorable for their business. 
              Competition among state and local governments to lure businesses has attracted
              considerable interest from economists, as well as legislators and policy
              makers, regarding issues influencing relocation of firms' manufacturing
              activities.  Only a few studies have looked at how manufacturing firms
              geographically locate their production, and most of them have looked at small
              samples from manufacturing or small geographic regions.  For an initial study,
              this dissertation research summarizes the patterns of plant relocation and the
              post-move performance of relocated plants in the U.S. manufacturing industries
              over the period 1972-1992 using non-publicly available plant and firm level
              data from the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) or the Census of
              Manufactures (CM).  Focusing on an individual firm's decision to relocate, this
              research tabulates and analyzes information on the relocation of firm's
              manufacturing activities in the following three subprojects.  First, the
              research assesses the relative importance of the relocation across industries
              and regions by constructing industry level measures of entry, relocation, and
              exit.  The study examines if relocation shows different patterns in plant
              openings and closings compared to de novo entry and permanent exit. Second, the
              research  studies the characteristics of relocated plants and the decision to
              relocate.  To analyze characteristics of individual firms' geographic shifts of
              production process, the research focuses on new production facilities for
              existing firms to produce a product in a new location.  Estimation based on
              econometric models will demonstrate how taxes, unionization, factor prices,
              ownership, and other geographic and plant specific characteristics affect the
              relocation decision.  Third, the research  investigates the impact of
              geographic shifts on the firms by comparing the growth rates of output and
              productivity for newly relocated plants to those for existing plants in the
              original location.  The inverse growth-age relation suggested by Jovanovic's
              (1982) firm-learning model is tested for relocating plants to examine whether
              the inverse growth-age relation observed among young firms holds also for the
              relocating plants that start over in a new space.  



