Title       : Some Macroeconomic Implications of the Second Industrial Revolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0136055

Award Number: 0136055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy P. Greenwood gree@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ananth Seshadri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Second Industrial Revolution is a major cusp on the chart of economic
              progress. It saw the rise of electricity, the internal combustion engine,
              steel, and the petrochemical industry. A massive transformation occurred in
              industry as steam, water, and horse-drawn power were supplanted by electricity
              and gas. A revolution just as great was taking place in the household sector of
              the economy. This research focuses on the household revolution. The idea is
              that technological progress can have profound implications in the microeconomy
              of the household that in turn can have enormous consequences for the
              macroeconomy of the nation. The Second Industrial Revolution is a major event
              in American economic history. There is little work in modern macroeconomics
              that addresses it. Understanding this period better is a worthy goal in its own
              right. But, it may have lessons for today. In many poor countries female
              labor-force participation is still low. Fertility is high and children still
              work. Most people live on farms. Maybe these countries resemble the US at the
              turn of the last century? As society moves into the information age,
              technological progress may lead to another shift in work patterns. Some
              speculate that it may favor working at home and outside of cities.
              Understanding how technological progress affected life in the past may aid in
              predicting how it will affect life in the future.

A revolution in consumer
              durables was associated with the Second Industrial Revolution.  Life at the
              turn of the last century was primitive. Most households didn't have
              electricity, central heating, or running water. This changed with the Second
              Industrial Revolution. It ushered in clothes dryers, electric irons,
              refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, and washing machines. A fruit of this
              technological advance was a dramatic decline in the time required for
              housework. Along with the spread of new appliances, there was a tremendous rise
              in female labor-force participation over the last century. Was the durable
              goods revolution responsible for the rise in female labor-force participation?
              How did this affect economic welfare? 

The Second Industrial Revolution
              transformed everyday life in other ways.   It witnessed a spectacular decline
              in fertility. It also unshackled children from serfdom. The percentage of
              children that were gainfully employed dropped precipitously with the dawning of
              the Second Industrial Revolution. Almost no children worked by the Revolution's
              end. Could it be that before the Second Industrial Revolution children were
              needed for farm and housework? Labor- saving technological progress lifted this
              requirement. Children could now attend more school. The consequence was a fall
              in fertility, the end of child labor, and a rise in educational attainment. 

              
Before the Second Industrial Revolution most Americans lived on a farm.
              Technological advance meant that less labor was required on the farm.
              Technological progress meant that new types of consumer goods could be produced
              for two reasons. First, it reduced the cost of producing these goods. Second,
              the rising incomes associated with technological progress in other areas of the
              economy increased the demand for new consumer goods. Thus, while less labor was
              needed on the farm, more labor was being demanded in manufacturing to produce
              these new goods. This project analyzes the wave of migration that occurred
              during the Second Industrial Revolution as people moved from rural to urban
              areas. It studies urbanization. 

