Title       : Collaborative Research: A General Purpose Tool for Acoustic Remote Sensing and
               Mapping of Hydrothermal Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0136768

Award Number: 0136768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher D. Jones cjones@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell R. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal -  0136768
P.I.   Jones

The goal of this proposal is to develop and
              fabricate an acoustic remote sensing and mapping tool dedicated to studying
              hydrothermal flow at the seafloor. The new system will be deployable on a
              variety of ROVs, deep towed platforms, and stationary seafloor observatory
              networks for the study and detection of high and low temperature hydrothermal
              flow regimes. The sensor will implement two new acoustic methods that will
              enable detection and quantitative mapping of diffuse hydrothermal flow at the
              seafloor using acoustic scintillation thermography (AST) and volumetric studies
              of plume particle distributions and flow above the seafloor. These methods have
              been demonstrated using a commercial sonar system mounted on the ROV Jason
              during three previous experiments. The proposed sensor will improve upon the
              operational and technical limitations of the commercial system and enable long
              time scale experiments and larger-scale surveys using a variety of platforms.
              In addition, the sensor proposed will enable high quality scientific data
              collection and analysis thus providing a flexible test bed for new acoustic
              methods and applications of remote sensing to hydrothermal flow. The system
              will be compatible with available and proposed seafloor observatories, enabling
              interactive operation via the Internet.

This proposal is the product of an
              ongoing collaboration between groups at Rutgers (Rona et al.) and the Applied
              Physics Laboratory of the University of Washington (APL-UW, Jones et al.) and
              arises from our experience in using commercial sonars for hydrothermal
              observations. The proposed instrumentation development is central to the goal
              of the PIs to observe focused and diffuse hydrothermal flow over long time
              periods. Design, fabrication, and local testing will be the responsibility of
              APL-UW whereas, the Rutgers group will contribute to the process of developing
              system specifications from scientific measurement requirements and will conduct
              the field tests, including analysis of test data.

The new remote sensing
              tool will enable measurements of plume flow variability at long time scales (of
              order 1 year). Such scales are important in studies on the response of
              hydrothermal flow regimes to tidal forcing as well as to volcanic and tectonic
              events. The sensor will enable the implementation of new acoustic detection and
              mapping techniques for characterizing diffuse flow over large regions (10s of
              km2) of interest. It is proposed that this instrument will also enable studies
              of net heat flux from hydrothermal systems and its relation to geophysical,
              oceanographic, and biological processes.

