Title       : Scaling Theory for Electronic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0136453

Award Number: 0136453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabre Kais kais@power1.chem.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sabre Kais of Purdue University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to develop and apply the finite scaling method
              in several related projects.  First, the finite size scaling method will be
              adapted for studying the critical behavior of a quantum Hamiltonian as a
              function of a set of parameters.  This method will be generalized using
              Gaussian basis sets to search for new stable multiply-charged anions in the gas
              phase.  As well, methods will be developed to predict and calculate the
              formation of resonances for atomic and molecular anions.  Next, the Feynmann
              path integral approach will be used to advance the finite size scaling method
              for mapping quantum problems to effective classical lattice systems.  The
              method will be combined with other simulation techniques to obtain critical
              parameters for molecular systems.  Finally, finite size scaling will be
              explored to enable correlation of structural and thermodynamic properties of
              small clusters with their corresponding bulk matter. 

A long-term goal of
              this research is the creation of a single approach that will enable accurate
              computational chemistry calculations for atomic, molecular, and cluster
              properties at the lowest effective cost.  Success in this area could obviate
              the need to carry out mundane or even hazardous experiments to determine
              necessary chemical information.  This work could also permit the exploration of
              transient chemical species that could otherwise be difficult or impossible to
              study experimentally.
