Title       : An Occupational Approach to Regional Growth and Specialization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0136988

Award Number: 0136988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann R. Markusen amarkusen@hhh.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Received theories of regional growth stress the role of firms and managers in
              making location decisions.  In contrast, this research project investigates
              whether an occupational rather than an industrial approach might better explain
              regional growth differentials. The occupational approach  emphasizes the causal
              role of human capital, especially as key generative occupations. Skilled
              workers of all sorts are less linked to specific industries than in the past,
              exhibit considerable inter-regional mobility and may provide a better vantage
              point from which to assess entrepreneurial potential than does the traditional
              reliance upon industries in regional analysis.  To identify occupations key to
              regional development, the research effort uses four attributes: capturability,
              growth potential, cross-fertilization and entrepreneurship.  Using federal and
              state level data on occupations, the effort will identify generative
              occupations for each of a set of US metropolitan areas and test hypotheses
              regarding the contribution of each to overall growth performance.  It will also
              compare the results of an occupational approach to traditional industrial
              approaches.

The research results will contribute methodological innovations
              to comparative regional growth analysis, expand the state of knowledge on the
              composition of regional economies and offer economic development practitioners
              an additional tool for guiding metropolitan growth and development.  Billions
              of dollars have been spent by state and local governments in attempts to
              attract and retain firms, with mixed results.  Encouraging the development of
              key occupations by working with the institutions that create and organize them
              (e.g. schools, colleges and Universities, training programs, professional
              associations) might prove a more economical and effective way of anchoring
              economic activity in regions than targeting industrial sectors.  This research
              is designed to test the theoretical underpinnings of this novel approach to
              economic development.

