Title       : Market Selection in Complete and Incomplete Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0136307

Award Number: 0136307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384106             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Easley dae3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence E. Blume  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Markets bring together traders with widely divergent beliefs and motivations for
              the purpose of exchange.  Economic tradition asserts the market selection
              hypothesis, that the market sorts traders.  Those traders most directly
              concerned with profits and with the most accurate forecasts of the future will
              come to dominate the market.  This hypothesis is used to justify a variety of
              modeling assumptions about markets, including rational expectations in
              macroeconomic models and informationally efficient markets in finance. However,
              it has never been carefully examined.

This project has two goals: To study
              the validity of the market selection hypothesis and, more generally, the
              implications of trader heterogeneity for market behavior.  The validity of the
              market selection hypothesis depends upon market structure.  If market structure
              allows all potential gains from trade to be realized, the market selection
              hypothesis will be valid.  If not, markets will sort traders in other ways
              which we hope to uncover.  Market selection becomes a more delicate issue when
              traders have incorrect beliefs but are learning.  In this case the question is
              how the market sorts across learning rules.  Although general equilibrium
              analysis does not require similar traders, modeling practice in macroeconomics
              and finance eschews trader heterogeneity.  We will show how market models with
              diverse traders exhibit very different (and more realistic) market behavior
              from the market models now in vogue. Our work opens a door for behavioral
              analysis in markets because the market selection hypothesis is not always
              correct, and even when it holds it has implications only for long-run market
              behavior. While it is possible to postulate the existence of traders with
              arbitrary behavior patterns, the market sorts among these traders and only a
              few behaviors will in fact determine market prices in the long run.

