Title       : The Anatomy of Real Exchange Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0136979

Award Number: 0136979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226715             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario J. Crucini mario.j.crucini@vandebilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chris I. Telmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A time immemorial question in international economics asks what determines the
              relative price of a good, or a basket of goods, in one country vis-a-vis
              another.  The first generation of empirical work, utilizing primarily consumer
              price indices, has documented large and persistent deviations from 'purchasing
              power parity' (PPP). The outcome has been more one of raising additional
              questions than providing answers. The research agenda proposed here follows a
              second generation of work taking the next logical step: examining panel data on
              local currency prices of literally thousands of individual goods and services
              across many different countries. This project blends theoretical and empirical
              analysis to better understand how relative prices of individual goods evolve
              over time, how this relates to the behavior of aggregate relative prices, and
              what this tells us about nominal exchange rates. This project consists of three
              related parts. The essence of each is new data on many goods and services
              across many countries and time periods. An important goal of the project is to
              make these data available publicly. 

The first part focuses on the European
              Union, studying good-by-good deviations from the Law-of-One-Price for over
              5,000 goods and services for the years 1975, 1980, 1985 and 1990.  It finds
              that between most countries there are roughly as many overpriced goods as there
              are underpriced goods. This phenomenon is stable across time, in spite of
              relatively large swings in nominal exchange rates. Equally weighted averages of
              Law-of-One-Price deviations are small, especially after controlling for
              national income levels. CPI-weighted averages are also small, indicating that
              deviations from Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) are small. Cross-sectional
              dispersion, in contrast, is large, but it is related to economically meaningful
              characteristics of goods such as international tradability, tradability of
              factors of production and the competitive structure of the markets in which the
              goods are sold. 

The second part extends the work to 122 cities across 79
              countries. Compared to Europe, we find both similarities and differences. We
              find, as others have, that price levels are lower in relatively poor countries.
              When we distinguish between traded and non-traded goods we find that the latter
              play a dominant role in explaining the behavior of aggregate international
              relative prices. A decrease in the overall level of price dispersion between
              1990 and 2000, for instance, is primarily attributable to convergence in the
              prices of non-traded goods. 

The third project models the dynamics of
              microeconomic prices. Preliminary results find that 
the half-lives of
              deviations from the Law-of-One-Price are less than 1 year for most goods. This 
              differs from previous work based on aggregate price indices, which has produced
              estimates between 3 and 5 years. Further dynamic reconciliation of our data,
              both across time and data sets, remains work-in-progress. Once complete, this
              reconciliation will open up many new lines of inquiry. 


