Title       : Zinc Biogeochemistry and its Relationship to Cobalt, Phosphate and Phytoplankton
               Community Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0136835

Award Number: 0136835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Simone Metz                             
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343928             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Moffett jmoffett@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sonya T. Dyhrman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0136835

A trace metal chemist and a molecular biologist from
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will join forces to determine the
              speciation and distribution of zinc and cobalt in the marine environment to
              assess the role these metals play as an essential micronutrient for
              phytoplankton.  The PIs also will determine what the relationship of zinc is to
              the geochemistry of cobalt and phosphorus and its influence on the composition
              of phytoplankton assemblages.  During cruises to the North Pacific and the
              Bering Sea, the PIs will measure the speciation of Zn and Co, as well as
              alkaline phosphatase activity.  Deckboard incubation experiments using freshly
              collected samples and added Zn, Co phosphate and organic P will be used to
              determine changes in alkaline phosphatase activity via ELF assay.  Observed
              differences in these experiments will be compared with changes in specific
              growth rates for alkenone producers and the drawdown of nutrients obtained by
              scientists from the University of Hawaii.  Similar measurements will be made
              during a cruise to the North Atlantic.  In the laboratory, culture experiments
              will be used to ascertain the following:  (1) effect of phosphate limitation on
              the requirements and growth limiting concentrations of Zn and Co and vice versa
              for cultures of E. huxleyi and Thallassiosira weissflogii by measuring growth
              rates and alkaline phosphatase activity; (2) whether E. huxleyi can use
              organically complexed Co; and (3) whether  Trichodesmium has an absolute
              requirement for Co or Zn and the effect of these metals on alkaline
              phosphatase.  From a methodology standpoint, the PIs plan to improve upon
              current methods available for making Zn speciation measurements, resolve
              existing discrepancies and lower the limit on free Zn concentrations.  They
              also will develop a new solvent extractions speciation/isotope tracer technique
              to extend detection limits for Zn and evaluate lability of ambient Zn
              complexes.   



