Title       : From Slaves to Citizens: Slave Law and Claims-Making in Colonial Cuba
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0136558

Award Number: 0136558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alejandro de la Fuente fuente2@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent scholarship has identified a set of social and economic conditions that
              led to the creation of segregation and of a legally-defined racial order in the
              United States and South Africa. Yet similar circumstances and needs did not
              result in comparable institutional and social arrangements in Latin American
              countries with a substantial population of African descent. Why? That is the
              central question that this research project seeks to answer. Building upon
              recent historiography on Atlantic slavery and using Cuba as a test case, this
              study seeks to identify some of the conditions that prevented the creation of
              segregation in Spanish America. The researcher suggests that the legal,
              institutional, and ultimately cultural settings in which slave regimes
              developed are indeed crucial to understand post-emancipation race relations.
              These settings established the ideological and cultural boundaries of what
              would later be politically possible. This research attempts to identify the
              opportunities for claims making that colonial legislation and institutions
              created for slaves during the long colonial period. Traditional Iberian law,
              represented mainly by the 13th-century code Las Siete Partidas, conferred a
              limited legal personality to slaves, as illustrated by several slave "rights":
              to marry even against the will of the master, to seek judicial protection in
              case of abuse and mistreatment, and to access manumission. These opportunities
              for claims making could have contributed to the creation of a political culture
              of inclusion and indeed to what has been described as the integration of the
              Africans and their descendants into colonial society. In turn, a political
              culture of inclusion and integration would facilitate the emergence of
              cross-racial forms of mobilization such as the nationalist coalitions that
              fought for independence in Cuba and elsewhere in Spanish America. To test these
              hypotheses, the principal investigator will use archival resources that contain
              local regulations, court decisions, cannon laws, pastoral letters and church
              documents.
