Title       : Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of Important Types of Geomagnetic Disturbance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0136139

Award Number: 0136139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $572765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence R. Lyons larry@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eftyhia Zesta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0136139
Lyons

Research over the past few years has demonstrated for the
              first time that there are several fundamentally different types of geomagnetic
              disturbances having time scales ranging from a few minutes to a few hours and
              ground magnetic field perturbations ranging from a few tens of nT to ~2000 nT.
              Each has unique characteristics, reflects distinctly different physical
              processes occurring within the magnetosphere, and contributes significantly to
              overall space weather activity that affects manmade systems in space and on the
              ground. The general objective of the research proposed here is to determine
              important aspects of the two- dimensional structure and temporal dynamics of
              these different disturbances by using the recently enhanced capabilities for
              Arctic ground-based observations (CANOPUS, NORSTAR, SuperDARN) of currents,
              electric fields, and optical emissions within the auroral ionosphere, in
              combination with appropriate spacecraft observations (DMSP, POLAR, IMAGE, LANL,
              GOES, Geotail). Specific objectives related to the following disturbances
              include:

Poleward boundary intensifications (PBIs: have an auroral signature
              that can extent equatorward from the poleward boundary of the auroral oval and
              are associated with short- time scale flow bursts in the magnetotail):
              Determine the two-dimensional structure of PBIs, and when and where their
              different types of two-dimensional structure occur. Relate the local
              two-dimensional structure to global auroral structure. Investigate the
              possibility that PBIs are a manifestation of a global magnetospheric
              oscillation by determining whether PBIs generally show large power at
              auroral-zone ULF frequencies, if the same ULF frequencies seen in the auroral
              oval are simultaneously seen in the nightside plasma sheet, and if consistent
              phase speeds can be seen for PBI-related variations. Determine if PBIs
              extending to low latitudes are of such large scale that they simultaneously
              affect the nightside plasmasheet from x ~ -30 RE (or near the separatrix) to
              synchronous orbit. Determine the two-dimensional relation between PBIs and
              plasma flows in the auroral ionosphere.

Dynamic pressure disturbances (large
              and rapid brightening, broadening, and poleward expansion of the auroral oval
              caused by enhancements in solar wind dynamic pressure): Determine (a) whether
              reconnection and the amount of open magnetic flux over the polar caps is in
              general strongly controlled by the dynamic pressure of the solar wind as recent
              observations suggest, (b) whether the strength of ionospheric and region 1
              currents are strongly controlled by solar wind dynamic pressure, and (c) how
              convection electric fields and the cross-polar cap potential drop depend upon
              dynamic pressure.

Convection-driven morningside auroral disturbances
              (auroral enhancements at midnight to dawn MLTs that occur during prolonged
              periods of enhance convection): Identify the current (ionospheric and field
              aligned), electric field, and precipitation particle characteristics directly
              associated with these dawnside auroral enhancements.

Substorms: Obtain an
              answer to the critical question of whether closer to 50% or closer to 100% of
              substorms are triggered by IMF changes that lead to a reduction in large- scale
              convection. This will be accomplished using the recently enhanced SuperDARN
              radar network to determine whether reductions in the strength of polar-cap
              convection (which must be related to appropriate IMF changes) are directly
              associated with substorm onset, and whether, for a given amount of energy
              stored in the tail, the strength of a substorm expansion phase is proportional
              to the amount of reduction in the strength of convection.
