Title       : Effects of Dietary N and Lichen on Body Protein Conservation in Reproducing
               Rangifer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0136210

Award Number: 0136210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $647056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Perry S. Barboza ffpsb@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0136210
Barboza

Caribou and reindeer (Rangifer tarandus) are the only
              ungulates to have successfully colonized both arctic and boreal ecosystems in a
              circumpolar distribution. These large animals are central to the cultural
              identity and sustenance of many indigenous peoples throughout the
              north.

Across arctic and sub-arctic landscapes, terrestrial lichens comprise
              a large proportion of the plant biomass. These assemblages of fungi, algae and
              cyanobacteria not only contribute to hydrology, nutrient cycling and
              atmospheric exchanges in the ecosystem, but are also consumed by caribou and
              reindeer. Pollutants deposited on lichens are dispersed via Rangifer into
              predators and humans and into soil and water systems along their migration
              routes. Lichens support many Rangifer herds in the depth of winter and in early
              spring before the majority of vascular plants resume growth. Consequently, the
              distribution and abundance of lichens are related to population dynamics and
              movements of Rangifer. Although lichens contain several potentially toxic
              compounds, Rangifer and its gastrointestinal microbes can adjust to utilizing
              the unusual structural carbohydrates in this forage. Exclusive consumption of
              lichen by captive reindeer, however, can result in mass loss and the net loss
              of nitrogen (N). Low concentrations of N in lichens may prevent animals from
              attaining a positive N balance especially at low food intakes. Inadequate
              dietary N compromises the maintenance of maternal tissues and limits the
              production of new tissues for fetal growth in pregnancy and milk for calves in
              spring. We propose a model of changes in body protein for northern deer to
              relate energy and N balance to dietary supplies. The model predicts changes in
              the concentration and isotopic enrichment of the catabolite urea in relation to
              tissue proteins and their products (creatinine, hydroxy proline, methyl
              histidine).

The proposed research will define mechanisms for conserving body
              N in Rangifer during pregnancy, and quantify a predictive model of body protein
              loss. Two PhD students will participate in the project. We propose two
              experiments with repeated measures of captive reindeer fed formulated diets or
              lichens. The first experiment will determine the dynamics of N through
              gestation; we will combine measures of food intake and excretion to assess N
              balance using tracer techniques and isotopic enrichments, with a validation of
              these methods in non- reproductive animals during spring. The second experiment
              will focus on the digestive and metabolic responses to lichens; we will
              determine intake, digestion, digesta flow and absorption, and recycling of
              waste N. Indirect measures of body composition will be used throughout to
              determine changes in body protein and fat in relation to diet and
              season.

Describing the interrelationships between lichen ranges and Rangifer
              populations requires long-term monitoring and management because lichens grow
              so slowly, but accumulate biomass over many years. This project will provide
              new data on metabolic responses of Rangifer to the nutritional constraints of
              northern ecosystems and a tool for understanding the importance of lichens to
              Rangifer populations. These data will provide a basis for assessing the
              contribution of migrating herds to N and mineral cycling in tundra systems.
              Such an increased understanding of herbivore dynamics in the arctic also will
              have direct implications to other arctic ruminants (i.e. moose and muskoxen)
              with similar adaptive physiological mechanisms for protein and energy
              conservation.

