Title       : Asset Market Frictions in Quantitative International Business Cycle Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0136885

Award Number: 0136885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Kehoe pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The central puzzle in international business cycles is that real exchange rates
              are volatile, persistent, and not closely related to macroeconomic aggregates. 
               These exchange rate fluctuations are explained by the interaction of monetary
              shocks and sticky prices.  However, researchers have not yet developed
              quantitative general equilibrium models that support this explanation.  The
              first generation of quantitative equilibrium models of international
              fluctuations from over a decade ago document that complete market models with
              technology shocks have a hard time generating the observed patterns of exchange
              rates.  This project consists of three parts which model specific frictions
              discussed in the literature and assesses their ability to better account for
              the observations.   The first part considers simple frictions such as
              incomplete markets.  The second part considers the friction due to the
              difficulty of enforcing contracts between sovereign nations.  These contracts
              involve large transfers of resources, which are only backed by promises to pay
              later.  In the third part frictions are due to fixed cost to access the asset
              markets.

More specifically,  this project introduces sticky prices, monetary
              shocks and monopolists who price to market internationally into a quantitative
              equilibrium model of international fluctuations. This model can generate
              volatile and persistent real exchange rates, as in the data.  The main
              discrepancy between the model and the data is the high correlation between real
              exchange rates and relative consumptions while the data shows no clear pattern
              between these variables.  This anomaly will occur in any model with
              frictionless asset markets because in such a model the real exchange rate is
              tightly linked to the marginal utilities of consumption of domestic and foreign
              agents.  The theoretical research shows that friction due to incomplete
              markets, international loans that can be enforced only by the threat of
              exclusion from future borrowing, and fixed costs to exchange bonds and money in
              international markets break the tight link between real exchange rates and
              relative consumptions present in frictionless models by introducing a
              stochastic wedge between the real exchange rate and the ratio of marginal
              utilities.  The project investigates the quantitative significance of the
              different types of frictions.   Preliminary results suggest that these
              frictions can go a long way in resolving the consumption-real exchange rate
              anomaly and at the same time generate other observed characteristics of the
              data.


