Title       : Cohomology and Representation Theory: Reductive Algebraic Groups and Related
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2001   
File        : a0136082

Award Number: 0136082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel K. Nakano nakano@math.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator will investigate problems 
involving the
              representation theory of reductive algebraic 
groups. The structures related
              to reductive groups include 
Lie algebras, Chevalley groups, Weyl groups and
              centralizer 
algebras. The methods and constructions involved in the study
              will be 
algebraic as well as geometric. The underlying theme will be 
to
              establish connections between the cohomology and representations 
of the
              objects in order to prove new and interesting results 
about these structures.
              Establishing such relationships also 
lends itself to providing concrete
              calculations. 

The algebraic objects known as "groups," "rings" and "Lie
              algebras" 
arise in many different physical applications in biology,
              
chemistry and physics. These algebraic objects 
in general have complex
              internal structures and symmetries. 
Extracting information about these
              structures can provide 
vital information which can be used in a range of
              applications
such as those mentioned above.  This project is in the area
of
              representation theory, which is now a central area of 
mathematics because it
              provides a systematic method for studying 
complicated algebraic structures.
              Roughly speaking, representations 
can be thought of as ``snapshots'' of some
              algebraic object from
different viewing angles. These snapshots are provided
              via 
explicitly described matrices. By putting together 
the information from
              the representations, many questions 
surrounding these complicated algebraic
              systems can be answered.
