Title       : RUI: International Taxation and the International Trade of Multinational Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0136293

Award Number: 0136293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly A. Clausing clausing@reed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reed College
	      3203 S E Woodstock Blvd
	      Portland, OR  972028138    503/771-1112

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates the relationship between the international taxation
              of corporate income and the international trade of multinational firms.  About
              40 percent of all U.S. international trade is intrafirm trade, or international
              trade that occurs between two affiliates of a multinational firm.  Preliminary
              evidence suggests that multinational firms alter the prices on their intrafirm
              trade transactions in order to minimize their worldwide tax burden.  For
              example, by underpricing goods sold to affiliates in low tax countries and
              overpricing goods purchased from affiliates in low-tax countries, a
              multinational firm can shift income to more lightly taxed locations.  The
              opposite strategy applies to transactions with high tax countries.
     The
              first goal of the  research is to examine the magnitude of such income
              shifting, analyzing the pattern of such behavior in different industries.  The
              empirical analysis will consider the relationship between intrafirm trade
              prices and the tax rate of the partner country, employing detailed data on
              intrafirm trade prices from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.   The second goal
              of the proposed research will be to consider the consequences of this behavior
              for (a) the volumes of U.S. international trade with different countries and
              (b) U.S. federal government revenue collections.  This analysis will rely in
              part on data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis on the operations of U.S.
              multinational firms.  Third, this research will consider an alternative
              international taxation system, formula apportionment.  Under this system,  U.S.
              multinational firms would be taxed based on the share of their worldwide
              activity (measured by sales, payroll, or assets) located in the United States,
              rather than based on the income they incur in the United States.  The revenue
              consequences of this system will be explored.
     This research will be
              informative for those scholars and policy makers who are interested in tax
              policy as well as those interested in trade patterns.  For example, the extent
              to which multinational firms avoid taxation by shifting their income to low-tax
              countries affects our assessment of the fairness and efficiency of the current
              international tax system.  By directly comparing the current system with an
              alternative, formula apportionment, more can be learned about the costs and
              benefits of these two options.  Further, the tax minimizing behavior of
              multinational firms also affects the pattern of U.S. international trade in
              ways that trade economists have neglected.  
     A final goal of the research
              will be to positively impact the research and educational environment of Reed
              College.  This will be done by strengthening the principal investigator's
              abilities as a researcher, by working closely with undergraduate students on
              the proposed research, and by sharing data and research findings with students
              and researchers both at Reed and elsewhere.


