Title       : Interpreting Geographies of Poverty: Rural Gentrification and White Poverty in
               the American Northwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0136703

Award Number: 0136703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171434             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria A. Lawson lawson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lucy Jarosz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project will examine the recursive relationships between the
              socio-economic forces producing rural poverty and the cultural processes
              through which the poor and rural poverty are identified by diverse residents of
              rapidly gentrifying areas in the rural American Northwest.  The  research will
              also explore how people understand class and gender differences in the context
              of high in-migration and rapid development and change in areas of persistent
              rural poverty.  The research project will be conducted over a three-year period
              and will use both quantitative and qualitative methods.  It will investigate
              the patterns of white poverty and economic restructuring across
              non-metropolitan counties and rural census tracts in Washington, Idaho and
              Montana. Economically booming and more stagnant places characterized by either
              high levels of white poverty or inequality will be compared in order to probe
              the ways in which social and cultural tensions over rural restructuring and
              poverty are being worked out in the Northwest.  Initially, a quantitative
              typology of non-metro counties will be constructed to characterize
              restructuring patterns.  The specific mechanisms by which class difference is
              represented and reproduced will then be investigated using in-depth interviews
              and focus group techniques.  The research will combine several elements of
              studies of rural poverty.  First, it will engage the literatures on regional
              economic and demographic change processes.  Second, it will describe the
              political economy of rural restructuring and link these analytic descriptions
              to the cultural dimensions of rural change.  The theoretical goal is to extend
              political-economy research through the incorporation of cultural and
              ideological processes in order to build a richer understanding of how poverty
              and socio-cultural differences are co-produced.  

The research project makes
              empirical, theoretical and applied contributions.  The research focuses on
              places where a large portion of those in poverty are white and so poverty
              cannot be racialized as a non-white issue.  In these contexts, the project will
              examine how poverty is understood in the context of economic restructuring and
              migration in the Northwest.  As the urban/rural divide becomes increasingly
              more porous and contested as urbanites move to rural spaces, it becomes ever
              more important to understand the ways in which marginalized populations are
              defined.  The project also extends a research agenda on the recursive
              relationships between political-economic restructuring and the socio-cultural
              construction of class difference.  The geographically specific analyses of
              restructuring and poverty will contribute to the goal of bringing cultural and
              ideological analysis into creative tension with political-economy approaches,
              thereby incorporating cultural considerations and meanings into the politics
              and economics, which define rural poverty.  Finally, this research will be
              informative to community members and policy makers as they work to address the
              problems of poverty and to create inclusive communities in the face of rapid
              change.

