Title       : Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Radicals and Clusters by Tunable-Laser Dissociative
               Photodetachment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0136195

Award Number: 0136195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Continetti rcontinetti@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division,  Continetti will use a tunable laser to study the
              dissociative photodetachment (DPD) and photodetachment dynamics of radicals and
              clusters. In these experiments, photoelectron-photofragment coincidence (PPC)
              spectroscopy combined with tunable laser photodetachment/threshold
              photoelectron spectroscopy will be used to carry out high-resolution studies on
              organic radicals as well as the wavelength-dependent DPD dynamics of cluster
              anions. These studies will focus on the spectroscopy and dissociation dynamics
              of alkoxy radicals important in atmospheric chemistry. Electronic structure and
              unimolecular dissociation calculations will be carried out to aid in the
              interpretation of the observed energetics and dissociation dynamics. Studying
              the wavelength dependence of the photodetachment dynamics of cluster anions and
              other transient species provides important information on the electronic
              structure of these systems and problems in electron-molecule interactions that
              are at the forefront of modern electronic structure theory. 

This grant
              supports the application of spectroscopic techniques to the study of
              short-lived, reactive molecules important in atmospheric and combustion
              chemistry. An important focus of the research will be on a class of molecules
              known as alkoxy radicals.  They play an important role in aspects of urban air
              pollution chemistry, but in spite of their importance, basic information about
              their stability and reactions are not known. This research project will help to
              fill in these gaps in our understanding of these important species, providing a
              solid empirical foundation for efforts to improve the modeling of atmospheric
              pollution phenomena. Graduate and undergraduate students will participate  in
              experiments involving state-of-the-art lasers and detection techniques,
              computer modeling and prediction of chemical properties.  They will thereby
              receive training in forefront methods of chemical research in preparation for
              advanced studies or entry into the scientific/technical workforce.

