Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grants: Relocating Indigenous
               Identity: Transnational Advocacy, Knowledge and Video in Oaxaca, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0136035

Award Number: 0136035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11976              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Jones geg172@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In southern Mexico, indigenous organizations struggle for autonomy by working
              with transnational non-governmental organizations (NGOs) concerned with
              environmental problems, resource use, human rights, and socioeconomic
              inequalities. New information and communication technologies (NICTs) are
              essential to these networks of advocacy. Greater access to NICTs provides
              indigenous organizations with
the means for self-representation, and thus
              changes the production of indigenous knowledge and identity. This dissertation
              project studies one such network in Oaxaca, Mexico with an examination of a
              grassroots support organization, Ojo de Agua Comunicacion, that endeavors to
              put new information and communication technology,
especially video equipment,
              at the disposal of indigenous communities. This research asks what are the
              organizational practices of video-mediated indigenous knowledge production? Who
              is accessing video technology and how is this access mediated by networks of
              advocacy? How is this video technology used to produce indigenous
              self-representations and challenge dominant constructions of cultural
              identity?
There are two specific research tasks supported by this grant: 1. an
              organizational ethnography of Ojo de Agua Comunicacion aimed at understanding
              its acquisition and use of NICTs in the process of assisting indigenous
              self-representation; and 2. an interpretive analysis of video-mediated
              self-representations of indigenous knowledge that this organization enables.
              For the first task, the everyday strategies of action of Ojo de Agua are
              studied
through participant-observation and in-depth interviews. The second
              task draws upon geographic methods of analyzing the spaces of representation in
              terms of cultural politics and the production of knowledge to provide an
              interpretive analysis of indigenous videos made possible with the assistance of
              Ojo de Agua. This dissertation research is important for three reasons. First,
              there is an explosion of transnational NGO activity and this study provides
              ethnographic insight into the practices of advocacy. Second, the use of NICTs
              drastically alters the ways that indigenous knowledge is produced and this
              investigation reveals the impact of these changes in Oaxaca, Mexico. Although
              this is a case study by virtue of method and research questions, these
              relocations in authorial agency are happening all over Latin America and
              throughout the global south, and it is crucial to understand how technoscience
              contributes to them. Focusing on video-mediated indigenous knowledge, this
              project will demonstrate how technoscience empowers authoritative
              self-representations of indigenous identity.

