Title       : Tidal transport of postlarval bivalves in a flood dominated estuary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0136916

Award Number: 0136916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather Hunt hhunt@unbsj.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Chant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Despite a growing recognition of the role of recruitment in structuring benthic
              communities, post-larval dispersal remains a critical gap in our understanding
              of the processes determining patterns of distribution and abundance in soft
              bottom communities. There have been many observations of post-larval dispersal,
              but far fewer measurements of rates or distances of dispersal and their
              relationship to physical and biological factors. In particular, we know very
              little about the scales over which post-larval dispersal occurs. Knowledge of
              the distances post-larvae disperse is crucial in understanding the ecological
              consequences of this dispersal, including its interaction with other processes.
              The overall objective of this study is to examine the scale and magnitude of
              post-larval transport of a bivalve, the soft shell clam Mya arenaria, in a
              small flood-dominated estuary. In a laboratory flume experiment and field
              experiments, the investigators will make measurements of near bottom current
              speeds and examine the relationship between physical factors (flow speed, tidal
              state and range, sediment type) and rates and distances of post-larval
              transport. At the end of the study, they will examine the consequences of
              post-larval transport for patterns of distribution and abundance by combining
              the physical and biological data to drive a numerical model of post-larval
              transport. The research will substantially advance our understanding of the
              role of post-larval dispersal in bivalve recruitment. The study will be one of
              the first to make direct field measurements of the scale of post-larval
              dispersal using mark-recapture techniques. 
	Quantifying the scale and
              magnitude of post-larval transport under observed physical conditions will be
              applicable to future studies of other species and other systems. The proposed
              research will have an educational impact by providing undergraduate students
              with the opportunity to conduct independent research as part of an
              interdisciplinary study.

