Title       : Doppler Turbulence Techniques for Ocean Observatories: An Interactive Approach
               using In Situ Measurements and LES Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0136403

Award Number: 0136403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $819734             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Gargett   (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Klinck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chester E. Grosch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0136403 Gargett

This project aims at developing new and promising techniques 
              based on acoustic Doppler technology for continuous estimation of important
              turbulence variables at ocean observatories. Addition of a 5th vertical beam
              (VADCP) allows estimates of all three components of turbulent kinetic energy as
              well as its dissipation rate. This project will assess their potential to
              provide time series measurements of turbulent as well as mean flow properties
              at remotely operated ocean observatories. The major technical challenges are
              provision of a stable platform, and sufficient power and data transmission for
              the fast sample rates needed to resolve the large-eddy structure of turbulent
              velocity fields. The major scientific challenges are the design of sampling
              protocols appropriate to the particular mix of processes generating turbulence
              at a given time, and the separation of surface wave and turbulent velocities. A
              final question is how to verify that the results are "correct", i.e.,
              consistent with what is known of various forms of turbulence in the ocean. To
              address these sets of problems simultaneously, exploratory coastal deployments
              of a VADCP, in both wave-protected and wave-exposed locations, will be combined
              with development and use of a large-eddy simulation (LES) model suitable for
              the coastal ocean. LES velocity fields will be "sampled" with different VADCP
              protocols (choices of time/space resolution), and the results used to estimate
              the reliability with which turbulent quantities can be estimated from the
              5-beam Doppler data under various combinations of turbulence forcing and
              surface wave contamination. In addition, the numerical results will be used to
              define requirements for statistical significance of future comparisons between
              time-continuous, spatially localized VADCP measurements, and time- and
              space-intermittent results from more traditional turbulence sensors carried on
              standard vertical profilers and/or autonomous vehicles. The observational
              results may in turn be used to examine the oceanic validity of assumptions
              underlying commonly used LES sub-grid parameterizations. 


