Title       : Collaborative Research: Active Tectonics at the Aleutian-Kamchatka Corner: A
               Lithospheric Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0136103

Award Number: 0136103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59790              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Ritzwoller michael.ritzwoller@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nikolai Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              01-36103
Ritzwoller
This is a collaborative proposal between Principal
              Investigators at the University of Colorado and Yale University.   Arctic
              tectonics is dominated by the interaction of the North American, Eurasian,and
              Pacific plates. In oceanic areas, the boundaries between these plates are
              relatively well known, but much of the North American-Eurasian plate boundary
              is defined by a broad zone of intra-continental deformation. The driving
              mechanisms for this deformation are poorly understood.

Newly acquired
              seismic data makes it possible to decipher plate motion at the
              Aleutian-Kamchatka junction.  This junction connects the strike-slip Bering
              fault along the western Aleutians with an active subduction zone beneath
              southern Kamchatka, where plate convergence is accompanied by vigorous
              arc-volcanics.  The Okhotsk Sea lies in the back-arc region of the Kamchatka
              subduction zone, and its unresolved deformation is critical to understanding
              present-day North America-Eurasia plate interaction.  The evolution of the
              Kamchatka-Aleutian junction is a critical component of the Cenozoic evolution
              of the Pacific-Eurasian plate boundary, and thus of Arctic tectonics as a
              whole.  

The principal goal of this project to characterize the temperature
              and the texture of the lithosphere and the asthenosphere near the
              Aleutian-Kamchatka junction region.  Temperature is related to seismic velocity
              anomalies, and deformation texture to seismic anisotropy.  Temperature and
              texture will reveal the role of the upper mantle in the interplay between the
              plates, particularly 1) how mantle processes facilitate the vigorous
              subduction-related volcanism near the Aleutian-Kamchatka junction, and 2)
              whether and how past extensional tectonics in the Okhotsk Sea have influenced
              the Cenozoic development of the North America-Eurasia boundary.  The Yale
              Principal Investigators acquired seismic data in Kamchatka by operating a
              portable network of broadband seismometers in 1998 -1999.  Recordings from this
              network combined with data from permanent seismological stations will for the
              primary data set for this study.   They bring expertise in regional tectonics,
              receiver function analysis, and characterizing lithospheric dynamics using
              seismic anisotropy.   The Colorado Principal Investigators are experts in
              surface wave tomography inversion for models of the crust and the upper mantle
              and the inference of mantle temperature from seismic models. This collaboration
              is designed to generate accurate and more sharply focused images of isotropic
              and anisotropic seismic features near the Kamchatka-Aleutian corner.  From
              these images the temperature and texture of the upper  mantle that constrains
              lithospheric dynamics will be inferred.



