Title       : Video Traces: Create, Disseminate, Analyze
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0136764

Award Number: 0136764
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $733308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Reisslein reisslein@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sethuraman Panchanathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Encoded video is expected to account for a large portion of the traffic in the
              Internet of the future
and next generation wireless networks. The video
              carried over future networks is expected to be (1)
coded using heterogeneous
              encoding schemes, (2) coded at a range of quality levels, and (3) to a large
              extent scalable encoded (e.g., into several layers) to enable scalable
              multimedia services over highly heterogeneous networks. To date the traffic
              characteristics of these heterogeneous and scalable encoded videos are largely
              unexplored (only a few initial observations based on a small number of short
              video sequences have been made). Even less is known about the implications of
              these traffic characteristics for the network transport of heterogeneous and
              scalable encoded video. Therefore, the researcher proposes a comprehensive
              large scale study of the traffic characteristics and the network transport of
              heterogeneous and scalable encoded video. The researcher will investigate
1.
              the traffic characteristics (i.e., statistical properties) in conjunction with
              the video quality and
the content features, and
2. the network capacity,
              i.e., the number of video streams that a given network can
              support
(multiplexing performance) subject to given quality of service (QoS)
              constraints
both for
(a) non scalable video encoded at a range of quality
              levels using diffierent encoding schemes, and
(b) scalable encoded
              video.
These traffic and networking studies are traditionally based on traces
              of real video traffic. The
existing video trace libraries, however, provide
              only frame size traces of a limited number of single
layer MPEG 1 encoded
              videos. Hence, the existing trace libraries are inadequate for this study
(and
              also for other researchers studying scalable multimedia services over
              networks). Therefore, the researcher proposes to create an extensive publicly
              available trace library of heterogeneous and
scalable encoded video as the
              basis for the proposed study. The researchers will 
(1) encode over 100
              di.erent videos, spanning a wide range of video genres and lengths
              and
including diverse texture and motion characteristics.
(2) encode each
              video into a single layer (non scalable) at a range of quality levels using
              di.erent
encoding schemes.
(3) encode each video into several quality layers,
              using the temporal, spatial, SNR, and data
partitioning scalability modes, as
              well as the object based scalability mode of MPEG 4.
(4) broaden the notion of
              video traces by capturing the video traffic, the video content features,
and
              the video quality in traces.
(5) disseminate the created video trace library
              through publicly available web sites.
The trace library will stimulate
              research on protocols and mechanisms for scalable multimedia
services in
              heterogeneous wireline and wireless networks. To date, the research in this
              area has been hampered by the lack of representative traces of scalable encoded
              video. In fact, the lack of realistic traffic data for scalable video may have
              prevented the development of e.cient and reliable protocols for heterogeneous
              multimedia services.
As part of the seed work for the proposed project, the
              researchers have created a preliminary publicly available library of traces of
              non scalable MPEG 4 and H.263en coded video (http://www.eas.asu.edu/trace) and
              studied the statistical properties of the traces in the library. This library
              is a first attempt at providing MPEG 4 and H.263 video traces. These traces are
              already widely used by networking researchers.
The PIs complement each other
              in their competencies. Martin Reisslein brings to the project
his expertise in
              developing and evaluating traffic management schemes for video traffic in
              high
speed wireline networks and wireless networks. Sethuraman Panchanathan
              brings to the project his
expertise in video compression, scalable video
              coding, video content analysis, and MPEG 4.
