Title       : The Roots of Human Sociality: An Ethno-Experimental Exploration of the
               Foundations of Economic Norms in 16 Small-Scale Societies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0136761

Award Number: 0136761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474709             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Ensminger jensming@hss.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Henrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0136761
Ensminger & Henrich
In all human societies, a wide range of social
              phenomena are governed by self-regulating institutions, or sets of norms that
              prescribe appropriate behaviors and proper sanctions for inappropriate
              behavior.  Such norms influence an enormous range of human activity, from
              marriage patterns and sexual inequality to political processes and market
              exchange. Despite a fair amount of agreement that such institutions exist,
              extant theories struggle to explain the genesis and maintenance of pro-social
              norms (e.g., standards of fairness, or rules for punishing norm violators) that
              form the bedrock of social interaction.  Both experimental and field data from
              across the social sciences indicate that neither assumptions of narrow economic
              self-interest nor evolutionary models based on kinship or reciprocity are
              sufficient to account for the observed patterns of human pro-sociality. 
To
              probe the diversity of social norms and preferences across the human spectrum,
              in 1998 the MacArthur Foundation invited twelve experienced field
              anthropologists to pioneer the use of experimental economic methods in
              small-scale societies. In this second phase of research, the researchers will
              explore the foundations of social norms by experimentally measuring
              individuals' preferences/tastes for altruism (or fairness), direct punishment
              (willingness to punish norm violators), and third party punishment (willingness
              of third-party observers to pay a price to punish unfairness) across 16
              small-scale societies.  These field sites include foragers, slash and burn
              horticulturalists, pastoral-nomads, small-scale agriculturalists, and urban
              wage laborers on most continents of the world.  One of the advantages of
              running experiments in these contexts is that the social spectrum of subjects
              is broadened from those typically found in U.S. university laboratories.  
The
              overall objectives of this new research are to replicate the earlier work
              (including the finding that altruistic behavior increases with the level of
              market integration), to broaden the research by including nine new sites and
              new experiments, to tighten the data collection methods across sites, and to
              extend the research with new testable predictions. A core package of three
              games (the Dictator, Ultimatum with Strategy Method, and Third-Party Punishment
              Games) will be used at all 16 field sites.  In addition, subsets of the group
              will pursue four supplemental studies to examine:  1) the relationship between
              social networks and trust, 2) framing effects created by manipulating the
              presentation of the games in the local culture, 3) the effect of the
              experimenter's knowledge of subjects' decisions in double-blind games, and 4)
              the temporal, intra-individual replicability of game behavior, i.e. if the same
              game is repeated with the same subjects, do preferences change? 
One of the
              advantages of a large and diverse group of researchers is the variety of
              theoretical traditions and interests brought to the table. The group contains
              scholars who have done their major theoretical and empirical work in the fields
              of evolutionary theory, psychological anthropology, rational choice, new
              institutional economics, development, and network analysis.  Previous
              experience has shown that this theoretical diversity inspires novel ideas,
              innovative empirical work, and theoretical development through the challenges
              that arise from the clash of paradigms.  This project should contribute to
              theoretical work that explores the importance of social learning, institutions,
              cultural evolution, and culture-gene co-evolution on human behavior.

