Title       : Phosphine Exchange in Metal Carbonyls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0136423

Award Number: 0136423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Keiter cfrlk@eiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Illinois Univ
	      600 Lincoln Avenue
	      Charleston, IL  619203099    217/581-2921

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Richard L. Keiter, Department of Chemistry, Eastern Illinois
              University, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
              Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division for mechanistic studies of
              intramolecular exchange of bound and unbound phosphorus donor groups in
              transition metal complexes containing multidentate phosphine ligands. In some
              Group 6 transition metal carbonyl complexes that also containing both
              coordinated and dangling phosphino groups the rate of phosphine exchange is
              much faster than expected. The fact that a large through space
              carbon-phosphorus spin-spin coupling constant occurs between dangling phosphino
              and cis-carbonyl groups indicates that an electronic interaction may be an
              important factor in the acceleration. By using a series of phosphine ligands
              containing substituents with differing steric and electronic properties, a
              mechanistic model in which a short dangling phosphine arm accelerates the
              exchange reaction by interacting with the cis carbonyl groups of the complex
              will be tested. The study will then be extended to known and new chiral
              ditertiary phosphines. The usefulness of these in asymmetric hydrogenation will
              be evaluated.   
  
 Substitution reactions have been studied extensively for
              many years but very few of these investigations have addressed phosphine
              substitution.  The absence of such exploration is surprising given the current
              interest in phosphine chemistry that centers on ligand design for asymmetric
              synthesis, site-specific drug delivery, and water-soluble phosphine.  In
              addition, the kinetic stability of the metal-phosphorus bond is highly
              important in catalysis and catalyst degradation.  This study will provide
              thermodynamic and kinetic insight into the factors that control phosphine
              substitution in transition metal complexes. An additional, very important
              aspect of the project is the education of undergraduate chemistry majors and
              the opportunity it will provide both B.S. and M.S. students to engage in
              cutting edge research.

