Title       : Vintage-Capital, Distortions and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0136922

Award Number: 0136922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafael Rob rrob@econ.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project improves our understanding of how economic factors affect income
              differences across countries. The focus of the research will be on the adoption
              of new technology in a "vintage capital" context. Vintage capital is a scenario
              whereby new technology can be implemented only if new machines that embody it
              are brought on line. This is different from the scenario of homogeneous
              capital, where technological progress can be exploited without the purchase of
              new machines. Vintage capital is quite a bit harder to deal with, which is the
              reason that many analyses have focused on homogenous capital.   The thesis of
              this research is that models of vintage capital can be made manageable and
              empirically operational, and that they perform much better than models of
              homogenous capital. In particular they can explain income gaps and the
              particular mechanisms that lead to such gaps much better. Of late there have
              been suggestions in the economic literature that cultural and other
              non-economic factors explain a great deal of income differences across
              countries.   The thesis of this project is that a carefully crafted economic
              model will do quite well without having to resort to such non-economic
              explanations.

More specifically, this project analyzes models of embodied
              technological progress and vintage capital. The objective is to determine the
              extent to which distortions to the adoption of new technology can block
              economic growth. Distortions are broadly understood: They could be taxes and
              tariffs on the purchase of machines, bureaucratic impediments to the
              construction of structures and production facilities, delays, corruption, red
              tape, etc.  The project constructs a quantitative model, capable of delivering
              numerical results concerning the effects of such distortions: To what extent
              distortions stifle investments, the capital stock of a country, the adoption
              decisions of manufacturers, wages of workers, and the GDP of a country.    The
              project pursues a three-pronged approach. First, a theoretical model of the
              adoption of new technology by individual firms is constructed. Considering many
              such firms the model will then be aggregated to yield the theoretical
              counterparts of National Income statistics. Second, the model's parameters are
              calabrated using U.S. National Income data.   The investigator also estimates
              econometrically the model's production function, using international data.
              These two steps provide a quantitative model, which is designed to predict the
              extent to which distortions can stifle the growth of an economy.   Third, the
              project considers different countries as having different distortions and then
              determine what the model predicts will happen to their GDP.   The investigator
              performs development decomposition exercises, determining how distortions,
              educational levels and efficiencies account for GDP differences across
              countries. 


