Title       : Molecular Regulation and Transport of Sterols in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0136034

Award Number: 0136034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Chappell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant sterols represent a complex array of chemical compounds that
              are
essential for many facets of plant growth and development, and are
              of
considerable importance for their nutritional contributions to animals
              and
man. Hence, it is not surprising that the biochemistry and
              molecular
biology of the sterol biosynthetic pathway has been intensively
              studied.
Nonetheless, very little is actually known about the regulation of
              this
biochemical pathway in plants. One goal of our long-term research in
              sterol
metabolism has been focussed on the regulation of squalene synthase, a
              key
enzyme in sterol biosynthetic enzyme. Our recent results suggest
              that
squalene synthase gene expression and enzyme activity are localized
              to
shoot meristems. In attempting to reconcile these results with
              those
already reported in the literature, the most logical interpretation is
              that
sterol biosynthesis itself is localized to this tissue. This
              interpretation
implies that regulation of sterol biosynthesis occurs in the
              shoot
meristem, a tissue that has not been evaluated as such before, and that
              a
sterol transport system for the movement of sterol from the apical
              meristem
throughout the plant must exist. Experiments to test these
              predictions are
proposed and include: 1, an evaluation if sterol biosynthesis
              localized to
the shoot meristem is regulated; 2, the development of a test for
              long
distance transport of sterol within plants; and 3, a determination if
              NPC1,
a highly conserved protein involved in cholesterol uptake and
              intracellular
trafficking, plays a similar role in plants as in animals. The
              proposed
work, which will involve undergraduate and graduate students and
              a
postdoctoral associate, should provide important insights into how
              this
pathway might be engineered for enhanced value using emerging
              technologies.



