Title       : Collaborative Research: Dye Tracer and Modeling Investigations of Cross-Shelf
               Circulation during Coastal Upwelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0136900

Award Number: 0136900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306425             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew C. Dale acd@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Barth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murray D. Levine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dale
0136900

Field and simulation studies will be used to determine where
              upwelled water originates, i.e. solely from the bottom boundary layer (BBL) or
              from a thicker region of the lower layer fluid, and where the displaced surface
              water goes, e.g. offshore in the the surface layer or, through subduction, to
              intermediate layers.  Five dye studies, using fluorescene and rhodamine-WT, are
              proposed for the upwelling region over the Oregon shelf.  Releases will occur
              in three different locations - beneath and inshore of the upwelling jet, in the
              BBL beneath the jet where onshore movement is expected, and inshore of the jet,
              just beneath the mixed layer but still in the Ekman layer, where offshore
              movement and possible subduction is expected.  Dye will be tracked for 72
              hours.  The background environment will be defined by GLOBEC cruises, at least
              during the first field year.  Three releases from the R/V Elakha will be traced
              during the first year.  The second year will involve two larger releases from
              the R/V Wecoma.  A version of the Princeton Ocean Model, configured for the
              region, will be run for comparison.  Particle tracing techniques will be used
              to model the initial, small-scale dispersion.  Both idealized situations and
              realistic modeling will be attempted.  A 2-D ocean-going model will be used, in
              conjunction with buoyed GPS drifters, to track the subsurface dye patch after
              release.  The results of the study will be a set of Lagrangian observations of
              cross-shelf transport pathways during upwelling.  These will lead to improved
              understanding of circulation and mixing.  

