Title       : Deployable in Situ Electrochemical Analyzer (ISEA) for Remote and Automatic
               Analysis of O2, H2S and Sulfur Species in Hydrothermal Vent Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0136671

Award Number: 0136671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367145             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Luther luther@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              P.I. Luther
       0136671

This project proposes to purchase an in situ
              electrochemical analyzer (ISEA) that can be deployed at any ocean depth on
              landers, moorings and CTD type profilers for remote aquatic experiments in
              waters and porewaters. With this instrument, many redox species can be
              determined simultaneously by voltammetry at a gold-amalgam solid-state
              electrode during one potential scan. These species include dissolved oxygen,
              sulfide, thiosulfate, polysulfides, iodide, Fe(II), Mn(II), and FeS. Oxygen can
              be measured with high precision and sensitivity as can total dissolved sulfide.
              No chemical manipulations are necessary for measurement and up to four working
              electrodes can be mounted at different depths and locations to obtain chemical
              information in the water column. This analyzer is ideal for monitoring
              important redox regimes such as the development of seasonal anoxia in nearshore
              and shelf environments, the changes in sulfur chemistry at hydrothermal vents
              and the profiles of redox species in sediments, stagnant bays, estuaries and
              basins. In a previous submission, these areas of study were targeted for making
              measurements but the reviewers indicated that this was too ambitious and only
              one should be selected for further work. In this proposal, the focus is on
              hydrothermal vent research. A major concern at vents is; what are the changes
              in vent and diffuse flow chemistry that affect the way organisms colonize
              different sites? Recent work has shown that different biological organisms
              reside in different chemical niches. Thus, in situ sensors that can measure a
              variety of redox species would be ideal for improving our understanding of
              biogeochemical studies of water chemistry on temporal and spatial scales in
              these environments.

A prototype in situ electrochemical analyzer has been
              successfully used on the DSV Alvin and is now commercially available from
              Analytical Instrument Systems, Inc. This system was designed to use DC power
              from DSV Alvin with electrodes deployed at given vent locations by the
              submarine's manipulators controlled by an operator in the submersible. The next
              step in development of this technology is to add remote or automatic capability
              to the system to monitor temporal changes in a variety of systems. Although the
              ISEA is a single system, it will have four Au/Hg working electrodes with four
              temperature and pH sensors integrated with each of the working electrodes. In
              essence, the ISEA is four separate instrument packages for voltammetry,
              temperature and pH in one analyzer, which permits analysis of four separate
              locations/depths. 

As part of this proposal the gold-amalgam (Au/Hg)
              electrodes will be tested for long-term deployment. The testing will include
              long-term deployment in estuarine waters at the University of Delaware's harbor
              and at hydrothermal vent waters. 

