Title       : Natural Radionuclides as Tracers of the Cycling and Fate of Particulate Organic
               Carbon on the Mackenzie Shelf: Participation in the Canadian Arctic Shelf
               Exchange Study(CASES)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0136459

Award Number: 0136459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338083             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Kirk Cochran kcochran@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0136459
Cochran

Of all the world oceans, the Arctic is unique in its
              persistent cover of sea ice, broad continental shelves that are loci for carbon
              cycling and strong annual variations in light intensity. Moreover the Arctic is
              perhaps the ocean most susceptible to showing the early effects of global
              warming. Although changes such as thinning ice cover may have natural causes,
              for example related to variations in the gradient of atmospheric pressure in
              the Arctic, they may also be related to changes in climate brought about by
              human activities. Climate warming may alter the cycling of carbon on arctic
              shelves through permanent reductions in ice cover and increases in riverine
              discharge. In turn these changes may lead to enhanced export of carbon to the
              slope and deep arctic basins.

One of the most distinguishing features of the
              Arctic is its extensive shelf area, comprising about 30% of the basin area and
              receiving about 10% of the world river discharge. River discharge in the Arctic
              is dominated by the great Siberian rivers - the Yenisei, Lena and Ob. The
              Mackenzie River is fourth in importance after these, but is first in rank in
              terms of annual discharge of sediment. Moreover, it is the only North American
              analog of the large Siberian rivers, and in practical terms is the most readily
              studied.

The potential importance of the river-dominated shelves to
              biogeochemical cycling in the Arctic has lead to an international effort --the
              Canadian Arctic Shelf Exchange Study (CASES)--organized by Canada to understand
              the consequences of sea- ice variability on the Mackenzie shelf. Based on prior
              involvement in Canadian-organized arctic programs in the Northeast and North
              Water Polynyas, the PI has been invited to participate in the CASES program.
              The research proposed here for the Mackenzie Shelf will build on the PI's prior
              efforts in the Arctic and elsewhere to use natural radionuclides as tracers for
              fluxes of particulate organic carbon and particles.

CASES includes three
              month-long process cruises (in August 2002, 2003 and 2004) on the Mackenzie
              Shelf and a year-long period between the August 2003 and 2004 cruises during
              which the research icebreaker will over-winter. This research will be
              structured to take advantage of the possibility to sample the full annual cycle
              of productivity on the Mackenzie Shelf. Focus will be on the three distinct
              zones (an early season inner shelf pool of freshwater dubbed 'Lake Mackenzie'
              separated by an ice dam from a flaw-lead polynya and the arctic pack ice) that
              develop in the system, and employ natural radionuclides as tracers for the
              transport of particles and particulate organic carbon within and between the
              zones. We hypothesize that significant exchanges between the zones will occur
              in the spring through summer as the Mackenzie River freshet begins, the ice
              retreats offshore and productivity increases. We will test this hypothesis
              through the use of natural radionuclides to determine the presence of freshly
              input riverine sediments to the inner shelf, the rate of export of POC from the
              euphotic zone, and through mass balances, as indicators of the transport of
              particulate material through the zones. The radionuclides we will use include
              cosmogenic radionuclides (Be-7 and C-14) produced in the atmosphere from the
              interactions of cosmic rays with atmospheric gases, and radionuclides of the
              naturally occurring U-238 decay series (Th-234, Pb-210). 

