Title       : Social Sharedness, Shared Task Representations and Group Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0136332

Award Number: 0136332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299939             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Scott Tindale rtindal@luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Small decision-making groups resolve many of the most important issues/questions
              in organizations and society.  Such groups bring more resources than any single
              individual to the task at hand.  There is also a fair amount of research
              support for the superior decision-making capabilities of groups as compared to
              individuals.  However, recent work has shown that the same processes that make
              groups superior decision-makers and problem-solvers can under certain
              circumstances, lead them astray.  

Groups perform better than individuals in
              many situations because when a correct or optimal alternative is proposed,
              groups have the ability to recognize the "correctness" of the alternative.  Our
              recent work has shown that a group's ability to do this depends on an
              appropriate task representation shared by the group members.  In most
              situations, the group members share an appropriate representation.  However, we
              have shown that in situations where group members share a faulty task
              representation, group often perform worse than individuals.  The research
              contained in the current proposal will attempt to further our understanding of
              how such shared task representations affect group decision-making.  In
              addition, the research will address how competing shared representations -
              specifically representations at different levels of generality - affect group
              decision outcomes and processes.  The overarching goals of the research are
              show how to enable groups to use appropriate task representations when they
              exist, but to learn how to prevent them from using faulty representations that
              are initially shared among the group members.

