Title       : Expectations, Learning and Economic Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0136848

Award Number: 0136848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185217             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Evans gevans@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A central feature of modem economic theory is the forward-looking decisions made
              by firms and households. Expectations of economic agents are therefore a key
              component of macroeconomic theories of consumption, investment, inflation and
              the business cycle. The RE (rational expectations) methodology has provided an
              elegant benchmark theory of expectation formation: expectations are assumed to
              be rational in the sense that agents do not make any systematic errors, given
              the available information. Two fundamental issues for this (now standard)
              approach concern the attainability of RE, i.e. whether boundedly rational
              agents can arrive at RE through a learning process, and the possibility of
              indeterminacy or multiplicity of RE equilibria. A related question is how the
              central messages of rational expectations are modified by the recognition that
              realistic decision-makers are likely to use misspecified models, and to be
              aware of this limitation. These interconnected issues, which have implications
              for economic policy and business cycle modeling, are pursued by this project on
              several fronts. A common theme throughout the project is the role that learning
              plays in the evolution of expectations.

The first part focuses on monetary
              and fiscal policy. Recent work based on "new Phillips curve" models has
              obtained (under the RE assumption) interest rate feedback rules 
designed to
              implement optimal policy. The proposed research shows that if policy rules
              
are formulated entirely in terms of responses to fundamental shocks, as might
              appear natural, the equilibrium will be unstable if private agents follow
              adaptive learning rules.   The project then shows that stability can be
              achieved, and optimal discretionary policy implemented, if the interest rate
              rule depends in the right way on both the fundamental shocks and observed
              private expectations. This project extends the analysis to cases in which the
              monetary authorities can commit themselves to a fixed rule. Other extensions
              take up the interaction of monetary and fiscal policy and study the
              implications of adaptive learning for interest rate rules that may be subject
              to liquidity traps. 

The focus of the second part is business cycle
              fluctuations. Extensions of the Real Business Cycle framework to incorporate
              monopolistic competition have shown that multiplicities can arise, taking the
              form of expectation driven fluctuations around an indeterminate steady state.
              This possibility is known also to arise in some standard monetary models.
              Recent work on expectational stability and adaptive learning has provided
              convenient tools to determine whether these "endogenous fluctuations" can arise
              as outcomes of adaptive learning rules. Preliminary results show that a
              subclass of "resonant frequency" solutions is stable under learning for a range
              of parameters. This project computes the parameter regions for which stable
              endogenous fluctuations occur and investigates whether macroeconomic policy can
              be used to prevent endogenous fluctuations from arising. 

A third line of
              research looks at the implications of underparameterization for the "Lucas
              Critique" of economic policy, one of the dramatic implications of RE. Private
              agents that 
recognize their misspecification will respond by using "constant
              gain" learning rules that trade off tracking and filtering. A simple example is
              adaptive expectations with an optimally tuned 
coefficient. This project shows
              that for much of the parameter space monetary policy remains subject to the
              Lucas Critique. However, there are also regions in which the expectation rule
              is invariant and the Lucas Critique does not apply.   Related work examines (i)
              the stability under learning of the high inflation equilibrium, in the
              seignorage model, to the assumption that some agents do not possess current
              information, (ii) the role of structural heterogeneity in facilitating or
              impeding coordination on a RE equilibrium, and (iii) the possibility that
              underparameterized learning may generate heterogeneity of expectations.

