Title       : SGER: Isolation and Culture of Deeply Divergent, Mesophilic Rhizosphere
               Crenarchaeota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2002   
File        : a0136441

Award Number: 0136441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66128              (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly M. Simon hms@plantpath.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Holly M. Simon at the University of Wisconsin to
              isolate and culture members of an unusual and little-understood group of soil
              microorganisms that colonize plant roots. These microbes, known as mesophilic
              crenarchaeota, are members of the archaea, a third domain of life separate from
              bacteria and eukaryotes. Growth of archaea on plant roots will be exploited by
              using the root as a starting point for their growth in vitro. Metabolic
              differences between archaea and bacteria will be used to selectively enrich for
              growth of the archaea while discouraging growth of bacteria also present on
              roots. DNA will be recovered for analysis of the diversity and potential
              metabolic activities of the assemblages present, which will in turn inform
              enrichment strategies. While isolation of the root-colonizing archaea in pure
              culture is the goal, their growth in vitro may require the presence of
              (an)other organism(s). Discovery of such commensal relationships would
              represent significant advancement of our knowledge about this unusual group of
              archaea.

Members of the archaea are important contributors to biosphere
              processes. Examples include the production of methane, (a "greenhouse gas), and
              globally significant transformations of sulfur. Archaea have also have often
              been discovered in extreme environments, such as Yellowstone hot springs, or
              submarine hydrothermal vents.  The group of archaea being investigated in this
              proposal was completely unknown a decade ago. They represent evolutionarily
              divergent members within the archaeal division Crenarchaeota that are able to
              grow under moderate (mesophilic) temperature conditions. The isolation and
              growth in vitro of members from this enigmatic group of archaea will help us
              understand their place in the scope of archaeal evolution, and will provide
              insight into their metabolisms and ecological functions.

