Title       : Foundations of Computational Mathematics Conference, August 5 - 14, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0136607

Award Number: 0136607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willard Miller miller@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Olver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator and his colleagues organize the third
Conference on
              Foundations of Computational Mathematics at the
Institute for Mathematics and
              its Applications (IMA), University
of Minnesota on 5-14 August 2002. 
              Deepening the understanding of
the mathematical processes that underlie fast
              computation and
computer simulation is the principal goal of the meeting. 
              The
mathematical content covers fields of research at the interface
of
              engineering, computer science, and pure mathematics, but
focused on
              computation.  The program includes 18 3-day workshops
and 18 plenary speakers.
               The plenary talks and workshops span
subjects of vital interest to the
              nation's infrastructure,
economy, and defense.  The project supports
              participation by
postdocs, graduate students, junior participants, women
              and
minorities as well as plenary and semi-plenary speakers and
workshop
              organizers.
     Large-scale computation and the implementation
              of
mathematical models for complex physical and societal phenomena
are of
              fundamental importance to the nation's economy.
Computation is also the
              backbone of the sciences supporting the
nation's defense.  Large-scale
              computation is the engine of
numerical models for complex physical phenomena
              occurring at many
scales.  Fast computation and processing of the
              ever-increasing
data sets obtained from various sensors is critical to the
              new
military.  The purpose of this major meeting, held only every
three
              years, is to further the understanding of the deep
relationships between
              mathematical theory: analysis, topology,
geometry and algebra, and
              computational processes as they are
evolving in tandem with the modern
              computer.  The topics to be
addressed include large scale computation and high
              performance
computing as occurs in atmospheric and groundwater
              modeling,
computer aided design and animation, data, image and
              signal
processing, modeling network traffic, quantum computing,
              learning
theory, optimization and control.  Sustaining the nation's
advantage
              in these vital areas relies on understanding the
foundations of computational
              science.  The meeting involves
350-500 researchers in 18 workshops over a
              10-day period, with
special plenary sessions attended by everyone.  A large
              contingent
of graduate students and other young scientists are
participating,
              and the program is designed to promote intensive
interaction among the
              participants.  Several panels are devoted to
identifying the most promising
              directions for future research.
Published proceedings, web-based materials,
              and the conference
sessions themselves serve as launching pads for focus and
              special
interest groups for future interactions in a range of subjects at
the
              interface of mathematics and computation.


