Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dynamics of Technological Innovation:
               Incumbents' Adaptation and Capability Building on the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0136720

Award Number: 0136720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7660               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerardine DeSanctis gd@mail.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines how established firms adapt to technological innovations,
              such as the Internet, as well as the performance implications of such
              innovations.  The specific research questions are: How strongly do current
              innovative efforts, relative to past experience, influence a firm's speed of
              technology adoption, the comprehensiveness of its technological adoption, and
              the returns to innovation?  How can later adopters, disadvantaged by past
              innovation experience, catch up by increasing their innovative efforts? 
              Although there has been strong theoretical emphasis on dynamic capabilities as
              critical to the adaptability of organizations, most empirical research has
              viewed organizations as evolving along paths and within boundaries determined
              by past experience.  This study adds the new dimension of emerging capabilities
              to that of past-accumulated experience as widely studied in the literature. 
              Emerging capabilities capture how firms organize for innovation once the
              decision for adoption has been made.  This research views innovation as a
              dynamic process evolving over time and assesses the degree to which firms can
              directly influence their innovation process versus the degree to which past
              experience (initial capabilities) determines the path and direction of
              innovation.   The dynamic capabilities perspective is used to reveal how firm
              capabilities emerge, develop, and change over time, as well as how firms
              integrate and reconfigure internal and external competencies to respond to
              technological and environmental change.  Interviews with e-business managers
              and reviews of archival data sources, such as press releases and trade
              journals, will shed light on firms' adoption processes.  Additionally, the
              project includes a large-scale survey of senior executives in charge of
              Internet activities/e-business operations at more than 600 U.S. financial
              institutions.

Although promising at the outset, many innovations never pay
              off but rather consume enormous resources. This study thus offers important new
              insights into the way in which firms create value through collaboration and/or
              integration of existing with newly-developed capabilities, and through internal
              versus external innovation-related capability development.  Moreover, ways in
              which later adopters manage to catch up during the innovation implementation
              process will be examined. This research analyzes firms' various adaptation
              strategies and innovation outcomes in the context of the Internet.  The study
              will assess the importance of Internet implementation decisions relative to
              prior experience and timing of adoption, proposing that how an innovation is
              implemented matters more than when it is adopted.  The findings from this
              research will ultimately provide organizations with a better understanding of
              how to develop innovation-related capabilities that improve innovation
              performance, and how to avoid implementation strategies that reduce the
              likelihood of yielding benefits from innovation.  
