Title       : Symbolic Computational Algebra 2002 Conference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0136990

Award Number: 0136990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria Powers vicki@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward L. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Serkan Hosten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reinhard C. Laubenbacher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              We propose running a five day conference in July 2002 on the use of symbolic
              computation in algebra, geometry, and analysis, preceded by a two day workshop
              for graduate students and non-specialists.  This will be a joint U.S. and
              Canadian event and will take place at the University of Western Ontario,
              London, Ontario, Canada.  We request funds from the NSF to provide travel and
              support costs for participants from the U.S.
The conference is intended to
              bring together researchers from a broad variety of areas within symbolic
              computation.  The topics included will be computational algebra (both
              commutative and non-commutative) and algebraic geometry, solving polynomial
              equations, differential algebra, coding theory and geometric invariant
              theory.
The conference will consist of approximately 10 one hour talks and 20
              half hour talks.  The one hour talks will be designed for an audience of
              nonspecialists, in particular, for students and researchers wishing to learn
              about the area.  The shorter talks will be designed to discuss current
              developments in the field.  In addition, the PIs plan to hold a two-day
              workshop before the start of the conference featuring coding theory and
              geometric invariant theory.  The workshop will be aimed at graduate students
              and non-specialists.
The conference is modeled in its scope, program and
              organization after the AMS-IMS-SIAM joint summer research conference Symbolic
              Computation:  Solving Equations in Algebra, Geometry, and Engineering that was
              held at Mount Holyoke College in June 2000 and organized by the PIs.  The Mount
              Holyoke meeting in turn was inspired by the special semester on Symbolic
              Computation in Algebra, Geometry and Analysis that was held at MSRI in the Fall
              of 1998.  The proposed conference will serve as a platform to present the most
              exciting results obtained since the summer of 2000.
We already have approved
              funding from the Fields Institute, Ontario Research Center for Computational
              Algebra (ORCCA), and the University of Western Ontario.  The organizers plan to
              make a special effort to attract graduate students and recent Ph.Ds, as well as
              women working in the areas within the scope of the conference.  A substantial
              portion of the requested funds would be used for support of graduate students
              and recent PH.Ds from the U.S.

