Title       : Identification and Inference in Structural Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0136869

Award Number: 0136869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256757             (Estimated)
Investigator: Whitney K. Newey wnewey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Structural estimation is vital in empirical economics. The need for structural
              estimation arises from confounding factors due to individual choice making and
              market forces. A classical application is estimation of the effect of tax
              changes in a particular market, where structural estimation can be used to
              separate supply and demand factors. This research will study how to do
              structural estimation without functional form assumptions, which will help
              avoid misleading inferences that do occur in applications. A menu of models and
              methods will be developed. The research will also develop statistical tools to
              help in selecting among the methods. These tools will evaluate the performance
              of the different methods using higher-order approximations, and help determine
              which method is best.
      Previous work shows that avoiding functional form
              assumptions in structural modeling can lead to more accurate inferences in
              important applications such as evaluating the effect of tax changes on labor
              supply or consumer well being. This research will add significantly to our
              ability to do structural estimation by developing methods for some of the most
              important models. Also, the study will show that certain of the methods have
              particularly good statistical properties. This research will show that among
              methods that are currently widely used for estimating models in both
              microeconomics and macroeconomics the one called empirical likelihood has
              particularly attractive properties. These results suggest that using this
              particular method may lead to more accurate inference in empirical research.

