Title       : WOCE AIMS: Analysis of Tracer Ages and Estimate of Isopycnal Mixing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0136973

Award Number: 0136973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $656614             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rana A. Fine rfine@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1326,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0136973 Fine

The goal of this project to estimate the uncertainties for
              individual tracer ages, and to associate differences in the magnitude of these
              uncertainties with known circulation phenomena. The focus is on thermocline and
              intermediate water masses, using World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE)
              chlorofluorocarbon and tritium/helium-3 data that have recently become
              available. Tracer ages are a measure of the ocean's ability to transport
              atmospheric constituents into the interior. Isopycnal mixing rates will be
              calculated for regions of the subtropical gyres where isopycnal mixing can
              significantly alter tracer ages. Errors  in  tracer  ages  arise from 
              analytical,  source  function,  and  other  factors.  Here  a differentiation
              will be made between  errors  in  tracer  ages  and  distributions. The  effect
               of  errors  on  tracer  age distributions is small compared with effects of
              oceanic processes. Depending on the extent and pathways of mixing, a tracer can
              exhibit a broad distribution of ages within a given water mass. Mixing,
              therefore, compromises the ability to interpret tracer ages; i.e., the elapsed
              time since a water parcel was in contact with the atmosphere. Mixing histories
              will be assessed by analyzing distributions of tracer ages with an accepted
              theoretical framework.  Isopycnal mixing rates and Peclet numbers will be
              calculated for sub-regions of the subtropical gyres. These values will be
              compared  to  tracer  age  distributions  and  non-linear  mixing  terms.  The 
              work will  be extended using  a  high  resolution  numerical  model  of  the 
              North  Atlantic  with  an  assumed  stationary circulation.  This  will  permit
               analysis  of  simulated  CFC  and  ideal  ages,  their  distributions,
              comparison with observations, and assessment of ventilation and mixing in the
              model. Results from the proposed multiple tracer approach will contribute
              toward quantifying the rate at which the ocean takes up atmospheric gases, for
              example, CO2.


