Title       : SGER: Algorithmic Infrastructure for Knowledge Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0136337

Award Number: 0136337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Shokoufandeh ashokouf@king.mcs.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Regli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project explores algorithmic techniques for archival, indexing and reuse of
              complex knowledge. Hierarchical graphs have emerged as a powerful knowledge
              representation structures, however existing database and data mining techniques
              are not able to manage the extreme combinatorial complexities required to
              compare, classify, index and cluster these structures as primitive data
              elements. Research challenges include (1) capturing the inner structure of
              graph based models, and their topological sub-structures, to use for pattern
              matching purposes; (2) classify the stability of these approximation techniques
              in the presence of noise; (3) identifying how to translate these techniques
              into suitable database mechanisms. The basis of the approach is a mapping of
              the topological structure of a graph into a low-dimensional vector space
              through an eigenvalue characterization. This SGER studies these problems in the
              context of collaborative and distributed engineering design, where teams of
              agents (human and computational) interact over the network to realize a product
              (e.g., software, electro-mechanical device, building, etc.). This process is
              modeled as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) that encodes the design modeling
              operations and decisions, as well as the flow of the information along the
              modeling time-steps. Knowledge acquisition agents will be fielded to capture
              these knowledge structures and a validation of the theoretical methodology for
              indexing and reuse of process knowledge will performed. Some of this work will
              be done in collaboration with Bentley Systems. If successful, these techniques
              will lead to dramatic new possibilities for database and information management
              systems: allowing them to efficiently store complex graphs as single large
              objects and identify useful patterns in and across large sets of these
              combinatorial structures. 
