Title       : Aggregation Issues in Activity-Based Travel Demand Models: Exploration,
               Understanding and Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0136818

Award Number: 0136818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54249              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darren M. Scott   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Urban Transportation Modeling System (UTMS) remains the dominant approach to
              urban travel demand modeling within the transportation planning profession
              despite concerns that have been raised regarding its ability to meet the
              challenges of contemporary and future transportation planning.  These concerns
              have not addressed through the development of new forms of activity-based
              travel demand models, which have the potential to remedy the deficiencies of
              UTMS by providing transportation planners with policy-sensitive forecasts.  The
              reliability of these forecasts depends on sound model development, however, and
              many issues have yet to be addressed on this front.  This project seeks answers
              to two questions relating to the development of activity-based travel demand
              models.  First, what spatial resolution is appropriate for such modeling? 
              Second, what activities are to be modeled?  To address these questions, a
              systematic research program will be undertaken with three objectives:  (1) to
              evaluate the effects of the modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP) on spatial
              choice sets, consisting of urban opportunities (i.e. potential destinations),
              and on the parameters of and outcomes from spatial choice models; (2) to
              develop an optimal zoning system that minimizes MAUP effects in activity-based
              travel demand models; and (3) to evaluate the effects of aggregating non-work,
              out-of -home activities on the attributes of those activities and on model
              parameters estimated for specific attributes.  Data will be drawn from two
              sources.  First, information on non-work, out-of -home activities will be
              obtained from a household travel survey that was conducted in the Louisville,
              Kentucky, MSA in the fall of 2000.  Second, details concerning all urban
              opportunities in the region will be taken from a database obtained from
              ReferenceUSA.  The geo-processing capabilities of GIS will be used to obtain
              specific data for many of the empirical analyses.  Descriptive statistics and
              statistical models (i.e. hazard models, multinomial logit models, and ordered
              probit models) will be used to analyze the data.

The priorities of urban
              transportation planning have changed considerably in recent years, largely due
              to government legislation such as the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1991. 
              Instead of building roads to meet a growing demand for travel, transportation
              planning today seeks to better manage existing infrastructure.  For this task,
              policy-sensitive tools like activity-based travel demand models are required. 
              The results of this research will shed considerable light on two issues that
              have yet to be addressed concerning the development of such models, spatial
              aggregation and activity aggregation.  Potential errors associated with these
              issues will be reduced, thereby increasing the reliability of forecasts and
              their usefulness for decision making.

