Title       : Collaborative Proposal: The Behavioral and Ecological Effects of Viral Disease
               in Caribbean Spiny Lobster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0136894

Award Number: 0136894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270064             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Butler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Ratzlaff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although the ecological consequences of viruses in marine systems are
              potentially enormous, studies of their role as pathogens of metazoans and their
              effects on host population ecology are in their infancy.  A poorly explored
              area of pathogen-host interactions is the effect of pathogens on the behavior
              of uninfected members of the host population, and the consequences of such
              behavior on host population dynamics.  A lethal, pathogenic herpes-like virus
              that infects Caribbean spiny lobster (Panulirus argus) has recently been
              discovered in the Florida Keys. Preliminary studies indicate that this disease
              not only alters the behavior of infected individuals, but also causes
              remarkable changes in the social behavior of healthy individuals in response to
              diseased conspecifics.  Behavioral responses to disease have potentially far
              reaching repercussions for the spatial structure, recruitment, and transmission
              of pathogens in lobster populations.  Traditional fishing practices may also
              contribute to the spread of this pathogen. 

The goal of this project is to
              determine the current incidence, mode of transmission, behavioral and
              ecological consequences, and potential population-level impacts of this newly
              discovered disease. Specifically, the investigators will:  

(1)	Expand
              preliminary field surveys to document the current distribution and prevalence
              of this disease in adult and juvenile lobsters, as well as in other potential
              viral reservoirs in the Florida Keys. 

(2)	Determine through laboratory
              experiments whether the pathogen is transmitted among lobsters by contact,
              water-borne particles, or ingestion of infected tissue, and whether
              transmission rates are affected by size (age), gender, condition, or injury.
              

(3)	Use laboratory experiments and field mark-recapture studies to test the
              effect of the disease on pivotal aspects of lobster behavior, population
              dynamics, and spatial structure that may influence the spread of the disease in
              this gregarious animal. 

(4)	Develop and implement a diagnostic
              immunological assay to identify infected lobsters during the early stages of
              the disease. 

(5)	Incorporate the information obtained in Objectives 1 - 3
              into a spatially-explicit, individual-based lobster recruitment model to
              determine if the aversion of uninfected lobsters to infected conspecifics, or
              practices employed in the lobster fishery, alter the spread of the disease.

