Title       : Collaborative Research: Remaking Bosnia: The International Community and the
               Returnee Policy Process in Three Bosnian Localities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0136847

Award Number: 0136847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31732              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl T. Dahlman dahlman@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project investigates the refugee returnee process developed by the
              international community to implement Annex 7 of the Dayton Peace Accords, the
              peace treaty that brought the Bosnian war to an end in 1995. The central
              research question is: how has the international community sought to
              reconstitute multi-ethnic Bosnian places and how have local authorities
              mediated this process? Field-research is grounded in three ethnically-cleansed
              Bosnian localities - Bosnian Croat-controlled Jajce, Bosniak-controlled
              Travnik, and Bosnian Serb-controlled Derventa - which were multi-ethnic places
              before the war. The international community has been active in all three
              localities promoting returns but with modest results so far. In answering the
              research question, data are collected from three sources: policy decisions,
              reports, and operational procedures generated by institutional actors involved
              in implementing Annex 7 of the Dayton Peace Accords; semi-structured interviews
              with key international, national, and local decision-makers in the returnee
              policy process; and focus group sessions with returnees in the selected
              research sites. Multiple methodological strategies will be used to study the
              data gathered including mapping the geographies of displacement and return,
              charting the reconstruction and return policy process, discourse analysis of
              policy-maker and implementation storylines at various scales, and discourse
              analysis of the perspectives of returnees themselves.

This research project
              investigates a nascent contradiction in the Dayton Peace Accords, which, on the
              one hand, pledged to reverse ethnic cleansing, but, on the other hand,
              sanctioned a segregated Bosnia created by ethnic cleansing and ruled by local
              authorities committed to ethnonationalism. This contradiction has given rise to
              a struggle between the international community and local authorities to define
              the ethnic and political geography of Bosnia. The study focuses on local
              municipalities to analyze how the extensive efforts of the international
              community to reverse ethnic cleansing in Bosnia impacted particular places.
              More broadly, it develops a conceptual understanding of the problems associated
              with the rebuilding of post-conflict states, especially the political
              geographic aspects of ethnic identity. It offers insight into how post-conflict
              plans conceived in international peace agreements are mediated and thereby
              transformed by the local contexts of their implementation.

