Title       : The Distribution of Obligations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0136339

Award Number: 0136339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Nock sln@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Kingston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0136339
Steven L. Nock
Paul W. Kingston

Researchers have made little
              progress in systematically specifying how obligations-- duties or
              responsibilities that people have to others--are established.  This project
              examines how Americans understand their obligations to others.  That is, who is
              considered morally responsible for whom, under what circumstances, and to what
              extent?  Also, why are some concerns treated as private troubles, whole others
              are viewed as public issues? The research is based on quantitative survey
              research and qualitative interviewers.  Specifically, a sample of adults will
              be asked to respond to hypothetical problems that imply a need for help from
              some source.  In these hypothetical dilemmas, basic features of the situation
              will be systematically varied, including the relationship between the person in
              need and the helper, the type of problem, the culpability of the person in
              need, and the detailed history of giving and receiving assistance from others. 
              Finally, a series of qualitative interviews will focus on motives for offering
              assistance and making particular distinctions between private and public
              obligations.


 The PIs will use a theoretical model that integrates social
              capital and life-course perspectives to guide the research.  This model
              proposes to explain how and why people assume responsibility for others in some
              cases, but not in others.  It will show how obligations are influenced by the
              specific nature of the situation calling for assistance, the relationship
              (kinship or otherwise) between an individual and the person in need, and
              numerous characteristics of the potential helper.  The project has practical
              significance in light of the growth of dependent populations who require care. 
              It could potentially advance scientific understanding of the factors that
              influence beliefs about responsibility and deservingness.  



