Title       : Climate Variability in Ocean Surface Turbulent Fluxes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0136934

Award Number: 0136934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $721000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Bourassa bourassa@mailer.coaps.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. O'Brien  (Principal Investigator former)
              Shawn Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0136934 O'Brien

Ocean surface turbulent fluxes will be examined for
              climate-related variability. SSTs, winds, and pressures are typically examined
              in such studies. The observed changes in winds (speed and direction) and SSTs
              alter turbulent surface fluxes, which have a far-reaching influence on regional
              climatologies. It is expected that surface turbulent fluxes (stress, sensible
              heat, and latent heat) are more directly linked to climate-related changes than
              winds and pressures. Similar approaches will be applied to two overlapping
              periods. We will objectively derive a high quality set of monthly surface
              fluxes (and related fields), covering 1950 to 2005, for the global oceans north
              of ~30 degrees S to examine variability on a wide range of spatial and temporal
              scales (seasonal to decadal). We will also create similar daily fields
              (including surface radiative fluxes) from July 22, 1999 through 2005, with
              greater spatial resolution. Our goal is to produce the most accurate flux
              fields available. Variability on many time scales will be identified by
              applying traditional techniques such as Empirical Orthogonal Functions to
              appropriate regions. The location and time scale of the variability in
              turbulent fluxes, surface winds, and SSTs will be associated with known climate
              related oscillations. These objective analyses will provide insight into the
              processes through which surface fluxes, winds and SSTs are connected to climate
              change. The surface flux data set will also facilitate a wide range of studies
              relating ocean surface flux variability to regional climate change. In order to
              reduce the know biases in reanalysis surface fields, in-situ (ship and buoy)
              and satellite observations will be objectively combined to create a better
              turbulent-flux product. The surface flux fields developed though this study can
              be used to help validate flux fields created with couple ocean-atmospheric
              models. The satellite-related surface flux fields used in this study will be
              indirectly validated in-house by forcing a high resolution ocean model for the
              Gulf of Mexico, and our monthly products will be validated externally by
              long-time collaborators. Our in-situ based monthly products will be compared to
              the satellite products. All of the objective fields will be made publicly
              available.


