Title       : Molecular Origins of Specificity in Protein-Nucleic Acid Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0136094

Award Number: 0136094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jannette Carey jcarey@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The molecular mechanisms by which small-molecule allosteric effectors activate
              gene-regulatory proteins for specific DNA binding are largely unknown.
              Understanding these mechanisms should provide general insights into molecular
              recognition, and inform our understanding of the biology of the molecules
              involved in these processes. The overall goal of the present work is to achieve
              an understanding of allosteric activation that accounts for both structural and
              energetic features of ligand binding and explains DNA specificity in the
              arginine repressor system of E. coli, ArgR. A combined biochemical and
              biophysical approach will be used to establish the quantitative foundations for
              a comprehensive understanding of the molecular and biological significance of
              ArgR-ligand interactions. The cornerstone of this approach is careful
              measurement of ligand-binding equilibria including determination of affinity,
              stoichiometry, and cooperativity. The goal in making these measurements is to
              define the ligand-occupancy states of the protein as a function of ligand
              concentration. This information is then used to set the conditions for studies
              of protein function and structure over the range of relevant ligand-occupancy
              states. This project has four aims.  1. Quantitative analysis of L-arg binding
              to ArgR using isothermal titration, analytical ultracentrifugation, and NMR. 
              2. Analysis of the effects of ligand-occupancy state on ArgR function in
              transcription and recombination.  3. Evaluation of changes in structure and
              dynamics as a function of ligand-occupancy state, using proteolytic cleavage
              and NMR.  4. Examination of ATP binding to evaluate whether this ligand confers
              functional or structural consequences for ArgR.  These biochemical and
              biophysical experiments should provide the quantitative foundations for
              understanding the molecular and biological mechanisms of ArgR function, and
              should help to bring the functional and structural pictures of ArgR allosteric
              activation into a common focus.  

Biomolecules have difficult jobs to do. 
              Many of them must recognize one ligand from an intracellular sea of similar
              ligands, and respond in a physiologically appropriate way.  The range of
              molecular strategies used to execute complex cellular functions is probably
              very broad, but few examples have been fully characterized.  An in-depth
              understanding of molecular strategies is fundamental to many areas of chemistry
              and biology. This research is aimed at expanding our general understanding of
              the mechanisms used by proteins to recognize and respond to small ligands that
              can potentiate their function.  

