Title       : A Nation of States: Mapping the Impact of National Political Forces Through
               State Electoral Institutions, 1840-1940
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0136260

Award Number: 0136260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel H. Kernell skernell@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project will focus on the study of political party systems, with an
              emphasis on the number of parties in a system, and on the sustainability of
              regional parties.  The Investigator plans to build on previous theoretical and
              empirical results to understand party systems in a variety of countries. 
              Currently he has data on Canada and Great Britain, and will get access to data
              on Russia, Germany, South Korea, Botswana, Ghana, and Zimbabwe, and possibly
              more countries. The fundamental question motivating the study is how and why
              some parties become national in scope and sustain a nationwide presence, and
              how and why some parties have only regional appeal. Results from this research
              should be widely applicable to party systems in many other democracies. 
At
              the core of the project is the theoretical argument, first proposed in Chhibber
              and Kollman (1998A, 1998B), that the degree of government centralization is an
              important factor in explaining both the number of parties in a system and the
              survival of regional or local parties. 
The literature on party systems is
              vast and diverse. Yet most theories of party systems are static. Explanations
              of the number of parties based on electoral institutions, national culture, the
              heterogeneity of national populations, or presidentialism have been quite
              successful at capturing cross-national differences. However, these explanations
              cannot help us to understand the dynamics of party systems. As the number of
              parties in many systems fluctuates, explaining the patterns requires attention
              on variables that change over time. One such variable that has been strongly
              correlated with party politics in the United States and India is the
              centralization of national government authority. 
The project will entail both
              empirical and theoretical components.  On the empirical side, the data sets
              gathered will contain constituency-level election results for a variety of
              countries.  Currently, the Investigator has data from Canada and Great Britain,
              two countries with single member, simple plurality electoral systems to their
              lower houses, similar to those in India and the United States. Other single
              member simple plurality countries, South Korea, Botswana, Ghana, and Zimbabwe
              have available data, and the Investigator will gather these data as well.  The
              Investigator will also gather data from countries that have mixed electoral
              systems (elements of proportional representation and plurality), beginning with
              Germany and Russia. 
The formal component contains a rigorous theoretical
              models that can offer insights into the process of party formation and party
              aggregation across electoral districts. As a base, the Investigator will extend
              rational choice models of Duverger's Law to incorporate national politics. Then
              using these insights, the Investigator will explore multidimensional political
              competition in a similar environment, but including multiple levels of
              government as in a federation, and legislative parties. 

