Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research In Political Science: Politics and Protest in New
               Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0136980

Award Number: 0136980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12184              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Solnick SLS27@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Analysis of the development of democracy in the advanced industrialized world
              has repeatedly pointed to the role of social protest and civic organization in
              expanding the franchise and consolidating the liberal rights associated with
              democracy. Consequently, the extent and nature of protest in post-authoritarian
              states might be expected to have an important impact on the development of
              democracy there. Yet so far there has been little research that gives us a
              systematic understanding of either how much, or what kind of protest has
              accompanied economic reforms and democratization in the East. As a result, the
              theory of the causes of protest and passivity, and their impact on
              democratization has been slow to develop. 
This Doctoral Dissertation research
              addresses the problem in two ways. First, it develops and makes available to
              other researchers a searchable database of strikes, hunger-strikes,
              demonstrations and other forms of protest that took place across the 89 regions
              of the Russian Federation between 1997 and 2000. This original dataset will
              considerably enhance the scholarly community's ability to analyze in detail
              political protest in one of the largest post- authoritarian states. Second, it
              develops a theory of protest and passivity that integrates elite politics into
              the model. Protest mobilization is hypothesized to be a function of bargaining
              between central and regional elites and of political competition among elites
              at the regional level. These hypotheses are tested quantitatively using the
              database and qualitatively using a series of case studies. If support is found
              for the theory that intra-elite politics is driving mass politics, scholars
              will have gained insight into the top-down rather than bottom-up nature of much
              of mass politics in post-authoritarian societies and will need to reassess the
              relationship between political protest and democratization in light of this
              finding 
Funding from the NSF contributes to the research by supporting travel
              to and around Russia that is essential both to the development of the database
              and to the testing of hypotheses about mobilization. The database is being
              developed with a collaborator in Moscow. On-going collaboration is essential to
              ensure the reliability and accuracy of the data and will require meetings in
              Moscow. In testing hypotheses, the statistical research based on this dataset
              is combined with a series of qualitative case studies that permit analysis of
              the causal mechanisms at work. The case studies require visits to three
              regional research sites in Russia. NSF funding 
