Title       : New Immigrants: Science & Engineering in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0136467

Award Number: 0136467
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79766              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roli Varma varma@mgt.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES 0136467
New Immigrants: Science & Engineering in the
              United States
Roli Varma
School of Public Administration
University of New
              Mexico, Albuquerque

Debates over the new immigration, or immigration from
              non-European sources, of
scientists/engineers to the U.S. focus on the extent
              to which new immigrants take highly
skilled jobs away from U.S. citizens or
              whether high-tech companies lay off native
workers to hire foreigners in order
              to maximize profits. Recently, some scholars have
focused on the existence of
              a "glass ceiling"  that impedes upward career mobility
for new immigrants in
              science and engineering (S&E). Most studies have yet to explore
the
              complexities/contradictions associated with the presence and experiences of
              new
immigrants in S&E occupations.

This project is a
              qualitative-quantitative study on the situation and experiences
of
              foreign-born scientists/engineers from India in the United States. It focuses
              on the
extent to which they are professionally successful and/or face
              institutional barriers with
respect to reward, recognition, and promotion in
              S&E organizations.  Attention to foreign-born scientists/engineers from India
              makes sense for many reasons.  First, they are increasingly present in the S&E
              workforce of the U.S..  Second, there is
little scholarly work on the
              experiences and impacts of Indian scientists/engineers in the
U.S..  Third,
              foreign-born Indians have made vast strides in education and employment in
              comparison to other ethnic minorities in the U.S.  Fourth, many cultural
              arguments (such as occupational preferences and linguistic abilities) for the
              lack of mobility in positions of authority and decision-making are not
              clear-cut for Indian scientists/engineers.  And fifth, many structural
              arguments for facing the glass ceiling, such as racial prejudice, may overlook
              other factors such as the existence of a "good old boy" network in S&E
              organizations.

Research methods include in-depth interviews to acquire
              primary data on the subject; collection of quantitative data;  examination of
              relevant literature. Attention is focused on two sets of subjects: foreign-born
              Indians holding master and doctorate degrees in S&E disciplines and their
              American colleagues, department chairs, and managers.  Subjects are drawn from 
              two industrial labs, two national labs, and three academic institutions.

The
              findings of this project help illuminate the potential contributions of Indian
              scientists/engineers in the future, as well as efforts to manage diversity,
              fairness and equality issues.  The project aims to develop a theory about the
              behavior of scientists and engineers from India, as well as to help shape
              future policies. Research findings are likely to raise questions and foster
              discussion about the purported objectivity in evaluation and promotion.  

