Title       : Molecular Basis of Bacterial Cyanide Assimilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0136280

Award Number: 0136280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Kunz kunz@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cyanide occurs as a natural biological poison in the environment.  Over 2000
              plants produce cyanide as a means of protecting against invading predators. 
              Cyanide is also produced by certain fungi and bacteria, and its production by
              certain root-colonizing bacteria is believed to stimulate plant growth. 
              Despite its occurrence in diverse biological settings, biochemical processes
              for cyanide metabolism are poorly understood.  This project seeks to shed light
              on these processes leading to a better understanding of pathogenesis,
              plant-microbe interactions, and cyanide recycling in nature.  The discovery
              that the initial steps in cyanide oxidation are mediated by a previously
              undescribed enzyme, cyanide oxygenase, and that this enzyme shares properties
              with another important enzyme having diverse roles in biology, namely, nitric
              oxide synthase, raises the prospect that new information on the properties and
              physiological roles of nitrogen-metabolizing enzymes in biology will be
              uncovered.  A two-tiered research plan involving a collaborative effort with a
              senior faculty associate will be undertaken, with the objective being to
              characterize the proteins and genes constituting the ability of the bacterium,
              P. fluorescens (strain NCIMB 11764), to assimilate cyanide as a nitrogen source
              for growth.  The biochemical pathway of cyanide breakdown in this organism will
              be determined, the enzymes and genes isolated and characterized at the amino
              acid/DNA sequence level, and the occurrence of related genes in other
              cyanide-metabolizing bacteria determined.  The long-range goal of this work is
              to understand the molecular basis of cyanide breakdown making it possible to
              better predict the ecological role of cyanide producing and metabolizing
              bacteria, and the agricultural significance of cyanide in plant-microbe
              interactions.  The proposed research will stress the multi-disciplinary
              training of students and post-doctorals impacting significantly the research
              and teaching atmosphere of the sponsoring institution.   



