Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Bargaining, Uncertainty and
               the Shadow of the Future in North Atlantic Fisheries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0136896

Award Number: 0136896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert O. Keohane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              



The impact of uncertainty on behavior has long captivated the political
              science discipline. Political theories addressing uncertainty's influence on
              bargaining and cooperation underpin the understanding of regime development and
              inform efforts to devise institutions that deal with societies most pressing
              problems. In surveying the theoretical literature, however, contradictory
              claims appear with respect to the causal mechanisms through which uncertainty
              supposedly exerts its influence. A number of prominent scholars have identified
              the salutary effects uncertainty should have on integrative bargaining and
              agreement on permanent rules while other scholars have offered equally
              plausible arguments suggesting that uncertainty inhibits such bargaining and
              impedes such agreements. 
As a means of testing countervailing claims
              regarding the relationship between uncertainty and institutional bargaining,
              this Doctoral Dissertation Research Support focuses on the North Atlantic in
              the wake of oceans enclosure. The formation of 200-mile exclusive economic
              zones (EEZs) provides a unique opportunity for evaluating countervailing
              expectations about bargaining behavior and associated outcomes as a set of new
              regimes are established. This project examines institutional bargaining through
              a research design that identifies variation in uncertainty across a rich set of
              comparable fisheries cases. The project examines the affect of this variation
              on the relative degree of integrative vs. distributive bargaining and the
              content of duration of regulatory agreements -agreements that usually take the
              form of property rights arrangements. Three theoretically plausible causal
              mechanisms are identified generating a number of contradictory propositions
              with respect to the influence of uncertainty on institutional bargaining. The
              project specifies  the
observable implications of these competing mechanisms
              and investigate the conditions under which they operate. 
The results of this
              project will illuminate our theoretical understanding of how competing
              bargaining incentives are reconciled under uncertain conditions, particularly
              in times of crisis. With respect to institutional design, this research offers
              insights into the sequence of issues negotiators might be best advised to
              address under specific conditions of uncertainty. A better understanding of the
              relationship between uncertainty and actual behavior can improve the
              probability of forging agreement on contemporary problems of environment and
              development that seek to balance equity, efficiency and sustainability
              concerns. 


