Title       : Evolution of a Channel/Floodplain System: Waipaoa River, New Zealand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0136375

Award Number: 0136375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87796              (Estimated)
Investigator: Basil Gomez bgomez@indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3551

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1352,9189,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Although rivers and the flood plains they occupy have long been the focus of
              scholarly attention, many aspects of their dynamic evolution are not fully
              understood.  Vertical accretion and channel narrowing due to suspended sediment
              deposition have been documented by geomorphologists over long time scales in
              qualitative or semi-quantitative terms, but complementary data on the
              contemporary rates at which these interrelated processes operate are lacking. 
              This research project will assemble a comprehensive, quantitative geomorphic
              history for a channel-floodplain system along the Waipaoa River on the eastern
              side of the North Island of New Zealand.  Previous research has shown that the
              floodplain is characterized by rapid growth through vertical accretion, which
              has a measurable lateral component at the decadal time scale.  This will be
              achieved by analyzing cross-section survey data, obtained since 1948 at 0.8-km
              (0.5-mile) intervals within a 40-km long reach.  These analyses will ascertain
              the controls on in-channel sedimentation and will determine the extent to which
              the observed changes in cross-section geometry compliment the previously
              documented process of vertical accretion on the Waipaoa River floodplain.

By
              considering complementary data for both the channel and floodplain, this
              research will shed light on the manner in which a river adjusts it hydraulics
              and morphology following a well-documented disturbance to the catchment
              environment (clearance of the native forest in the nineteenth and early
              twentieth centuries).  By correlating patterns of overbank deposition and the
              complimentary process of in-channel deposition that promotes channel narrowing,
              the project will show how the coupled channel-floodplain system has responded
              to human-induced change in the historic period.  The project therefore will
              afford a unique perspective on a suite of processes that has long been surmised
              from stratigraphic studies and is recognized to represent a fundamental
              adjustment of the fluvial system to human-related disturbance.  This research
              also will provide the direct observational experience necessary to test
              relevant width adjustment and floodplain growth models which provide a
              mechanistic explanation for the tendency of a gravel-bed channel, like the
              Waipaoa River, that is subject to an increase in the supply of fine sediment
              load, to evolve into a narrower, deeper river with fine banks and a coarse
              bed.


