Title       : Sequential Voting in Collegial Courts: An Experimental Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0136858

Award Number: 0136858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth C. Williams kenneth.williams@ssc.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reginald S. Sheehan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sequential voting among collegial courts during deliberations is a phenomenon
              that is fairly consistent among different types of court systems. However, the
              method of sequential voting varies widely from court to court. The U.S. Supreme
              Court uses a seniority sequential voting system during the certiorari vote and
              the original votes of merits, in which the most senior justice votes first, and
              so on to the least senior member. U. S. state courts use a multitude of
              sequential voting mechanisms which range from the seniority system described
              above, to a reverse seniority system (in which the least tenured justice votes
              first and so on to the most tenured justice voting last), to a rotation or
              random seniority system (in which the order of voting is determined randomly).
              Sequential voting processes affect the level of uncertainty judges confront
              when they cast their vote on a case. The amount of uncertainty that judges
              confront when they cast their vote is relevant because this influences a
              judge's ability to vote strategically.  Specifically, it may influence a
              judge's decision to join the majority coalition.  Being in the majority has two
              benefits for judges: an individual-level benefit and a collective benefit.
              Individually, in certain judicial systems, a judge who is in the majority has
              he opportunity to draft the initial opinion where bargaining occurs.
              Collectively, the formation of supermajorities is attractive since the
              legitimacy of the court's judgment is heightened when there is consensus about
              a legal issue. To test the effect of voting sequence, the researchers propose a
              series of laboratory experiments. Laboratory experiments also allow control for
              relevant parameters, such as the type of voting system, risk aversion of the
              judges, size of the court, the level of uncertainty, and the saliency of the
              issue under consideration. This research will provide evidence about which
              judge is more likely to vote strategically given his or her position in the
              voting queue, and the rate of strategic voting that should occur in each of the
              court systems. The experiments should also provide some useful results about
              the social welfare properties of each system. 
