Title       : CD8 NK/T Cells and the Phylogeny of Cellular Immunity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0136536

Award Number: 0136536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525321             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacques Robert robert@uhura.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              CD8 cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTL) recognize and kill targets that express
              antigenic peptides in the context of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
              class I molecules.  As such, CTL are crucially involved in the generation of
              adaptive immunity against viruses and tumors.  Natural killer (NK) cells play
              an active role in innate immunity by detecting and killing virally-infected or
              tumor cells that have down-regulated their surface MHC class I molecules
              thereby escaping surveillance by the adaptive immune system. Growing evidence
              suggests that some immune responses are mediated by CTL expressing
              NK-associated molecules (CD8/NK T-cells). The biology and physiological
              significance of the complexity and heterogeneity of NK-associated molecules and
              their expression by different effectors (e.g. CTL) is unclear. Since it is now
              well established in several species, including frogs, that certain heat shock
              proteins (e.g. gp96 or hsp70) elicit both adaptive CD8 T-cell mediated
              responses against the antigenic peptides they chaperone, and innate immune
              responses, it will be of significance to explore, for the first time, the
              extent to which this putative ancestral system of hsp-generated immunity may
              involve CTL that express NK-associated molecules. In addition, an unequivocal
              characterization of NK/T-cells in an amphibian that occupies a pivotal position
              in the evolution of vertebrates would support the hypothesis that CD8
              NK/T-cells represent an important evolutionary step that bridges the innate and
              adaptive immune systems. This finding would also attest of the importance of
              this cell type in immunity of mammals.  Finally, a better knowledge of
              cell-mediated cytotoxicity in Xenopus may have crucial implication with respect
              to understanding putative defects in the immune defense systems used against
              those viral pathogens that are causing world-wide declines of amphibian
              populations.  The overall goal of this project is to take advantage of our
              Xenopus model to assess, from an evolutionary perspective, the role of CD8 NK/T
              cells, both in vitro and in vivo, in innate and adaptive immune responses to
              tumor, viral, and minor histocompatibility antigens as well as to explore the
              idea that T-cells co-expressing CD8 and NK markers (CD8 NK/T-cells) are
              phylogenetically early mediators of cellular immunity.
	
Natural killer and
              cytotoxic T-lymphocytes are two important types of immune cells involved in
              defense against virus infections and tumor. Recent studies suggest the
              existence of a novel cell type with intermediate characteristics.  The goal of
              the research program is to use the frog Xenopus rather than mice as a model
              system to better understand the role of this new type of immune cell in immune
              defense against cancer and virus infections from an evolutionary perspective.

