Title       : Macroeconomic Policy with Illiquid Financial Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0136790

Award Number: 0136790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo J. Caballero caball@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Financial markets play positive and negative roles in economic fluctuations.
              This project focuses on the latter roles and their impact on actual and optimal
              macroeconomic policy. Since emerging economies are particularly affected by
              financial underdevelopment and its consequences, they are both an object of
              study in themselves, and a good device to isolate the financial mechanisms that
              affect developed economies as well. Consequently, this project focuses on
              emerging economies but extracts more general lessons as well. The starting
              point of the project is a perspective where emerging economies are affected by
              two main forms of financial frictions. They have weak links with international
              financial markets and domestic financial markets are underdeveloped. The
              combination of these ingredients lead to occasional external crises, which are
              made more likely and severe by the equilibrium undervaluation of precautionary
              actions by domestic agents.  Within this context the investigator asks and
              attempts to provide theoretical and empirical answers to questions such as:
              What is the appropriate monetary policy during crises and their prelude? How is
              the answer affected by the potential separation between domestic and
              international liquidity? To what extent and under which circumstances can
              monetary policy substitute for missing domestic insurance markets? How is this
              role affected by liability dollarization? Why does the latter persist long
              after inflation has subsided? What is behind the underinsurance problem of
              emerging economies? How is the standard political-economy analysis of central
              bank behavior affected by the presence of recurrent crises? What is the optimal
              exchange rate system for economies with underdeveloped financial markets? 


