Title       : Assessing the Impacts of Global Financial Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0136938

Award Number: 0136938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232129             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen K. Lewis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The trend toward international financial market integration has accelerated over
              the past decade. The effects of global market integration on asset prices is
              obviously an important issue for both policy-making and research reasons. Are
              equity prices being priced more as an asset in a single world market or are
              they still priced according to benchmarks from their own domestic country? And
              if equity markets are evolving towards a common integrated market, what do the
              effects on asset prices imply about traditional assumptions about the
              diversification potential of foreign assets? These general questions are the
              focus of a large literature spanning both macroeconomic and financial research.
               This project intends to take a different approach to these questions, however.
              It is commonly argued that the higher costs of foreign stocks interfere with
              global market integration. These costs are usually argued to be one of two
              kinds: (1) direct transactions costs of going to foreign markets and paying
              possibly higher taxes and fees; or (2) informational costs of learning about a
              foreign firm and its growth potential. This project examines a set of foreign
              stocks that are largely devoid of significantly higher costs along these two
              dimensions.  The investigator builds a unique data set with information about
              foreign companies that cross-list their stocks in the U.S. through so-called
              ADR (American Depositary Receipt) programs. Acquiring these foreign stocks is
              no more costly than acquiring domestic stocks. Moreover, foreign firms that
              list these stocks on the NYSE must go through the same disclosure requirements
              as a domestic US firm, including following the same accounting standards.
              Therefore, these foreign stocks on domestic markets provide a unique
              opportunity to directly study the effects of global market integration on asset
              pricing and on the potentials for gains from international diversification. The
              data set is unique because it provides a full time series for the price of the
              foreign companies both at home and in the U.S.
 
This project consists of 
              three parts. The first part of the project focuses upon the effects of
              financial integration on asset pricing relationships. The issue of foreign
              stocks in the US market has been associated with a casual empirical
              observation: the stock price of the parent company tends to covary more
              positively with the US market after cross-listing. If these anecdotal stories
              are true, they are important for understanding international equity pricing,
              and thereby bear on most policy issues concerning international financial
              markets. This part of the project examines the question of whether greater
              international financial integration in the form of cross-listings of stocks has
              affected international equity pricing. It also calculates the welfare gains for
              international equity markets before and after integration. 

The second part
              of the project focuses more directly on the scope for diversification in the
              face of greater integration. This question is important for policy issues
              ranging from retirement and its associated social security questions to
              international allocation of capital issues.  The project uses a time series of
              about 2000 foreign firms' cross-listed stock price in the US and match these
              with their counterparts on their own markets. This allows a comparison of asset
              pricing behavior before and after cross-listing. A Bayesian approach is used
              that allows the calculation of what investors would choose once these stocks
              are issued in the U.S. and thereby address two different fundamental questions.
              First, comparing the degree of integration between the US and a given foreign
              market before and after cross-listing, what are the diversification gains from
              the increased integration? This question is important because the existing
              literature has generally compared gains only relative to perfect integration.
              Second, would US investors who hold cross-listed foreign stocks still choose to
              hold additional foreign stocks that are not cross-listed? Obviously, answering
              this question is important for determining whether domestic investors really
              need to hold assets obtained directly from foreign stock exchanges to be
              optimally diversified. 

The third part of the project asks: Has global
              integration through cross-listing improved the domestic resident's ability to
              hedge consumption risk?  It addresses this issue by testing whether the
              variability of consumption growth that is explained by these stocks is
              significantly higher than the variability of the general foreign index.
              Addressing these issues is important since studies of international
              diversification from a macroeconomic viewpoint have focused upon the sharing of
              consumption risks. To the extent that international portfolio allocation has
              been considered, it has been to ask what assets would support the sharing of
              consumption risks. No study to date has examined the direct effects of market
              integration through cross-listing on the ability to insure consumption risk. 

