Title       : Algebraic and Stochastic Models of Structures Arising in Utility Theory and
               Psychophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0136431

Award Number: 0136431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Duncan Luce rdluce@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research continues and extends earlier theoretical work of the investigator
              and of collaborator A. A. J. Marley on the measurement of psychological
              attributes such as the utility of goods and the subjective intensity of
              physical signals such as lights or sounds.  The research will describe the
              underlying structure of independent variables that affect the attribute in such
              algebraic terms as (1) the ordering by "subjectively greater than," (2)
              operations like being presented with two goods or stimuli at once or in quick
              succession, (3) treatments of stimuli as deviations from the status quo in
              utility or from threshold in psychophysics, and (4) use of judgements of
              "ratios of intervals" similar to those found in magnitude production methods. 
              This project will account for violations of dominance, such as the utility of
              gambling per se, peculiarities of mixed gambles of gains and losses, and
              various principles to extend the theory from binary gambles to general ones. 
              The project also will attempt to generalize some of the algebraic theories to
              probabilistic versions.

Utility models are extensively used in providing
              advice to decision makers and subjective expected utility also is a key part of
              Bayesian statistical methods.  Sensory measurement is used widely in a variety
              of industrial settings.  Yet these applications are based primarily on
              empirical generalizations whose theoretical basis has recently been brought
              into doubt.  This project will advance theory and methods in many application
              areas.  It also will further the development of a probabilistic version of
              fundamental measurement theory, thereby expanding the value of this approach
              for many social and behavioral science inquiries.

