Title       : Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical Modeling of Carbon Partitioning in the
               Pacific: the Role of Si and Fe in Regulating Production by Siliceous and
               Calcifying Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0136443

Award Number: 0136443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Dugdale rdugdale@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frances P. Wilkerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Physical and biological interactions play a complex role in the partitioning of
              carbon between the atmosphere, upper ocean, deep ocean and sediments. At
              present, interdisciplinary models offer the best means to test hypotheses about
              how carbon partitioning is regulated in various oceanic regions on time scales
              of years to centuries. A new interdisciplinary model will integrate advances in
              several areas to test two related hypotheses: 1) that switches in community and
              productivity dominance between diatoms and other phytoplankton groups (e.g.
              non?siliceous picoplankton and calcifying phytoplankton) significantly affect
              carbon partitioning, vary spatially and temporally and are regulated by a
              combination of Si and Fe in combination; 2) that changes in Si trapping in the
              Southern Ocean affect Si(OH)4 concentrations in the "mode" waters that feed
              equatorial upwelling, and that Si and C uptake by equatorial phytoplankton
              alters air?sea exchange of carbon dioxide at the equator.

An
              interdisciplinary science team of biological and chemical oceanographers and
              modelers will address these issues via four approaches.  First, a calcifying
              phytoplankton component will be added to an existing model and used to
              incorporate water column production and dissolution of CaC03.  Second, model
              experiments will be designed and executed to explore the regulation of
              switching between siliceous (diatoms) and non?siliceous (pico and calcifying)
              plankton.  Third, an improved blogeochemical model developed for the equatorial
              Pacific will be spatially expanded to include the Southern Ocean, and used to
              conduct a series of simulation experiments on the processes that link high
              latitude "mode" water regions with the source waters for equatorial upwelling. 
              Finally, iron?sensitive growth parameters of the phytoplankton components of
              the model will be manipulated to test the ecosystem response to iron enrichment
              in both the equatorial Pacific Ocean and the Southern Ocean. These objectives
              represent a significant step in the development of coupled physical
              biogeochemical models for exploring the response of marine biogeochemical
              processes to climate change.


