Title       : RUI: A Dynamical Study of Chemical and Biochemical Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0136143

Award Number: 0136143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrique Peacock-Lopez epeacock@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Enrique Peacock-Lopez of Williams College is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to carry out research in the area of chemical
              and biochemical reactions in solutions and on surfaces using analytical methods
              and simulations.  The effort will expand proposed minimal models and consider
              several systems that are relevant to nonlinear chemical kinetics and
              biochemical mechanisms in cell and human physiology.  Specifically, cell
              surface ligand-receptor interactions and lateral diffusion on phospholipid
              bilayers will be studied.  As well, cascade mechanisms responding to
              ligand-receptor binding and specific biochemical mechanisms related to
              biochemical response will be explored.  Applications will enable insights to be
              gained into biochemical systems including self-replicating structures and their
              implication on triple-stranded DNA, prion kinetics, pulsitile secretion,
              regulation of pituitary hormones, and glucose metabolism in liver cells. 
              

Temporal and spatial pattern formation in biological systems is an
              interesting and challenging problem in theoretical biophysical chemistry.  In
              this project, the molecular basis of different physiological mechanisms will be
              explored, with the aim of understanding the response to initial
              macromolecule-surface protein "signals" at the molecular level.  Undergraduate
              participation is an integral part of this effort, with students expected to
              gain valuable research experience and benefit from complementary interactions
              with experimentalists.  

