Title       : Heterogeneity of Ion Channels in Isolated Hippocampal Astrocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0136960

Award Number: 0136960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold K. Kimelberg kimelbh@mail.amc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Min Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albany Medical College
	      47 New Scotland Avenue
	      Albany, NY  122083412    518/262-5181

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1192,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              LAY SUMMARY; ION CHANNELS in HIPPOCAMPAL ASTROCYTES.  Harold K. Kimelberg and
              Min Zhou 

	Voltage gated ion channels for the small cations sodium (Na+ )
              and potassium (K+  ) are responsible for  the wave of depolarization that
              travels down the neuronal  axon and excites other neurons to which it is linked
              by synapses, where the depolarization releases neurotransmitters which rapidly
              diffuse across the synaptic cleft to stimulate the next neuron, and so on,. 
              The formation of circuits by such connected neurons are thought to underlie how
              the brain works.  The properties of the Na+ and K+ ion channels in neurons have
              been extensively studied.  The other major type of brain cells are called glia
              and they are not excitable.  Current studies have now shown that these cells
              can contain the same type of voltage sensitive sodium and potassium channels as
              are found in neurons, and also voltage dependant chloride channels.  This is
              surprising as the function of these  channels is thought to be to modulate
              neuronal excitability and the glia are unexcitable.  
This project will use a
              freshly isolated preparation of one of the main kinds of glial cells the
              astroglia to identify what ion channels are present in these cells and to help
              understand their functions.  Our work to date shows that this preparation can
              be divided into two different classes of astroglia based on a different
              repertoire of channels.  Knowledge of the detailed properties of these channels
              will give us important clues as to their functions.  We will test one
              hypothesis that one type of astrocyte but not the other has K+ channels and Cl-
              channels designed to allow it take up K+ plus Cl- when K+ is released via the
              outward rectifying K+ channel on neurons during impulse conduction.  (293
              words).

