Title       : The Use of 15NH3 to Estimate Fractionation of Nitrogen Isotopes during
               Diagenesis of Organic Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0136500

Award Number: 0136500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Hammond dhammond@earth.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0136500


The biogeochemical cycle of nitrogen is very
              susceptible to changes in environmental conditions.  Understanding the present
              and past response of the marine  nitrogen cycle to natural and anthropogenic
              changes is important for our ability to predict  the potential impact of future
              environmental changes on primary production in the oceans, and consequently
              their effect on global and regional marine ecosystems.  One of the most 
              powerful tools for deciphering past fluctuations in the marine nitrogen cycle
              is the 15N isotopic composition  (d15N) of  organic matter preserved in marine
              sediments.  In various settings, this tracer may provide  information about
              variability in ocean productivity and the degree of nutrient utilization, or 
              about the relative importance of nitrogen fixation or denitrification. 
              However, to accurately  interpret the paleoceanographic record, a critical
              question that must be answered is to  estimate the extent of nitrogen isotope
              fractionation during diagenesis.  

In this study, researchers at the
              University of Southern California will measure the d15 N of ammonia in pore
              waters of sediments from  several near-anoxic basins in the California
              Borderland and the Gulf of California.   Analyses of the solid phase abundance
              and d15N of bulk organic nitrogen and THAA  (total hydrolyzable  amino
              acids)will also be made.  Because irrigation effects are absent  from the study
              sites, it will be possible to construct mass balances for 15N and 14N lost 
              during diagenesis of solid phases by fitting diffusion-advection-reaction
              models to pore  water data.  The combination of these model calculations with
              information on sediment  accumulation rate and solid phase nitrogen data will
              establish the degree of isotope  fractionation, and will also be useful for
              evaluating whether bacterial uptake of isotopically  light nitrogen plays a
              significant role in the sedimentary nitrogen budget.  To evaluate the 
              potential for fractionation at more oxic sites, incubation experiments will be
              run using  mixtures of sediment and fresh plankton decomposing under both oxic
              and anoxic  conditions.  


