Title       : Macroeconomics and Inequality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0136351

Award Number: 0136351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Per Krusell pekr@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

The United States economy is one of the richest in the world, both in terms
              of per capita wealth and in terms of per capita output, but it is also an
              economy with very sharp contrasts between rich and poor. What is the source of
              this inequality, and should it concern economists and policy makers? Is it
              perhaps a natural, or even necessary, aspect of being the richest in the world,
              or does it reflect a failure that can be addressed with economic policy? And
              even if inequality per se is not a cause for concern, does it influence
              aggregate economic activity?   Although much progress has been made, academic
              economists are not yet able to address the above issues in a quantitatively
              satisfactory way. First, few natural experiments are available to speak
              directly to the issues using purely empirical methods. Second, adequate
              economic theory is largely missing. This research addresses the second point:
              it aims to continue the development of the theory and numerical tools needed
              for a quantitative study of the sources of inequality and its interrelation
              with macroeconomics. The present project, in particular, is a continuation of
              an earlier project (NSF grant #9807760) by this investigator with
              collaborators.
 
The work proceeds along several fronts, but the common theme
              is to both develop and apply methods that are of general use in
              quantitative-theoretical studies of macroeconomics and inequality.   The
              central questions are rather basic ones: What determines how different people
              save, both in human and physical capital? How does technological change
              influence wage inequality? How does economic policy influence, and how is it
              influenced by, inequality? The project has specific applications, but most of
              the work is on questions of quite broad applicability. The subprojects are as
              follows: 
I. Origins of inequality: 
a. Savings: Why do households differ so
              much in their propensities to save? This project continues earlier work on the
              role of initial wealth differences and labor market luck, but also goes
              further: what determines "discount factors?"  The approach here is one of
              psychology and economics; the psychology literature reports that many consumers
              seem to face "urges" to consume, and whether they do or not, and how they deal
              with the urges, seems to vary widely. 
b. Earnings: How are wage and human
              capital inequality influenced by technological change that is embodied in
              capital? Arguably, the bulk of the present and recent improve- ments in
              productivity take this form, and the existing work on the topic is quite
              limited. Here, the focus is on how frictions in the labor markets impact both
              accumulation of physical and human capital, and on how economic policy
              interacts with these frictions. 
II. Interactions between inequality and
              aggregates: 
a. Does the wealth distribution matter for macro? A further
              investigation of channels through which inequality-via the differences in
              propensities to save and work in the population-influences aggregates is
              undertaken here. 
b. The policy channel: How does economic policy affect
              inequality, and vice versa? This work includes (i) a political-economy study of
              redistribution and social insurance and (ii) a study of dynamic policy
              determination when policy makers are restricted by a lack of commitment. 

