Title       : SGER: Flexible Index Structure for Relevance Feedback Content-Based Retrieval in
               Large Image Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0136348

Award Number: 0136348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jing Peng jp@eecs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Heisterkamp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to design efficient indexing strategies that
              support flexible retrieval metric through relevance feedback learning. However,
              trying to satisfy both goals (efficiency and flexibility) at the same time
              leads to a conflict. A novel approach is explored to capture the inherent
              interplay between flexible metrics and indexing that has the potential to
              resolve the conflict. It is hypothesized that the interplay can be exploited to
              create effective content-based retrieval systems that meet performance and
              computational challenges encountered in practical image database applications.
              This exploratory project seeks to establish the proof of concept of an approach
              that trades off accuracy for efficiency, and that can avoid exhaustive search
              in large-scale image databases. The methods to be explored are based on
              bump-hunting in high-dimensional data for inducing a set of (possibly
              overlapping) boxes that capture the local data distributions. The induced boxes
              effectively cover the feature space, thereby providing an index to the image
              database. The flexibility and efficiency of the novel indexing technique will
              be tested in heterogeneous image databases that support a variety of query
              types, ranging from query-by-image to query-by-region. If successful, the
              results of this project will enable the use of flexible metric learning in
              large scale image databases, which will have a significant impact in
              content-based image retrieval in broad areas such as health-care, scientific
              images, education, or art. 
