Title       : When Juveniles are Tried as Adults: The Effects of Voir Dire on Jury Composition
               and Juror Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0136652

Award Number: 0136652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Bull Kovera koveram@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will examine whether voir dire results in a more conviction prone
              jury in cases where juveniles are tried in adult courts. Juveniles who are
              transferred to adult court have the same rights as adult criminal defendants,
              but are the rights of juvenile offenders to a representative and impartial jury
              abrogated when they are transferred to adult court? This research will use four
              studies to address the following questions: Do judges ask veniremembers
              questions about the possible penalty during voir dire in youthful offender
              cases and what effect do these questions have on juror decisions? Are juvenile
              waiver attitudes correlated with demographic variables such that minority group
              members are likely to be excluded from jury service because of their
              anti-waiver attitudes? Does the inclusion of jurors with anti-waiver attitudes
              increase the ability of a jury to evaluate the quality of the evidence
              presented? Finally, does exposure to voir dire questions in juvenile offender
              cases result in a more conviction-prone jury? To answer these questions, the
              principal investigator will collect and content analyze transcripts from a
              sample of cases in which juveniles were tried in adult courts. This initial
              exploration will allow the researchers to characterize the typical voir dire
              that occurs in these cases. In Study 2, the researchers will examine whether
              particular attitudes and demographic characteristics are correlated with
              anti-juvenile waiver attitudes. In Study 3, a jury simulation will be conducted
              in which half of the juries include jurors with anti-waiver attitudes and half
              do not, varying the strength of the evidence. To investigate whether exposure
              to "juvenile qualification" produces a more conviction prone jury, the
              researchers will expose some jurors to a simulated voir dire in a juvenile
              offender case and other jurors to a voir dire that lacks questions about
              juvenile waiver attitudes in Study 4. The results of these four studies will
              provide information about the voir dire process in juvenile waiver cases.
