Title       : Research in the Foundations and Practice of Social Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0136115

Award Number: 0136115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Kimball Romney akromney@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Batchelder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Social measurement entails discovering the nature of knowledge shared by a group
              of individuals who possess common backgrounds, cultural knowledge, or social
              norms, i.e., knowledge defined by social conventions.  Unlike most physical and
              psychophysical measurements, social measurements need not have objective
              external criteria.  Therefore cultural knowledge and social norms must be
              inferred from the pattern of responses among respondents to test items posed by
              researchers.  Previous research has developed a collection of formal models and
              methods for social measurement known as cultural consensus theory.  The models
              bear a close relationship to models in psychometric test theory; however,
              unlike most applications of test theory, the researcher does not assume prior
              knowledge of the "answer key" for the test items.  The theory consists of a
              family of knowledge aggregation models for questionnaire data that permits the
              simultaneous estimation of the competence or knowledge of each respondent and
              the consensus correct answer to each question.  Models exist for particular
              testing formats such as true-false, multiple-choice, matching, and rank order
              for the case of a single homogeneous culture.

This research project will
              take cultural consensus theory to the next level by developing new models to
              deal with more complex response formats, and to extend the models to the
              multiculture case where the respondents can be partitioned into subgroups.  The
              new models will then be applied to a set of empirical studies concerning
              reliable differences in the perceptual structure of color, in particular across
              different language groups and between different individuals within a group. 
              State-of-the-art Markov Chain Monte Carlo estimation methods will be developed
              for these new models.  The advances in theory and method that will emerge from
              this research will improve the quality of social measurement, both for research
              questions related to the perceptual structure of color and for other
              measurement questions that depend upon aggregating the judgements of
              respondents.

