Title       : Risk communication and public participation during the investigation of cancer
               clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0136935

Award Number: 0136935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259623             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig W. Trumbo trumbocw@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shanna Swan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine A. McComas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Every day in the United States, on average, three communities reach
              a
sufficient state of concern to contact their state health department for
              the
investigation of a suspected cancer cluste, ran unusual and
              unexplained
increase in the occurrence of cancer in space and time. State
              health
departments investigate about a third of these cases in one way or
              another,
but find that very few (about 1%) present suspect cancer rates.
              However,
these cases of community concern and health department response
              present an
effective circumstance in  which to investigate risk perception,
              risk
communication, and public participation in risk analysis.  This project
              is
the continuation and expansion of an established research effort designed
              to
examine the social and psychological circumstances
              surrounding
citizen-initiated cancer cluster investigations, with an emphasis
              on two
aspects: the effects of state health department communications, and
              the
experiences of citizens and officials in public meetings held during
              these
cases. To meet the first goal, the project will integrate, and develop,
              two
primary theoretical models, one central to risk perception (the
              Psychometric
model) and one central to information processing and decision
              making (the
Heuristic-Systematic model). Previous work in this effort has
              examined a
series of five such cases. This expansion will use mail and phone
              survey
methods to look at a larger and more diverse set of cluster
              investigations
(about 50), enabling a comparison across cases. The analysis
              will continue
the refinement of a model that describes the effects of
              information provided
to communities in these cases, and will also evaluate the
              effects of the
specific circumstances unique to theses cases (e.g., types of
              cancer,
suspected causes). The analysis will also focus on the
              different
communication techniques used by various state health departments to
              convey
the results of their epidemiological investigations. To meet the
              second
goal, a set of five cases will be more deeply studied with an emphasis
              on
the public meetings that are almost always an important feature of
              these
community experiences. That effort will make further use of mail and
              phone
survey methods, and will also make use of extensive interviews and
              focus
groups. Overall, the project is expected to provide a detailed
              examination
of how information is conveyed in these cases, and how citizens
              make use of
information to reach, or modify, their orientation toward concerns
              about
cancer rates.

Relative to scientific interests in risk perception,
              one of the most
interesting aspects of this investigation resides in the fact
              that cluster
cases almost always present a circumstance in which the
              scientific evidence
indicates little or no risk, yet that evaluation is
              couched in the
probabilistic language of cancer epidemiology. This
              investigation will
advance scientific understanding of how individuals react
              to this form of
information, a problem that has been a long-standing concern
              in the fields
of psychology, social-psychology, and risk communication. In
              more practical
terms, this project is also designed to evaluate the methods by
              which this
form of information is provided to communities. The analysis will
              illuminate
the more effective means of communicating the results of
              epidemiological
studies and as such will provide important and useful
              feed-back for those
who are charged with that work. The project's ultimate
              goal is that this
kind of information will be communicated more effectively
              and the
communities involved in such cases will be better served.
