Title       : Economic Analysis of Data from Laboratory Experiments: Endogeniety, Attrition,
               Subject Heterogeniety, and Interdependencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a0136925

Award Number: 0136925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285399             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Kagel   (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Ham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal addresses a number of issues involved in the statistical analysis
              of data from laboratory experiments in economics.  Experimental work in
              economics is of growing importance to the field, but the statistical analysis
              of data from these experiments is still relatively primitive compared to the
              opportunities available and the research issues posed.  The purpose of our
              investigations is both methodological and substantive: Methodological in the
              sense of demonstrating applications of modern statistical (econometric)
              techniques to data analysis issues of central concern to experimenters, and
              refining applications of these techniques to the special questions (and
              opportunities) that laboratory experimental data pose.  Substantive in that a
              number of the particular issues addressed have been of concern in the
              literature, so that the new experiments proposed here, and the corresponding
              data analysis, should provide new insights into the issues at hand. 

Work is
              proposed on a number of issues.  (1) In common value (or mineral rights)
              auction experiments there is a significant self-selection effect as bidders who
              fall prey to the winner's curse lose money, often go bankrupt, and end the
              experiment with very little money.  As a consequence they tend to self-select
              out of returning for subsequent experimental sessions which can lead to
              important biases in the conclusions reached regarding the behavior of more
              experienced bidders.  The plan is to both measure the bias and to explore
              different ways of dealing with it, both statistically and in terms of
              experimental design. (2) One common method in economic experiments is to
              provide repeated trials with payoffs within a given experimental session to
              provide subjects with experience with the economic contingencies involved. 
              This leads to subjects accumulating earnings from the experiment over time
              whose effect is typically ignored, or when studied fails to account for the
              endogeneity of changes in these earnings.  This in turn can lead to important
              biases in the analysis of auction outcomes. We plan to determine why agents are
              subject to such effects when economic theory suggests that they will not be,
              and to extend the experimental methodology developed to study the impact of
              earnings on cash balance effects in mineral rights auction experiments.  (3)
              Economists have long suspected that performance in economic experiments
              reflects, at least in part, the experiences of subjects outside the lab as well
              as their demographic characteristics.  We will study this systematically by
              collecting relevant demographic and experiential data on subjects borrowing
              methods developed in the statistical analysis of field data.  (4) In many
              economic experiments there are potential interdependencies between individual
              subject observations associated with repeated observations of a group of
              subjects within a given experimental session. We plan to explore this issue in
              a number of different settings and to devise ways for dealing with it.  (5)
              Often when statistically evaluating behavior in economic experiments
              investigators assume that all, or most, response coefficients are constant
              across subjects.  This is likely to be incorrect in a number of cases.  We plan
              to study ways of accounting for this response heterogeneity across individuals
              in such cases. 

