Title       : Inference for Average Treatment Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0136789

Award Number: 0136789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230498             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guido Imbens imbens@econ.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Estimation of causal effects of policy interventions such as job training
              programs is an
important goal of much applied economic research. Often a
              reasonable starting point is the
assume that assignment to the treatment is
              random given on sufficiently detailed observed
pretreatment variables. Under
              that assumption one can identify the population average
effect. This research 
              will contribute to the literature on inference for average treatments effects
              under
these assumptions in three parts. First, the research will 
              develop
large sample theory for matching estimators. By matching estimators we
              mean estimators
where each treated unit is matched to one or a fixed number of
              controls, and each control
is matched to one or a fixed number of treated
              units. Such pure matching estimators have
considerable intuitive appeal and
              have been used widely in practice, without their large
sample theory having
              been established other than for special cases. The result should be
an
              asymptotic theory for such matching estimators that allows researchers to use
              these
estimators in practice. In a  second part, the research  will
              investigate higher order properties
of some of the estimators for average
              treatment effects  that have been proposed. Many
of these estimators have a
              nonparametric component. However, most of the literature is
silent regarding
              the actual choice of smoothing parameters, beyond rate conditions. This
makes
              it di .cult for practitioners to actually implement thse estimators. Here the
              plan is to
develop a mean-squared-error based criterion to derive an explicit
              data-driven criterion for
the smoothing parameter. In the third part, the
              research  will compare a number of the
estimators for average treatment
              effects. So far a number of estimators have been proposed,
often with a small
              simulation study to investigate their properties. What this research
              accomplishes  is
a systematic comparison of various estimators.

In many
              studies of social programs such as job training programs observational
              data
are used to evaluate these programs. Statistical methods for such
              evaluations often rely on
matching type methods that match trainees to similar
               controls, that is individuals who
received the training to individuals who
              did not receive the training with similar background
characteristics and labor
              market histories. A variety of such methods are currently used, with
often the
              properties and reliability of such methods unknown. This research  investigates
              the
formal properties of such methods. In addition the research  will develop
              automated procedures for
implementing some of these methods. Currently these
              methods often require the researcher
to make a number of choices in the
              implementation that potentially affect the final results
substantially,
              without much guidance available to guide these choices. This should make
these
              methods more transparent and easier to implement. Finally, the research  will
              compare a number
of these methods in settings where the correct answers are
              known so as to evaluate their
performance and reach recommendations to inform
              the future use of such methods.
