Title       : Consumer Profiles, Consumer Privacy, and the Information Marketplace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0136817

Award Number: 0136817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis R. Taylor CRTaylor@econ.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In a recent survey, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) found that 99% of on-line
              companies collect personal information from the individuals visiting their web
              sights. In September 2000, Amazon.com conducted dynamic pricing experiments in
              which DVD movies were sold to different customers at different prices (up to a
              40% difference) based on their purchasing histories. Besides dynamic pricing,
              firms use consumer profile data to target ads and make product recommendations.
               Indeed, customized ads that use consumer profile data sell for up to ten times
              the price of untargeted advertisements.  There are many Internet marketing
              firms such as Double Click and I-Behavior that collect and sell customer
              information to electronic retailers. In addition to purchasing histories, these
              databases typically contain such items as an individual's income, size of
              family, lifestyle interests, and motor vehicle ownership. Consumers are
              becoming increasingly aware that their electronic purchases and other
              activities are being monitored and cataloged.

The purpose of this project is
              to investigate these privacy issues in the context of a series of
              game-theoretic models.  Specifically, some of the key questions to be addressed
              include the following: What is the economic impact of a closed privacy regime
              (in which consumers own the information) versus an open privacy regime (in
              which firms own it)?  Which -- if any -- consumers are likely to benefit from
              an open privacy regime and which are likely to be hurt by it? When -- if ever
              -- would firms prefer to insure the privacy of their customers and how might
              they accomplish this?  What is the impact on efficiency and industrial
              organization of access to consumer profile data?  Specifically, will such data
              become an integral input to the profitability of firms, and if so, is
              differential access to information likely to generate market power and
              anti-competitive behavior?

