Title       : Ionically Conductive Polyelectrolyte Multilayers for Microbattery Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0136029

Award Number: 0136029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula T. Hammond hammond@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The alternating adsorption of polyelectrolytes and other multivalent organic
              and
inorganic species has evolved in the past decade into a quickly developing
              new field of
materials science.  The multilayer assembly technique, which
              involves the alternating
adsorption of oppositely charged species from dilute
              aqueous or mixed solvent solutions,
has been used to create a number of
              systems with electrical, optical, dielectric and
electrochemical
              functionality.  Ultrathin films with high uniformity are can be created
using
              layer-by-layer assembly techniques.  The ease of fabrication, ability to
              control film
structure on a nanometer length scale, and the tunability of the
              final properties of the film
make polyelectrolyte multilayer approaches
              interesting as components in micron scale
battery applications.  Recent work
              from the Hammond research group has resulted in a
number of microfabrication
              techniques that allow the incorporation of functional polymer
multilayers into
              micron scale devices.  New work in this group has also led to orders
              of
magnitude increases in the solid state ionic conductivity of
              polyelectrolyte multilayer
films through the use of highly acidic polyions
              such as perfluorosulfonated ionomers, and
the incorporation of polyethylene
              oxide.  The goals of this work are to develop new
polyelectrolyte multilayer
              systems with ionic conductivities suitable for thin film battery
applications,
              to take advantage of the nanometer scale control that multilayer
              assembly
processes provide to develop electrolyte films with gradient
              electronic conductivities for
battery electrode components, and to apply
              nonlithographic microfabrication techniques
developed in this group to create
              cheap, easily manufactured multilayer battery devices
on plastic, glass or
              paper substrates for plastic and paper thin film electronics
applications.

