Title       : Charging and Sentencing Decisions Under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines: A
               Three-District Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0136236

Award Number: 0136236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159972             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cassia C. Spohn spohn@unomaha.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Omaha
	      60th and Dodge Street
	      Omaha, NE  68182    402/554-2286

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The enactment of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 and the subsequent
              promulgation of sentencing guidelines by the United States Sentencing
              Commission (USSC) transformed sentencing in the federal criminal justice
              system. The highly discretionary and largely unregulated sentencing process of
              the pre-guidelines era was replaced by a tightly structured system in which
              judicial discretion is constrained by sentencing rules based largely on the
              seriousness of the offense and the offender's prior criminal record. Moreover,
              prosecuting attorneys, who played a fairly circumscribed role in the
              pre-guidelines era, have substantial influence on sentencing under the
              guidelines; in many cases, their charging and plea bargaining decisions
              determine the sentence that will be imposed by the judge.  Research designed to
              evaluate the impact of these "revolutionary" changes in the federal sentencing
              process focus on sentencing decisions at the national level. These studies
              assume, either explicitly or implicitly, that there is little inter-district
              variation in case processing policies and procedures and that findings
              regarding sentence outcomes at the national level therefore reflect the reality
              of decision making in each of the U.S. District Courts. A second issue is that
              prior researchers have focused almost exclusively on the sentencing decision
              itself, rather than examining the prosecutor's charging and plea bargaining
              decisions. This research will address these methodological limitations by
              studying federal sentencing practices and outcomes at the district level and by
              using quantitative and qualitative research techniques to describe and analyze
              charging, plea bargaining, and sentencing policies, practices, and outcomes. 
              The research will study three U.S. District Courts: the District of Nebraska,
              the District of Minnesota, and the Southern District of Iowa.  The primary
              objectives of this project are: (1) to test for inter-district disparity in
              sentencing; (2) to describe charging and plea bargaining practices and to
              identify the predictors of charging and plea bargaining decisions; and (3) to
              examine the effect of offender and case characteristics on sentence outcomes at
              the district level. The researchers will collect data on all cases prosecuted
              in the three districts during fiscal years 1998, 1999, and 2000. They will
              obtain detailed data on the offender, the case, and the sentence from the
              USSC's Offender Datafile for each district for each year. They will supplement
              these data with information contained in the Presentence Investigation Report,
              the Sentencing Recommendation, the Order of Judgement, and other documents
              provided by each U.S. District Court. The researchers also will interview
              judges, attorneys, and probation officers in each district.  The proposed study
              will fill important gaps in our knowledge of the dynamics of the federal
              sentencing process. It represents a first step toward understanding
              inter-district variation in case processing procedures and outcomes, removing
              the "cloak of secrecy that surrounds charging and plea bargaining in the
              federal criminal justice system, and untangling the complex inter-relationships
              among charging decisions, plea agreements, and sentence outcomes. 
