Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Explaining the Political
               News Product
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0136850

Award Number: 0136850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. MacKuen MacKuen@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The news media play a vital role in many of the political processes of most
              interest to scholars. Accordingly, any political science subfield that uses
              news content as an independent or intervening variable will benefit from a
              systematic, theoretically driven accounting of the process by which the
              political world is filtered and condensed into a news product. This Doctoral
              Dissertation Research project embeds theories of the news production process in
              the empirical-test-friendly research designs of aggregate policy system
              analysis, in order to answer the question: what drives systematic variation in
              the political news product over a variety of substantive issue areas? National
              newspapers and evening newscasts from the past 20 years are examined. 
In all
              three studies, the dependent variable -news content -is measured by content
              analyses utilizing independent coders. The stories are gathered from
              Lexis-Nexis Academic Universe and the Vanderbilt Archives. Independent
              variables come from a variety of 
sources, the two most important being the
              Pennsylvania State University Correlates of War Project, and the University of
              Washington Policy Agendas data set. 
The three separate studies apply the
              primary research question to three facets of the political process: I) What
              explains variation in economic news over time? 2) What explains variation in
              the quantity of coverage allotted by the American press to foreign conflicts?
              3) What explains variation in the quality and quantity of coverage given to
              congressional hearings? 
F or each model of variation in political news, four
              competing classes of independent variables are tested for their relative
              explanatory power. First, it is argued that the normative implications of mass
              mediation are most fruitfully understood by calibrating coverage to a reality
              baseline: the tangible, measurable aspect of the given political domain that an
              objective press is expected to report as faithfully as possible, and that the
              veracious reporting of which renders the press mere information carriers in the
              political process. Next, the extent to which elites' deliberate attempts to
              shape the news product are successful in a given context is the extent to which
              the media are falling short in their watchdog role. Thus much can be learned
              from assessing the impact on news formation of independent variables that
              indicate a conscious attempt by elites to shape the news. Also, the use of
              dynamic models enables a statistically sound assessment of whether prior public
              opinion moves subsequent news, controlling for the more conventional effect of
              news on opinion. Such an effect suggests a previously overlooked element of
              democratic responsiveness in the policy process. Finally, variation in
              seemingly arbitrary qualities of the political world wield a powerful influence
              over news content on account of their conformance with the norms and
              constraints of professional news organizations. Such variables -known as media
              power variables -indicate a significant non-spurious effect of the news media
              on the political process.
 



