Title       : Development of a Computing Infrastructure for Political and Social Science
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1994 
File        : a9413939

Award Number: 9413939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Hanneman robert.hanneman@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Romero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Wenzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Nagler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hanneman    With National Science Foundation support, the University of 
              California, Riverside, will develop a networked computing  infrastructure for
              the departments of political science and  sociology. This will consist of: a
              central Unix machine providing  remote-login service for all users as well as
              data-storage  facilities; two fast workstations providing processing power for 
              users working on large data sets or computationally intensive  problems; 16
              Pentium based machines and various other PCs which  will serve as X-Windows
              terminals. Several existing machines will  be upgraded to have X-Windows
              capability and all will be  connected via the University's ethernet. The server
              and  workstations will run a variety of statistical software through  SAS, SPSS
              and Gauss and these will provide primary tools for data  analysis.    This
              system will be used by both faculty and graduate students  and serve both
              research and training purposes. Projects to be  conducted involve analyses of:
              congressional roll-call data, data  on Supreme Court opinions, the performance
              of different maximum-  likelihood estimators on the choice problems faced by
              voters in  multiple-candidate elections, simulation of models of social 
              processes, Mexican politics, and the sociology of garment  manufacturing in Los
              Angeles. Currently the research in the  departments of sociology and political
              science is constrained by  computer limitations. This award will remedy that
              situation.
