Title       : Acquisition of Core DNA Sequencing Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1994  
File        : a9413456

Award Number: 9413456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John W. Cross                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald P. Hart   (Principal Investigator current)
              Danny J. Schnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a request for core DNA sequencing instrumentation to  serve a group of
              active, federally-funded research faculty  and several training programs.  The
              instrumentation will  include a DNA sequencer and several supporting items, 
              including an oligonucleotide synthesizer, thermal cyclers, a  plasmid
              preparation device, a fluorometer, and networked  computer equipment and
              software for DNA sequence analysis.  The facility will serve several
              laboratories where DNA  sequencing is an integral part of active research
              projects,  and will also serve as a site for genomic study through  automated
              RFLP analysis.  An additional utility of the  facility will be its proximity to
              a biotechnology teaching  laboratory, where undergraduate and graduate level
              classes  will have the opportunity to train on the equipment.  This  teaching
              laboratory is also the site of our NSF summer  program in biotechnology for
              college faculty, who would  likewise benefit from the training opportunity.   
              The Newark campus of Rutgers University is a unique research  center combing a
              small but focused research community with a  strong commitment to
              undergraduate, graduate and  particularly minority education.  We have added
              over 25 new  research faculty to the campus in the last 10 years.  These  new
              faculty have all successfully competed for federal  funding of their research
              and have also worked together to  improve the educational opportunities on
              campus.  This is  demonstrated by our extensive grant-funded educational 
              programs, including:  NIH Minority Biomedical Research  Support, NIH Bridges to
              Baccalaureate Program Award, NSF  Computers in Education, NSF Summer Programs,
              and the Howard  Hughes Medical Institute Initiative for Undergraduate  Science
              Program.    The addition of this core DNA sequencing facility will 
              significantly enhance our faculty's ability to compete for  future funding both
              in research and education.  It will  facilitate our simple sequencing needs and
              help us to  attract proposed new faculty in the  filed of molecular  evolution.
