Title       : Acquisition of Instruments for a Fiber-Optic Sensor and Communication Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9413705

Award Number: 9413705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170912             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred Daneshgaran fdanesh@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Vali  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lili H. Tabrizi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin S. Roden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Killinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Los Angeles
	      5151 State University Dr
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-0111

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1502,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9413705 Daneshgaran  The objective of the proposed project is to equip a fiber
              optics laboratory for R&D on sensors and communications.  The funds requested
              will permit the equipping of a fiber optics facility that will make possible
              state of the art R&D as well as provide a good training facility for
              undergraduate and Masters students.  Since CSULA is a minority institution, the
              laboratory is closely related to real industry needs and interests.  Three
              economic technology-rich growth areas targeted by the Administration are
              addressed by the work to be conducted in the laboratory: manufacturing process
              monitoring and control, environmental monitoring, and fiber optics
              communication for the information superhighway.  A dozen projects are
              identified in the proposal, with applications in areas including geophysical,
              manufacturing process control, automotive sensors and displays, communications,
              microwave remote control, and optical beam steering .   Two--a geophysical
              strainmeter and a towed array-- that have garnered particular interest by
              funding agencies are described in more detail.  A number of the projects are
              derivatives of patented Hughes technologies,  that the company is interested in
              seeing reduced to practice.  Student involvement will be through several 
              vehicles.  The laboratory will  be used for engineering design clinic projects
              funded by industry.  It will also provide an extension to a Senior Design
              Laboratory that was built with $350 K of  funds from Hughes, and will be used
              by seniors to fulfill their design project requirements.  In addition, R&D at
              the frontiers of fiber optics applications and funded by federal and state
              science and technology agencies will be conducted with student participation. 
              The laboratory will help bridge the gap between undergraduate, masters, and
              traditional doctoral graduate education by provide hands-on research
              experience.  In addition, the close collaboration with industry will help
              students make the transition to industry upon graduation.   The  principal
              scientist involved in the project have complementary skills in fiber optics,
              electro-optics signal processing, communications, and control.  The project is
              to be codirected by Dr. Victor Vali, who has set up and conducted fiber optics
              research at three institutions, and Dr. Fred Daneshgaran, who specializes in
              signal processing  and communication theory.  It is felt that the
              industry-oriented, multidisciplinary approach proposed here is lacking in may
              of the existing fiber  optics work conducted in institutions of higher
              education.  The total project  cost  over a three year period are $315,468, of
              which $220,828 is requested form NSF.  Dr. victor Vali is contributing his time
              to set up the laboratory and to instruct students,  staff and faculty on its
              operation.  Funding for the twelve research areas described in the proposal
              will be the subject of subsequent proposals to interested agencies.
