Title       : Dissertation Research: Ceramic Standardization in Household Production at
               Bezuapan, Veracruz, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1994   
File        : a9413438

Award Number: 9413438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9974               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Browman dlbrowma@artsci.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Browman    With National Science Foundation support and under the direction  of
              Dr. David Browman, Ms. Georgia Britt will collect data for her  doctoral
              dissertation. She will analyze ceramic material from the  archaeological site
              of Bezuapan which is located in Veracruz,  Mexico. Prior excavation of
              individual households has yielded  large samples of ceramics from well defined
              stratigraphic  contexts. All date from different intervals within the Late 
              Formative period. Evidence indicates that the ceramics were made  within each
              household. Ms. Britt will examine these materials  from a number of
              perspectives to determine the degree of  standardization within each ceramic
              type within each sample. She  will record metric as well as technical and
              decorative  attributes.    The underlying goal of this research is to study the
              relationship  between ceramic production and social organization. 
              Archaeologists have argued that as societies grow more complex,  the degree of
              economic specialization increases and the degree of  mass production increases.
              They have also assumed that  standardization increases as well and that degree
              of  standardization in ceramics and other common objects can be used  as an
              indirect measure of social complexity. However these  assumptions have not been
              carefully tested. Other kinds of  archaeological evidence indicate that the
              Late Formative period  in Veracruz marks a time of increased social complexity.
              By the  following Early Classic period a clearly divided hierarchical  society
              had emerged. In conjunction with other researchers who  have examined ceramics
              from the later period, Ms. Britt will  focus on the Late Formative to determine
              whether, in fact, social  complexity and ceramic standardization are related.  
                This research is important for several reasons. It will help to  refine a
              tool which is of wide archaeological use. It will also  assist in the training
              of a promising young scientist.
