Title       : Acquisition of Dual Purkinje Eye Tracking System: Research in Attention, Vision
               and Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9413466

Award Number: 9413466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40798              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Posner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell S. Tomlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret E. Sereno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Posner    With National Science Foundation support, the University of  Oregon
              will purchase a Dual Purkinje Eye Tracking system and  related accessories.
              Developed by Stanford Research Institute and  Forward Technologies, the
              eyetracker determines the direction of  eye gaze over a large two-dimensional
              visual field. It operates  with infrared light and does not interfere with
              normal vision.  The system is accurate to 1 minute of arc and outputs a signal 
              every millisecond. This temporal as well as spatial accuracy are  essential in
              tracking smooth pursuit eye movements.    Dr. Michael Posner and his colleagues
              will use the instrument to  pursue three lines of research. The first involves
              a study of  communication between identified neural areas in reading.  Previous
              studies have shown that specific neural areas are  involved in processing
              visual, phonological and semantic codes of  visually presented words. Under the
              planned research, studies  will be extended to actual reading situations. Eye
              movement will  be monitored and brain electrical activity recorded. A second
              set  of experiments involves the role of attention in language  production. The
              eye tracking system will be used to measure  allocation of attention in real
              time while subjects produce  descriptions of animated events they witness. A
              final area of  research involves perceptual-motor transformations in the visual
               motion domain. In instances where apparent motion of a stimulus  differs
              substantially in velocity from its real motion, the  investigators wish to
              discover which course the eye actually  tracks.
