Title       : Upgrade of a Solid-State NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9413674

Award Number: 9413674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Garrison bjg@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9413674           Garrison              NMR spectroscopy is a major
              tool in the study of  solid-state materials and their chemistry. The
              sensitivity of NMR  to local electronic and magnetic interactions of nuclei has
               helped to make it one of the most useful diagnostic tools for the  elucidation
              of unknown structures. As new techniques are  incorporated into routine
              strategies to solve chemical problems  in solids, the equipment that is
              necessary for the experiments  becomes more sophisticated.  Partial funds are
              provided to  upgrade the existing solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance 
              spectrometer (Chemagnetics CMX 300 spectrometer) operating within  the
              Chemistry Department at the Pennsylvania State University.  This instrument is
              equipped with dual radiofrequency irradiation  channels. Assorted solid-state
              NMR probes are available for  irradiation of the nuclei and the detection of
              high-resolution  NMR signals of solids. The requested upgrade includes a change
              in  the computer hardware and NMR operating system, a third  radiofrequency
              channel with a high-power radiofrequency  amplifier, three new NMR probes for
              accomplishing sophisticated  solid-state NMR experiments, and a fast computer
              for off-line  data analysis, data storage, and calculations of spin dynamics. 
              The major users of this spectrometer upgrade will be five  researchers at Penn
              State and a group of minor users whose work  is concentrated in the fields of
              solid-state materials and  chemistry. The improved instrument will be used in
              the following  representative studies: study of biomimetic materials; synthesis
               and characterization of new polymeric materials; characterization  of new
              mesoporous molecular sieves; studies of pillared and  intercalated layered
              solids; synthesis of semiconductors in  zeolites; investigation of zeolites and
              related framework solids;  studies of order in amorphous solids; synthesis and 
              characterization of glasses; studies of catalytic systems;  synthesis of new
              polymeric materials synthes ized by high-pressure  chemistry techniques; and
              study of coal and coal precursors with  high-resolution NMR spectroscopy.
