Title       : New Strategies for the Enantioselective Synthesis of Fluorinated Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9413004

Award Number: 9413004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Welch jwelch@uamail.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                     The focus of this
              research is the development of new stereoselective syntheses of specifically 
              fluorinated molecules.  The work studies the reactivity and selectivity of
              various fluorinated  building blocks and how these factors are effected by the
              presence of fluorine.  Toward this end  the stereoselective reactivity of
              fluorinated ketenes, ketene equivalents or products derived from  them will be
              explored.  Specific aspects include a study of the reactivity of fluoroketenes
              in  cycloaddition reactions, preparation of fluorinated transition metal
              organometallic complexes as  fluoroketene surrogates, use of optically pure
              fluorinated beta-lactams as building blocks, use  of optically pure fluorinated
              cyclobutanones as intermediates, and use of fluorinated C,O-  disilylketenes as
              building blocks for the synthesis of fluorinated olefins.    With this award,
              the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. John T. Welch 
              of the Department of Chemistry at the SUNY Albany.  Professor Welch will focus
              his work on  the development of new stereoselective syntheses of specifically
              fluorinated molecules.  This  strategy will use the construction of reactive,
              functionalized fluorinated intermediates that can  undergo a variety of further
              stereoselective transformations.  Such systems include fluorinated  ketenes,
              beta-lactams and cyclobutanones.  The methodology developed will allow the
              synthesis  of optically pure fluorinated compounds that can be used as probes
              in a variety of mechanistic  and biological problems, as well as materials
              applications.
