Title       : Development of a 750 MHz NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1994 
File        : a9413448

Award Number: 9413448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510395             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary P. Drobny drobny@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                         ABSTRACT         
              Funding is requested in the amount of $700,000 toward the purchase of a 17.6
              Tesla NMR  magnet and toward the design and construction of an accompanying NMR
              console. The 750 MHz. NMR console that we propose to construct, will be capable
              of performing the wide variety of NMR experiments required by the research
              programs of the participating faculty. These experiments include: homonuclear
              two dimensional experiments like NOESY and ECOSY, used by Brian Reid's group to
              study nucleic acids solution structure, heteronuclear multi-dimensional
              experiments like HMQC-NOESY, used by Rachel Klevit's group to study the
              structure of proteins, protein-protein and protein-nucleic acids complexes,
              solid state NMR techniques like deuterium wide line NMR, Rotational Resonance
              (R2) and RFDR, used by Gary Drobny's group to study the structure and dynamics
              of nucleic acids and of very large nucleic acid-protein complexes, and high
              resolution tritium NMR, used by Michael Heinekey's group to study the kinetics
              of inorganic metal hydride complexes and by Heinz Floss' group to study the
              structure of natural products and metabolites.        For the groups of Klevit,
              Drobny, and Reid, which use NMR as a primary tool for probing  molecular
              structure, the need for higher field is driven mainly by a requirement for
              higher sensitivity.  A common theme running through all three programs is the
              interest in studying the structure of nucleic acids and proteins in complexes.
              However, protein-nucleic acid complexes are notoriously insoluble, hence the
              need for higher sensitivity to study very low concentrations of complexes in
              solution. Solid state NMR experiments have been used by the Drobny group to
              measure internuclear distances in labeled nucleic acids, making possible the
              study of DNA and RNA structure in very large complexes with proteins, but a
              number of important solid state NMR experiments, i.e. multiple quantum
              experiments, are simply too low in s ensitivity to be practical for use in
              large complexes of biopolymers. We estimate that the factor of roughly 2.8
              improvement in sensitivity will greatly expand the domain of molecular size
              that we can study using such methods. In addition, a number of other faculty
              will find a 750 MHz. spectrometer useful or crucial for their research
              programs. These faculty include: David Baker, who studies protein folding,
              needs high sensitivity NMR instrumentation because folding intermediates are
              very insoluble. Pat Stayton, who studies bio-materials, requires high
              sensitivity NMR equipment to study the solution structure of the 13000
              molecular weight protein Streptavidin, which is an important component in
              biosensors, and which tetramerizes in solution. J. Michael Schurr, who plans to
              study the solution dynamics of high molecular weight DNA, also requires high
              field NMR instrumentation.        The University of Washington is qualified to
              carry of the development of high field NMR  instrumentation. Three NMR
              spectrometers have been designed and built since 1985 including: two 500 MHz.
              consoles (both capable of performing high resolution and solid state NMR
              experiments), and a 400 MHz. solid state NMR spectrometer (used primarily for
              high speed magic angle sample spinning experiments). In addition, the U.W. has
              recently received a contract from Battelle's Pacific Northwest Lab to design,
              prototype, and construct a 900-1000 MHz. NMR for the DOE-funded Environmental
              and Molecular Sciences Laboratory. The design work for the 900-1000 MHz. NMR
              console is already in progress, and can be easily adapted to a 750 MHz.
              console. Finally, a collaborative effort is planned with Resonance Research
              Inc., aimed at applying matrix shim technology to produce pulsed field
              gradients for multi-dimensional NMR experiments and micro-imaging. In the first
              phase of this planned effort, we will attempt to use matrix technology to
              produce pulsed gradients in an 11.75 Tesla magnet. Applications to higher field
              systems will follow.
