Title       : Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art Imaging Center With Electrophysiological
               Recording Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9413528

Award Number: 9413528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157218             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald S. Faber   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha C. Nowycky  (Principal Investigator former)
              Douglas Baird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny Univ Health Sci
	      Broad & Vine
	      Philadelphia, PA  191291192    215/842-6000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Proposed major research instrumentation        This proposal is a
              request for an imaging -- recording  center which will enhance the 
              capabilities of an existing confocal microscope, replace an  out-of-date image
              analysis system,  and introduce techniques such as time lapse micrography that 
              are not currently available at the  Medical College of Pennsylvania. The major
              optical  components of the system consist of an  ultraviolet laser for a Biorad
              MRC-600 confocal microscope,  an inverted Zeiss microscope,  cooled CCD camera,
              a gel analysis system, and various  analysis, storage, and output devices. A 
              complete system for several electrophysiological recording  techniques will be
              incorporated into  the light microscope setup. This will include facilities for
               whole cell and single channel patch  clamping, sharp microelectrode work, and
              microinjection of  cells for molecular biology  manipulations. The resulting
              system will add a state-of-the-  art facility for the combined imaging  and
              recording of cells which will greatly extend the scope  of the investigators to
              pursue studies  of cell function.    Type of research/research training
              conducted        The interests of all of the investigators represented  in this
              proposal center around issues  of cell function including intracellular
              signaling,  regulated exocytosis, and mechanisms of  development. While several
              individuals study neuronal  preparations, we feel strongly that the  major
              questions in cell biology will be answered by studies  of many cell types and
              should be  approached by a broad spectrum of techniques. Technical  expertise
              within the group in this  proposal includes physiology, biophysics, imaging,
              and  molecular biology. The investigators are  all supported by funds from
              government and private sources.  The existence of a multi-  disciplinary,
              multi-technique center will greatly benefit  both the investigators and
              training at all  levels from graduate students through advanced post-doctoral 
              fellows.    Activity th at would result if funded        The research community
              at the Medical College of  Pennsylvania is a relatively small but  highly
              interactive and productive group. The equipment  requested is too expensive to
              be  justified by individual grants. The existence of an imaging  - recording
              center will both extend  and enhance the research programs of individual 
              investigators, and will increase the amount of  interdisciplinary interaction.
              Several of the individuals  listed in this proposal participate in an 
              interdepartmental "Secretion Journal Club". If this research  is funded we
              would extend the scope  of the Secretary club to include other aspects of cell 
              development and communication.        A major benefit of such a center is that
              imaging and  electrophysiology will be combined  in one location, lowering the
              barriers for individuals to  perform experiments using unfamiliar  techniques.
              Although the imaging center will be administered  by the Department of Anatomy 
              and Neurobiology, it will be made readily available to other  individuals and
              departments. The  presence of the confocal microscope during the last year and 
              a half has motivated several  interdepartmental collaborations. Enhancement of
              imaging and  recording resources will greatly  expand the number and strength
              of such collaborations.
