Title       : Micellar Systems for Modulating Microwave Heating of Chemical Reaction Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9413894

Award Number: 9413894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Laibinis pel@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              T. Alan Hatton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1035,1048,1049,9146,9197,9290,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Laibinis - 9413894      Microwave-based heating of chemical systems
              holds the promise of increased energy efficiency and superior temperature
              control over chemical processes.  Particular advantages of microwave heating
              appear to be the abilities to increase reaction rates (by seemingly
              superheating the reaction medium) and to heat systems uniformly (by applying
              heat from within a vessel rather than by conduction from its walls).  In this
              work, surfactants will be used to structure fluids as a means for enhancing the
              desirable chemical processing features of microwave-based heating.  The
              abilities to control and structure the polarity of a liquid phase through the
              formation of micellar domains are expected to yield new methods for tailoring
              and optimizing the heating liquid phases by incident microwaves.  The methods
              will produce environmental and processing benefits by reducing energy
              consumption in the heating of chemical streams and by producing uniform heating
              profiles within reaction vessels.  This latter ability will avoid exposing
              reaction mixtures to the elevated and spatially variant temperatures that
              typically reduce reaction specificity and lead to enhanced material
              decomposition and waste products.    It is the goal of this work to develop new
              processing methods for controlling the heating of chemical systems by
              microwaves, in particular, for non-polar chemical phases where the use of
              microwave radiation for heating has been ineffective.  The strategy uses the
              abilities of self-assembled polymer and surfactant systems -- micelles, reverse
              micelles, vesicles, liposomes, etc. -- to produce specific isolated
              micro-domains of different polarities within a liquid continuum.  The resulting
              polar and non-polar domains represent specific regions within the liquid that
              will absorb the incident microwave radiation differently, with the polar
              regions being responsible for efficient energy absorption and subsequent rapid
              thermal dissipation to the contacting non-polar phase.  In these 
              self-assembled systems, the dielectric properties, contents, sizes, and
              relative amounts of the individual domains can each be readily changed, and
              their manipulation should provide a controlled method for modifying the
              microwave absorbing characteristics of a liquid phase.  Aqueous dispersions
              should allow for the efficient absorption of the incident microwave radiation
              and the use of frequencies (2.45 GHz) and hardware presently dedicated for
              microwave heating.  From an industrial standpoint, an important aspect of the
              work is that the energy absorbing properties of reaction/solvent systems will
              be varied by straightforward chemical means and will not require changes to the
              microwave hardware.
