Title       : Acquisition of a Sum-Frequency Generation Instrument for the Study of the
               Spectroscopy, Structure, and Chemistry of Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9413889

Award Number: 9413889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy S. Zwier   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Bein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce H. Morimoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford P. Kubiak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1037,1750,9157,9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With the funds provided by the Academic Research Infrastructure Program this
              group plants to construct a state-of-the-art laser system for the purpose of
              studying interfaces making use of both second harmonic generation (SHG) and
              infrared-visible sum frequency generation (SFG) techniques. The 60 picosecond
              laser output will be tunable in the range 1.2 to 18 micrometers with pulse
              energies between 5 and 100 plus microJoules/pulse. The facility, which will be
              housed at the Purdue Chemistry Laser Facility, will constitute a
              cross-disciplinary Center for the Study of Interfacial Materials and Chemical
              Processes. The Facility will be used for the study of liquid-liquid,
              solid-liquid, and gas-solid interfaces with research topics including: 1) SFG
              studies of chemically sensitive surfaces and monolayer reactivity; orientation
              and vibrational spectra of molecules at lubricated solid interfaces under
              variable shear forces; surface spectroscopy of environmental particles; SHG
              studies of the nickel cluster electrocatalyst aryl thiol self assembled
              monolayers; SFG spectroscopy of adsorbed species at electrochemical interfaces;
              time resolved SFG studies of photoactivated, catalytic organometallic thin
              films; nonlinear optical and microscopic studies of photopolymerization on
              metal surfaces; interfacial orientation and biological effectiveness of
              dopamine receptor ligands; solvent fractionation and structure of immiscible
              liquid interfaces.  A pulsed laser facility capable of second harmonic
              generation and sum frequency generation will be employed in broad ranging
              studies of liquid-liquid, liquid-solid, and gas-solid interfaces. The research
              ranges from the study of electrolytes in contact with solid electrodes and the
              corrosive effects of water on clay surfaces to the biological effectiveness of
              dopamine receptor ligands to the study of immiscible liquids in the presence of
              a third miscible component.
