Title       : Acquisition of a 600 MHz NMR Spectrometer and Upgrade of Existing NMR Facilities
               at Rutgers University and at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
               Jersey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9413508

Award Number: 9413508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $571000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean S. Baum   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gaetano T. Montelione  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                       The acquisition of a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer, and  the upgrade of the
              existing Varian VXR-500 to UNITY Plus  500, XL-400 to UNITY Plus 400 and the
              addition of  accessories to the UNITY 500 MHz NMR spectrometers at  Rutgers
              University, and at the University of Medicine and  Dentistry (UMDNJ), are
              crucial for the successful execution  of the research projects of the
              Structural Biology community  at these universities. The major users of the NMR
              facility  are: Prof. Jean Baum, Chemistry, Rutgers; Prof. Gaetano  Montelione,
              MBB, Rutgers, and CABM; Prof. Roger Jones,  Chemistry, Rutgers; and Prof.
              Stephen Anderson, MBB,  Rutgers, and CABM. In addition, there are many Rutgers
              and  UMDNJ faculty who are using, or planning on using, high  field NMR in
              their research, either independently or via  collaborations with the major
              users.           The recruitment of Drs. Montelione and Baum to  Rutgers
              University established  multidimensional NMR as a major priority on campus.
              Numerous  investigators at both universities are currently  collaborating with
              these two groups. In addition, Drs.  Anderson and Jones have been expanding
              their own research  efforts using high field NMR. As a result, all of the 
              existing NMR instruments are in constant use (24 hrs/day, 7  days/week), and
              the development of independent NMR programs  by other investigators has been
              prevented because of  insufficient instrument time. The lack of a 600 MHz 
              spectrometer on the campus and deficiencies in the existing  equipment severely
              limit research efforts with larger (10 -  30 kD) proteins and complexes. In
              addition, the NMR  instruments used to recruit Baum and Montelione are now out 
              of date. The 500 and 400 MHz spectrometers in the Chemistry  Department lack
              triple-resonance and PFG capabilities which  are essential for heteronuclear
              NMR of macromolecules. None  of the instruments are equipped with deuterium
              decoupling  capabilities required to exploit random deuteration  techniques for
              overcoming short 13C relaxation rates   encountered in larger proteins.        
                The NMR research and research training of the four  major users require
              direct access to NMR instrumentation for  about 40 researchers. In addition,
              the independent users,  mentioned above, have on the order of 40 graduate
              students  and postdoctorals doing 'hands on' NMR experiments. The NMR 
              facilities will also have a significant impact on research  and teaching for
              some additional 40 faculty, students, and  postdoctorals at Rutgers and UMDNJ
              through the research  programs of collaborators. In total, approximately 120 
              scientists will be affected by the proposed NMR hardware  upgrades and
              acquisition of a new 600 MHz NMR spectrometer.           The research
              activities of the major users of the NMR  facility are in structural biology
              with emphasis in the  following areas. 1) development of new NMR experiments
              which  facilitate and automate the protein structure determination  process; 2)
              structure determination of small biomedically  important proteins (sizes range
              from 7 to 30 kD); 3)  conformational studies of denatured or partially
              denatured  proteins to understand the mechanism of protein folding; 4)  atomic
              details and dynamics of molecular recognition; 5)  studies of nucleic acid
              structure and interactions. In  addition, a number of independent users are
              interested in  the analysis of organic and inorganic compounds. The 
              acquisition of a 600 MHz NMR and the upgrades of the  existing facility will
              greatly improve the scientific and  engineering infrastructure of Rutgers and
              UMDNJ. In order to  maintain the momentum of this developing dynamic scientific
               community in structural biology, the NMR facilities must be  brought up to the
              cutting edge of the field.
