Title       : Acquisition of an EPR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1994 
File        : a9413530

Award Number: 9413530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon D. Parker vparker@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Utah State  University requests
              matching funds from NSF to purchase an  Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR)
              Spectrometer.   EPR is  a fundamental spectroscopic technique with applications
              that  span both chemistry and biochemistry.  The acquisition of an  EPR
              spectrometer by Utah State University would fill a void  in our current
              instrumentation facilities.  A new EPR  spectrometer would become the
              centerpiece for several  Chemistry and Biochemistry research programs and
              courses.  The current courses offered by the university that would  utilize an
              EPR spectrometer in their curricula are:  Physical Chemistry, Advanced
              Synthesis, and Instrumental  Analysis laboratories as well as Physical
              Biochemistry and  Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy.  Each of these courses 
              would instruct students in the fundamental principles of EPR  spectroscopy as
              well as the applications relevant to the  course outline, with additional
              "hands-on" operation of the  instrument.  Instrument operation would include: 
              sample  preparation, data collection, and data processing.  The type  of data
              collected (i.e. organic free radicals or transition  metal complexes) would
              depend on the course objectives and  level.    EPR spectroscopy would also form
              a central element in  research projects across the University and the region. 
              Research projects of faculty members in Molecular Biology  and Biology at Utah
              State University would be minor users of  a new EPR spectrometer.  In addition,
              a faculty member in  the Biochemistry Department at Brigham Young University
              and  a faculty member in the Biochemistry Department at Oregon  State
              University would be periodic users.  Seven major users  and three minor users
              of an EPR spectrometer have been  identified in the Department of Chemistry and
              Biochemistry  at Utah State University.  In each of these research  projects,
              graduate students and postdoctoral research  associates will be trained to
              record and process their data.  The specific re search projects described
              within the proposal  are listed below:    a. Elucidating the Mechanism of
              Coupling MgATP Hydrolysis to  Electron Transfer in the Metalloenzyme
              Nitrogenase.  b. Characterization of the Nickel-Iron Sulfur Center of  Carbon
              Monoxide Dehydrogenase from Rhodospirillum rubrum.  c. EPR Investigations into
              the Function of the Dinuclear  Hydrolytic Aminopeptidase from Aeromonas
              proteolytica.  d. Mechanisms of the Light-Induced Inhibition of  Photosynthesis
              and its Relation to Photoassembly of the Mn-  Containing Water-Oxidizing
              Complex.  e. Elucidation of the Coordination Symmetry and Location of  the
              Binding Sites for Iron on Erionite.  f. Free Radical Mediated Oxidative and
              Reductive Reactions  Catalyzed by Fungal Peroxidases.  g. Hydrogen Atom
              Transfer Reactions of Radical Cations.
