Title       : Adaptive Critic Design and Implementations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1996     
File        : a9413120

Award Number: 9413120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236177             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Wunsch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
               7 #                       2           2                             $     $   $
                  $     $     2     D     D     D     D     N     X     X $   | x   D        
                      6 *   `     $         6     *     6     6     ` -   6     6     6     6
                  6     6    9413120 Wunsch   II  The Adaptive Critic  Neural Network is a
              promising new technique of computational intelligence capable of solving large
              variety of applied problems in nonlinear dynamic identification,  optimal
              real-time nonlinear control and time series forecasting.  This project will
              implement various Adaptive Critic Designs (ACDs) in software based on different
              models of Neural Network and prove their efficiency for solving various
              problems in simulation.  IT will develop C/C++ code for all modules of ACDs in
              accordance with ANSI specification to provide a common graphical interface and
              portability across various platforms.  This will provide the tools for early
              industrial collaborations.  The PI will implement computer-simulated solutions
              of examples of complex identification problems (e.g., identification of
              chemical reactor dynamics),  time series predictions (e.g., stock market
              forecasts) and those of complex optimal control problems (e.g., flight control
              of a Single -Stage-To-Orbit (SSTO) plane).  These will come from published
              sources.  As application demands  rise,  and the volume of opportunities
              necessitates and rapid prototyping capability,  They will port these tools to a
              specialized neural coprocessor.  Proving numerically or theoretically the
              ability of ACD to approximate Lyapunov functions of a complex nonlinear dynamic
              system as a whole (i.e., a system  plus ACD-based controller),  along with a
              study of real-time interaction of neural networks, is also a goal of the
              project.  This will significantly contribute to the knowledge of stability
              analysis of nonlinear dynamic systems.  Finally, these will be a special
              concentration on dissemination of the results, including educational activities
              for academia, industry and govern ment; software available for ftp,  workshops,
              enhanced publishing, and further collaborations with government and industry. 
              This work  will  enhance the success of both neural  networks  and nonlinear
              controls as  engineering disciplines by providing better tools and reducing the
              learning curve associated with their use.  u ork is a promising new technique
              of computational intelligence capable of solving large variety of applied
              problems in nonlinear dynamic identification,  optimal real-time nonlinear
              control and time seri           1   2   5                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 @                                                           
                      2                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         !        x      !         !        
              !                                                2     2       2               
               5         2                           !      9 :~     H H       (       F G ( 
                   H H       (     d            '                            @               
                        = /             R       B      H   -:LaserWriter             Times   
                                     J   e   J   S   - wunsch.abs  Alicia Harris   Alicia
              Harris
