Title       : Acquisition of Multi-User Instrumentation for the Epitaxial Growth and
               Fabrication of III-V Nitride Semiconductor Materials and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1994 
File        : a9413689

Award Number: 9413689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. DenBaars denbaars@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Merz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Umesh K. Mishra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry A. Coldren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur C. Gossard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9157,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Instrumentation will be acquired for the metallo-organic chemical vapor
              deposition (MOCVD) and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) synthesis of III-V nitrides
              using funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program. The major items
              include a RF heated III-V MOCVD nitride system and a nitrogen plasma source for
              MBE growth. The aluminum, gallium and indium nitride materials are the most
              promising materials for optoelectronic devices to operate in the ultraviolet to
              blue wavelength regime. The research activities will focus on: 1) development
              of novel epitaxial growth technologies for III-V nitride semiconductors, 2)
              fundamental studies of the epitaxial growth mechanism, and 3) the fabrication
              of UV/blue laser diodes, high temperature electronics, and vacuum electronics
              devices. This research involves substantial support and interest from
              industrial collaborators.  Studies of the epitaxial growth of III-V nitride
              semiconductors will be conducted with the ultimate objective of producing high
              quality laser diodes for use in the ultraviolet and blue wavelength regimes.
              The III-V nitride semiconductors are useful materials for high temperature
              electronics and also for vacumn electronics devices. The III-V nitrides are
              technologically important materials for devices, particularly at shorter
              wavelengths and at higher temperatures.
