Title       : E-Print Archives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a9413208

Award Number: 9413208
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1730303            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Ginsparg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Erica Jen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey B. West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Forslund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DOE-Albuquerque Operatns
	      
	      Albuquerque, NM  87115    /   -

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9134,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a software development effort that,  in close liaison
              with major scientific communities, will  expand the use and increase the
              effectiveness of a major  scientific preprint archiving system, and focus on
              the  design, implementation, and incorporation of new, innovative  tools for
              electronic communication of research results.  Moreover new archives will be
              made available to other  communities.    During the past two years a powerful
              new tool has been  developed for exchange and processing of scientific 
              information.  The Theoretical Division at Los Alamos  National Laboratory has
              developed and implemented an  "e-Print Archive" system for the distribution,
              archiving,  and searching of scientific preprints.  Thus far, e-Print  Archives
              have been set up for twelve scientific disciplines,  and are rapidly becoming
              the primary means of information  exchange in the communities they serve.  The
              system has been  operated as a community service in a "cottage industry" mode 
              by the particle theory group at Los Alamos.  The Principal  Investigator on
              this proposal, Paul Ginsparg, has had  essentially full responsibility for
              software/hardware  maintenance as well as user support.  Given its importance 
              to the research communities it serves, the e-Print system  project now needs
              long-term stability.  Consequently, this  award will allow it to be transferred
              to a team of computer  personnel that will guarantee its reliability and 
              development, and in particular to be put on a firm technical  support basis.
