Title       : Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffraction Facility for Structural Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9413895

Award Number: 9413895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Zerner zerner@qtp.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Khalil A. Abboud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randolph S. Duran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9157,9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Academic Research Infrastructure Program will fund a new up-to-date X-ray
              Diffraction Facility for X-ray structure analysis in the areas of materials
              synthesis, biochemistry, and inorganic and polymer chemistry. The facility,
              consisting a dedicated single crystal instrument and a
              polymers/materials/general diffraction instrument, will provide new
              capabliities at U. Florida not presently available including: 1) a cooling
              system for single crystal data collection, 2) a high temperature sample holder
              for fluid samples, 3) a Charge-Coupled-Device area detector system optimized
              for single crystal diffraction, 4) a high sensitivity  gas filled area detector
              optimized for diffraction of polymers, fibers, and thin films, 5) a user
              facility for small angle scattering and a staging area for synchrotron studies,
              6) software and hardware for full structure determination of molecules
              containing up to 350 non-hydrogen atoms. The facility will be employed for the
              study of non-equilibrium processes in order-disorder alloys, real time
              crystallization in metals, domaain structures in incommensurate materials;
              correlating structure to membrane permeability and enzymatic cleavage of small
              peptides; catalysts for olefin metathesis and polymerization; induced layer
              ordering in polymer thin films; synthesis of tungsten nitrene complexes;
              electrohemical synthesis of highly ordered polyheterocycles; synthesis of
              metallaaromatics and complexes of tropyne and cyclooctatrienyne; study of
              reversible crosslinks in polymers; determination of structure of new pentanary
              alloys of semiconductors; study of high-oxidation state organic conductors and
              superconductors and iorganic extended lattice monolayers in Langmuir-Blodgett
              films.  New X-ray instrumentation, including modern state of the art area
              detectors and software and hardware for structural determination of complex
              structures, will be employed in a variety of areas for the study of the
              structure of new materials, the study of biochemical systems, and the study of
              a va riety of inoganic and polymer chemistry systems.
