Title       : Acquisition of Scanning Electron Microscope for Introductory/Advanced Course
               Work and Faculty/Undergraduate Research: Biology, Geological Sciences,
               Anthropology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9413977

Award Number: 9413977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold J. Hoops hoops@uno.cc.geneseo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D. Jeffrey Over  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Geneseo
	      
	      Geneseo, NY  14454    716/245-5211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of scanning electron microscope for introductory/advanced      
              course work and faculty/undergraduate research: Biology,       Geological
              Sciences, Anthropology.    Instrumentation:    The scanning electron microscope
              (SEM) housed in the Department of  Biology has been in service for fifteen
              years. Recent breakdown  (cracked scanning/objective coils) and unavailability
              of replacement  parts or possibility of repair has made the microscope
              inoperable. The  major users in Biology and Geological Sciences propose to
              replace the  inoperable instrument and incorporate an Energy Dispersive X-Ray
              (EDX)  analysis system in a new instrument.    Research and Training    Geneseo
              is a primarily undergraduate institution with a strong  commitment to faculty
              and student research. The proposed SEM would be  utilized in several courses,
              as a primary instrument in directed  studies, undergraduate theses, and as a
              research instrument for faculty  and undergraduate research projects. Courses
              that utilize the SEM  included: General Biology Laboratory (Biol 118;
              laboratory  demonstration), Microscope Techniques (Biol 378), Biological 
              Techniques: Electron Microscopy (Biol 390), and Invertebrate  Paleontology
              (GSci 361). In these courses 25-75 students are introduced  annually and or
              trained in operation of the instrument. Directed  studies (Biol 382, 399, Gsci
              399, Anth 399) and other student research  projects will comprise a significant
              portion of student use and  training. In these investigations students under an
              appropriate level  of supervision use the SEM to pursue individual or project
              research  goals. (In the last year since the SEM breakdown twelve students in 
              geology course or projects have had reason to use an SEM for  microfossil and
              sedimentary particle or fabric studies.)    Faculty research at Geneseo
              encompasses several fields that utilize  electron microscopy; procurement of a
              new instrument is required for  attainment of external funds and continued
              research. Faculty teaching  and rese arch include: Paleogene primate evolution
              (Anemone),  parasitology (Bandoni), Zebra mussel larva morphology (Bosch), 
              flagellar apparatus of green algae (Hoops), micropaleontology and black  shale
              studies (Over), plant-bacteria relations (Simon), and palynology  (Spear). An
              EDX system will be applied in research involving magnetic  sensing in birds
              (Beason), paleomagnetic fabric in sediments (Brennan),  bentonite and burrow
              lining characterization (Over), and bacterial  ecosystems (Simon). In addition
              the research potential of the SEM-EDX  will be increased to incorporate a
              broader range of studies.    Funding for a new SEM will lead to continued study
              of organisms and  environments where high resolution, high contrast microscopy
              is  essential. The instrument will be an integral part of student and  faculty
              research and serve as a tool for encouraging under-represented  groups to
              pursue careers in science and engineering. Six of the major  users currently
              have research funding, four projects are directly  related to studies that
              utilize the SEM; all major users have proposals  under review or in preparation
              that will utilize the SEM an/or EDX  system.
