Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Thicker than Blood: Re-membering Identity in
               U.S. v. Oregon, et al, Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation,
               Plaintiff-Intervenor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1996   
File        : a9413118

Award Number: 9413118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Silverstein m-silverstein@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9413118  Silverstein  This Dissertation Improvement project examines the dynamic
               relationship between the law and culture through an extended  study of a
              treaty rights case in which the Colville Confederated  Tribes of northeastern
              Washington State have been engaged since  1989.  In this ongoing case the
              Colville Tribes are attempting to  secure their right to gather fish from the
              Columbia River system  by building on the series of landmark fishing rights
              cases that  have come out of the pacific Northwest since the 1960s.  In 
              contrast to these earlier cases, the defendants in the Colville  case are not
              local non-Indians nor state governments, but the  Indian tribes whose rights
              were previously secured through this  litigation.  In turn, in addition to the
              significance of the  Colville's particular struggle for sovereign rights, their
              case  is representative of the most developed and refined legal methods  of
              interpreting culturally-based rights in the U.S., and also of  the kinds of
              changes in cultural relations that result from the  resolution of social
              conflicts through litigation -- the  "legalization" of cultural identities. 
              This study will take  "language use" as its focus in order to explore the
              dynamic  between law and culture form these related, but distinct 
              perspectives.  This study will analyze (1) the formulae by which  federal
              courts interpret the language of the treaty contracts  that are central focus
              in this case, (2) the methods by which the  court produces and interprets the
              testimony of tribal witnesses,  and (3) the manner in which tribal witnesses
              speak about the  issues and events central to this case and about the law
              itself.   Colville and federal methods of defining legitimate identity and  of
              narrating history will be compared.  Research will be  conducted on the
              Colville reservation where extensive recorded  interviews will be conducted
              with Colville witnesses, other  relevant Colville tribal members and Colville
              attorneys about the  central issues and events raised  in this case and about
              the law  more generally.  Trial transcripts and the exhibits presented in  this
              case will also be reviewed.
