Title       : Acquisition of Computer, Video and Sound Technology for Cooperative Research on
               Discourse and Function in Descriptive and Cognitive Linguistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9413812

Award Number: 9413812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66921              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell S. Tomlin tomlin@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Colette G. Craig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott DeLancey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Tomlin    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Russell Tomlin and  his
              collaborators will purchase: computing equipment needed to  develop animations
              and other video elicitation materials for  cognitive research; computing
              equipment needed to run multiple  subjects for experimental research; and
              video, sound and computer  equipment needed for field research and data
              analysis.  The  Department of Linguistics at the University of Oregon focuses
              on  empirical, data-oriented research in two principal inter-related  areas:
              descriptive linguistics and cognitive linguistics. The  equipment provided will
              permit the department to develop the  infrastructure needed to expand, in a
              significant fashion, both  empirical and experimental research. The group will
              develop  discourse elicitation and experimental tools suitable for the  field
              situations but also well-grounded in cognitive principles  of language use
              which can be tested in a laboratory setting. On  this basis, insights drawn
              from careful, cross-linguistic  description can serve to develop sound
              cognitive theories of  language and language use.    Large numbers of languages
              in many parts of the world are on the  verge of extinction as the pools of
              native speakers die out. The  Oregon department has focussed on collecting such
              rapidly  disappearing information and using it to develop broader language 
              theories. The proposed equipment has a visual component which  will permit
              investigators to present a carefully controlled  scenes which can vary in
              specific ways and use these as  elicitation devises to provide insight into
              grammar and  discursive form. The equipment will be used not only by a number 
              of professional linguists but also by many graduate and  undergraduate
              students.
