Title       : The Mouse: Acquiring and Disseminating Biological Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1994 
File        : a9413997

Award Number: 9413997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315968             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Schimenti jcs@jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Jackson Laboratory (TJL) is a national resource for  mammalian genetics
              research.  Its threefold mission is to 1)  Perform basic research in mammalian
              genetics, 2) maintain  and distribute vital genetic resources, and 3) educate 
              students and scientists in these areas.  Funding is  requested to obtain
              advanced research tools and computing  hardware that will both enhance the
              Laboratory's ability to  perform scientific research, and to collect and
              distribute  data on the mouse at an unprecedented level of resolution  and
              comprehensiveness.    The Laboratory currently serves as a mouse informatics 
              center for scientific community, compiling and preparing  genome databases
              available via electronic communication.  Additionally, 15,000 phone inquires
              concerning a wide range  of topics on mice are fielded each year by the
              scientific  staff.  Recently, The Laboratory has become a repository for 
              'induced' mutants created by modern transgenic technologies,  addition to its
              responsibility as a curator and provider of  genetics resources.    It is in
              the best interests of the scientific community for  The Laboratory to adopt the
              most modern and efficient  strategies to obtain, preserve and communicate the
              explosion  of biological data from mammalian genetics  research.  This 
              proposal seeks to upgrade the capabilities of TJL towards  this end through an
              integrated approach to basic research  and data dissemination.  The research
              tools requested  include a variety of instruments that have the ability to 
              generate and record digital biological information of the  large number of
              unique inbred and mutant stains of mice  maintained at TJL.  These include
              microscope imaging system,  a lab animal body composition analyzer, and an EEG
              machine.  This equipment would benefit the research of scientists at  TJL, and
              produce data that can be constructed on site.  To  store, organize, and
              disseminate this information to the  scientific community, a high capacity data
              storage component  is requested.  The enhanced  data storage and throughput 
              capabilities will be a critical addition to the ongoing work  and new
              initiatives of the TJL Informatics groups, and will  ultimately benefit the
              worldwide community by enabling the  provision of detailed biological data
              through enhanced  databases accessible through the Internet.
