Title       : The Development of an Integrated Eye Tracker, Driving Simulator and Virtual
               Acoustic Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9413733

Award Number: 9413733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Fisher fisher@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 9157,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Fisher    With support from the National Science Foundation and industrial 
              collaborators, Dr. Donald Fisher and his research team will  develop a
              state-of-the-art video based eye tracker, a research  level driving simulator
              and a virtual acoustic environment which  are fully integrated with one
              another. The system consists of an  advanced eye tracker to be developed by
              Applied Sciences  Laboratory, a driving simulator developed by Illusion 
              Technologies Incorporated and an acoustic environment which  mimics or
              simulates the reverberant characteristics of an  automobile. The planned system
              would supersede a current  instrument which makes use of a "moving window"
              paradigm, and  which permits a wide range of research in psycholinguistics, 
              reading comprehension, visual scanning and scene comprehension.     The
              research and research training that will be undertaken with  the level driving
              simulator and sound equipment will nicely  complement and extend the ongoing
              laboratory activities. It  would, for the first time, allow the study of the
              basic cognitive  processes in complex, dynamic displays using window and
              boundary  paradigms that have been successfully employed in more simple 
              situations. The range of potential behaviors to be examined will  also expand.
              Researchers and psychology and communications  disorders can use the eye and
              head tracking equipment to study  sound localization and detection. Exercise
              scientists can use  detailed information on driving responses to study the
              slowing of  motor processes with advancing age. Increased understanding of 
              visual scanning of complex dynamic displays and dynamic decision  making in
              realistic, highly stressful conditions will also be  possible. On a more
              practical level, the basis research proposed  will provide a first step in the
              development of in-vehicle  collision avoidance devices.
