Title       : Acquisition of an X-Ray Area Detector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1994 
File        : a9413553

Award Number: 9413553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Fletterick flett@msg.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Agard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Stroud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Acquisition of an X-ray Area Detector  P.l. Robert J. Fletterick  
               An area sensitive X-ray detector system is requested for X-  ray
              crystallographic data collection for  high resolution structure analyses of
              proteins. The new  instrument is to augment the UCSF  structural capability
              which is currently vastly  oversubscribed. At present, persons typically wait
              in  turn for one month to six weeks for time on one of the two  existing area
              detectors. The new  instrument requested is to overcome this rate limiting step
               in the structural science. The new  phosphor storage technology used in the
              proposed detector  system makes data collection more  efficient and accurate.
              As structural analysis moves us to  ask scientific questions using many 
              mutations, or using modified inhibitors aimed at designing  improved
              therapeutics, study of a single protein system can  occupy as much as 50% of
              the time on one data collection  instrument.  Understanding the properties of
              mutant proteins or altered  inhibitory compounds will require an  analysis of
              structure as thoroughly as for the native  proteins. The speed with which
              site-directed  mutagenesis is accomplished requires rapid structural  analysis
              for the scientist to remain close to the important  scientific questions.    In
              the following narrative, we list the projects of the  three principal
              investigators and demonstrate  the need for the new communal equipment. The
              laboratory to  house the new machines will be  renovated: a wall is to be
              added, plumbing changed,  electrical installation and a safety enclosure  will
              be built. The projects, most supported by NIH grants to  the three P.I.s, are
              briefly described  in narrative form, with references to published work where 
              possible, and followed by a table. This  lists the individual projects by
              title, the principal  scientists working on the project and the status of the 
              project. The status provides a brief summary of the current  needs for data
              collection.
