Title       : Post-CHF Swirl Flow Heat Transfer with Low Wall Superheat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1996     
File        : a9413546

Award Number: 9413546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269413             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. France dfrance@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. J. Minkowycz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The objectives of this investigation are to: 1) measure and predict heat
              transfer to post-critical heat flux (post-CHF) two-phase flow under swirling
              flow conditions at low wall superheat over a broad parameter range, 2) verify
              the mass flux effect recently identified, and 3) identify physical conditions
              in the flow field. The benefit of flow swirl to the post-CHF regime is
              substantial, and recent data obtained at UIC, for application to heat
              exchangers with swirl flow induced by inserts inside tubes, suggest that direct
              drop-wall heat transfer is an important contributor when the wall superheat is
              low and the mass flux is high. Minimal post-CHF data exist in the literature at
              low wall superheat axial or swirl flow - and most data at high wall superheat
              and axial flow do not exhibit this effect. The relatively unique liquid-heated
              flow boiling experimental facility at UIC, which allows steady-state testing in
              the post-CHF region, will be used to obtain data over an extended range of mass
              flux to provide overlap with limited existing data necessary to verify the mass
              flux effect on this post-CHF heat transfer and to support modeling verification
              of this two-phase flow. Flash X-ray, laser Doppler velocimetry and photographic
              instrumentation available at UIC will be used to measure drop size
              distributions in the flow for use with an expanded modeling effort. A second
              experimental facility will measure swirl flow drop size in air/water dispersed
              flows.  Experiments to verify the mass flux effect will also broaden the data
              base by including an environmentally acceptable refrigerant as the boiling
              fluid. Test section orientation and size will also be varied to produce
              predictions based on a wider range of parameters.  Experimental results will be
              used in the development of both semi-empirical phenomenological models and
              basic analysis. Both approaches have been formulated and successfully verified
              over a limited data range, and significant advancement in both generality and
              modeling approach is expec ted from this combined experimental/analytical
              effort.
