Title       : Acquisition of a Digital Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1994   
File        : a9413907

Award Number: 9413907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164189             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Chaitin   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Yorio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victoria L. Rudick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Dan Dimitrijevich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UNT Hlth Sci Ctr at Fort W
	      Camp Bowie at Montgomery
	      Fort Worth, TX  76107    817/735-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This proposal requests funding for a state-of-the-art  digital transmission
              electron microscope, the Zeiss EM 910.  This instrument will serve a growing
              community of  researchers at the University of North Texas Health Science 
              Center at Fort Worth as well as a number of other  researchers from local
              institutions.  Currently the electron microscopy lab of the Microscopy Core 
              Facility serves 12 researchers.  This includes 5 major  projects with the
              remainder being comprised of minor  projects, graduate students and non-Health
              Science Center  researchers. The Microscopy Core of the Health Science  Center
              is housed within the Department of Anatomy and Cell  Biology and is currently
              attempting to upgrade its  facilities.  Several pieces of state-of-the-art
              support  equipment have already been acquired.  The Zeiss EM 910 will  replace
              an aging transmission electron microscope which  cannot be upgraded to the
              levels of sophistication and  ability currently needed.  The Zeiss EM 910 is a
              state-of-  the-art instrument which will enable us to meet our current  and
              future needs, as well as add an integral piece of  equipment to an ongoing
              effort to improve the research  infrastructure at this new health science
              center.Our current  research needs, which the Zeiss EM 910 meets and our
              present  microscope does not meet, include:    1.    Improved image contrast
              for work with low contrast  specimens (i.e. immunocytochemistry and in situ 
              hybridization).    2.    The ability to record, store, manipulate and print 
              digital images from the transmission electron microscope.    3.    The ability
              to perform morphometry, stereology and  particle analysis using digital images.
                 4.    Storage and automated recall of specimen grid  coordinates.    5.   
              Low magnification micrography and automated montaging.    6.    Enhanced data
              recording to both negatives and archival  computer files.    7.    Utilization
              of the Health Science Center's computer  network for exchanging data and images
              between researchers  here an d around the country.    8.    Electronic image
              rotation to allow better orientation  of images prior to recording.    9.   
              Future upgradability to cryoelectron microscopy,  scanning transmission
              electron microscopy, energy dispersive  x-ray analysis and the in-line Omega
              electron energy filter.        This instrument will also compliment our goal of
               improved training of institutional and community graduate  students
              and.technicians.  It will also enhance the current  medical profession program
              and the planned allied and public  health professions programs of this new
              health science  center.
