Title       : U.S.-Germany Program: Dissertation Research in Plant Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1995   
File        : a9413194

Award Number: 9413194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12456              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan R. Wenck GWenck@spike.psc.scarolina.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5936,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Wenck  9413194    This award supports Allen R. Wenck, a doctoral student of 
              Professor Laszlo Marton at the University of South Carolina  (USC), for a
              three-month visit to the Max Planck Institute for  Developmental Biology in
              Cologne, Germany.  There he will carry  out research on gene transfer in
              Arabidopsis thaliana with   Dr. Csaba Koncz in the Laboratory for the Genetic
              Basis of Plant  Development.  The objective of his dissertation-related
              research  is to examine the influence of homologous gene sequences on gene 
              transfer mediated by Agrobacterium.  He will experiment with  various lengths
              of homology bounded by specific types of internal  genetic markers referred to
              as an "in-frame reporter system",  which will enable him to monitor the site of
              the gene transfer.   After constructing plasmid vectors and transgenic plants
              in South  Carolina, he will spend several months working with Dr. Koncz on  the
              analysis of the genetic integration process.   Professor  Marton and his
              research group at USC has been working on  homologous recombinantion for
              several years using Agrobacterium  mediated gene transfer.  They pioneered the
              transformation of  Arabidopsis root cultures and the maintenance of transgenic 
              plants in permanent root culture.  The group at the Max Planck  Institute in
              Cologne offers unusual expertise in the analysis of  integration events during
              Agrobacterium mediated gene transfer.   The Institute in general is one of the
              best plant molecular  biology Laboratories in the world.      Agrobacterium
              mediated gene transfer has been used extensively to  create transgenic plants. 
              It offers a number of advantages over  direct methods, but the detailed
              sequence of integration events  is not well understood.  In particular, the
              influence of the left  end sequence homology has not been examined until now.  
              Mr. Wenck's proposed research will clarify site selection of  transfer DNA
              integration.  This will be important in the design  of plasmids for
              Agrobacterium mediated gene transfer.  In   addition, this research will
              contribute to the development of  "in-frame reporter systems" for plants, which
              is a long term goal  of many plant genetics laboratories around the world.  ***
