Title       : Instrument Development Plan for Chemistry at the University of Minnesota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  1994   
File        : a9413114

Award Number: 9413114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $486419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne L. Gladfelter gladfelt@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
              will assist the  Department of Chemistry at the University of Minnesota in the
              purchase of a high resolution  mass spectrometer, x-ray diffractometer, and a
              high field NMR spectrometer.  The faculty  members whose research is dependent
              upon mass spectroscopy will greatly benefit from the  acquisition of these
              instruments.  Research projects to be carried out with these instruments 
              include:  (1)  Probing Nucleation Phenomena in Chemical Vapor Depositions; (2) 
              Gas Phase  Ion-Molecule Reactions; (3)  An Investigation of Multielectron
              Transfer Reactions in  Organometallic Complexes; (4)  Synthesis and
              Characterization of Transition Metal-Gold  Cluster Compounds; (5)  Synthetic
              Modeling of Copper-Nitrogen Oxide Interactions in  Proteins and Heterogeneous
              Catalysts and Development of C3-Symmetric and Optically  Active Polypyrazole;
              (6) Surface Chemistry of Chromatography Stationary Phases; (7)   Stacking
              Faults and Polytypism in Nanocrystalline Materials; (8)  Detection of Volatile 
              Organic Compounds (VOC) by Linear Chain Pt Compounds; (9)  NMR Studies of Metal
               Oxide Catalysts; and (10)  Catalysis with Supported Transition Metal-Gold
              Cluster  Compounds.     A high resolution mass spectrometer is an instrument
              used to measure the precise molecular  weight of a molecular ion.  This
              information is an important piece of data used to help determine  the atomic
              composition and, sometimes, the molecular geometry of a molecule.  It is one of
              the  essential tools needed to learn the detailed structure of newly
              synthesized molecules.    The x-ray diffractometer is used to make accurate and
              precise measurements of the full three-  dimensional structure of a molecule. 
              The information obtained gives the precise values of all  the bond distances
              and bond angles of a given molecule and it gives accurate information about 
              the spatial arrangement of that molecule relative to the neighboring molecules.
                 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NM R) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool
              available to  chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules.  It
              is used to identify unknown  substances, characterize specific arrangements of
              atoms within molecules, and to study the  dynamics of interactions between
              molecules in solution.  Access to state-of-the-art NMR  spectrometry is
              essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.  The results from
               these NMR studies are useful in the areas such as polymers and catalysis, and
              in biology.
