Title       : A Pilot Database for Collaborative Studies of Human Genome Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9413152

Award Number: 9413152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Beach                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth K. Kidd   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    This is a proposal to explore use of a common database by a group of
              investigators in many  different countries who will be participating in a Pilot
              Project of the Human Genome  Diversity Project (HGDP).  The larger HGDP Project
              is still in the planning stages but  informatics will clearly play a crucial
              role; acknowledging that, the HGDP organizational  structure includes an
              Informatics Committee (chaired by Dr. Tom Marr, Cold Spring  Harbor).  That
              Committee has recommended that prototype development is an important  aspect of
              informatics at this early stage of the project.  At Yale we have developed a 
              client-server database to handle our own data which are very similar to the
              data that will be  collected in the Pilot Project and in the full HGDP. 
              Therefore, the Informatics Committee of  the HGDP recommended that we consider
              adapting our database as a prototype for use in the  Pilot Project.  This
              proposal is for the funds to make that conversion.  The existing database  uses
              4th Dimension on a Macintosh as the client and Sybase on a Sun Sparcstation-2
              as the  server; communication is over the Internet.  The adaptation process
              proposed will involve  wide consultation on an initial modification,
              distribution of the subsequent prototype to  groups in several different
              countries, a second cycle of modification, and distribution and use  by a
              minimum of ten laboratories participating in the HGDP Pilot Project. 
              Laboratories in  California and Connecticut, in Japan, in England, in Germany,
              and in Italy have already been  identified as participants.  Those labs will
              use the client software produced at Yale on their  local machines to enter
              their data into the Sybase database resident at Yale.  Among other  aspects the
              database will be critically examined to see how it could better facilitate
              local  management of data an the data collection process and how it might
              better promote the  interactive/collaborative nature of the project.  The final
              dataset will be publically available  and will se rve as a testbed for further
              exploration of informatics relevant to the larger HGDP.   This project is
              funded by both the Physical Anthropology Program and the Database Activity  in
              the Biological Sciences.
