Title       : Acquisition of Growth Chambers for the National Phytotron
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9413757

Award Number: 9413757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Reynolds jfreynol@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Boyd R. Strain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Siedow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David T. Patterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Schlesinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT    Duke University requests $700,000 to
              enhance capabilities of  the National Phytotron by the addition of 18 new
              controlled  environment (CE) chambers.  The Phytotron, an NSF-funded  national
              research facility established in 1968, consists of  40 artificially lighted CE
              growth chambers and 6 glasshouses  that provide more that 477 m2 of controlled
              environmental  space for advanced research in environmental plant biology. 
              These CE units are used to reproduce different types of  environments --
              ranging from the arctic to the desert to the  tropics.  This allows researchers
              to have precise control  over environmental conditions, e.g., air temperature, 
              irradiance, carbon dioxide, relative humidity, and nutrient  concentration,
              thereby providing an opportunity to gain  increased understanding of the
              complex interactions between  plants and their environment, which is virtually
              impossible  to do under natural, uncontrolled field conditions.  The  Phytotron
              hosts, on yearly average, 17 students, 4  postdoctoral scientists, and 20
              senior scientists, 73% of  whom are off - campus users.    The Phytotron's
              current CE growth chambers have operated  continuously for 25 years.  While
              some have been upgraded,  their limited analog controls are not adequate for
              precise  and flexible control of multiple environments variables,  e.g.,
              temperature, light, and humidity.  In addition, these  older chambers lack
              sophisticated computer-based monitoring  capabilities, thus limiting
              researchers' abilities to  monitor experiments and to reproduce short-term,
              variable  environmental conditions, which are critical to  understanding
              processes like carbon allocation,  photosynthesis, and acclimation.  Over the
              past decade, the  environmental factors that researchers have most frequently 
              manipulated in the Phytotron are the effects of carbon  dioxide and temperature
              -- other factors include drought  stress, nutrient availability, photoperiod,
              UV-B radiation,  and salinity.  With Excelle nt lighting, digital controls, 
              and real time monitoring, the 18 new controlled environment  chambers will
              provide the flexible, quality-controlled  environment needed by a range of
              projects, including  molecular, whole-plant (including such as areas as leaf 
              physiology and growth dynamics), biotic interactions (e.g.,  plant-plant and
              plant-animal interactions and pathogens),  population genetics, and ecosystem
              microcosms.    Acquisition of these 18 state-of-the-art chambers will have  an
              immediate and substantial impact on U.S. ecological  research, particularly
              studies on the effects of global  change on plants and ecosystems, efforts to
              scale processes  across biological levels of organization, and basic  molecular
              and physiological studies of carbon fixation,  allocation, and respiration. 
              This instrumentation will  build upon and enhance NSF's investment in
              ecological  research and allow the National Phytotron to address  national
              needs in the biological sciences, including  graduate and postgraduate
              education, and to remain one of  the most important centers for controlled
              environment  research in ecology in the United States.
