Title       : Acquisition of an Isotope Facility to Study Atmosphere- Ecosystem Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1994  
File        : a9413903

Award Number: 9413903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene F. Kelly pedoiso@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Wunder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid C. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Schimel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward T. Elliott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey M. Welker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas O. Holtzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Parton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Valentine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is to establish an isotope ratio mass  spectrometer
              (IRMS) in order to resolve very small differences in  the isotopic compositions
              of elements - primarily carbon, oxygen,  nitrogen, and hydrogen - in various
              materials.  This will  facilitate fundamental insights into the major ecosystem
              processes  governing atmospheric composition at larger scales, and enable 
              research into several major environmental issues, including global  climate
              change and the carbon cycle, radiatively active trace gas  exchange, ecosystem
              management, sustainable agriculture, soil and  water quality, conservation
              biology, and atmospheric and  terrestrial pollution.  Some specific issues
              would include:  (1)  How are the processes governing soil carbon storage and
              chemistry  modified by changes in climate and land use?  (2) How are the known 
              controls over methane biogeochemistry manifested in ecosystem-level  methane
              flux rates and isotopic compositions?  (3) What can the  pedologic record tell
              us about past influences of climate on soil  formation?  (4) How is the
              hydrological cycle altered as a result  of changing management, biota, and
              climate?  (5) What is the  functional dependence of ungulate diet on geographic
              variation in  forage availability and quality, and how does this effect methane
               production during digestion?  Ultimately, the facility will provide  crucial
              data for developing and testing ecosystem-atmosphere models  needed for the
              next generation of global and regional environmental  models.    This facility
              will complement existing facilities in an array of  existing laboratories and
              research groups on the Colorado State  University campus and nearby.  The
              Colleges of Agriculture and  Natural Resources at CSU already support
              laboratories necessary for  the preparation of soil, water, plant and air
              samples for mass  spectrometric measurements, but these samples now are
              analyzed off-  campus.  The Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory maintains 
              facilities for quantifying trace gas co ncentrations.  This facility  will
              serve as a magnet to foster interdisciplinary collaboration  among diverse
              research groups.  Collaborators at NCAR, the  Institute of Arctic and Alpine
              Research, and Carnegie Institute  will provide complementary expertise and will
              continue to  collaborate in research using the facility.
