Title       : Reaction Mechanisms and Simulations of Industrial Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1995   
File        : a9413930

Award Number: 9413930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Goddard wag@wag.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Professor William A. Goddard at the Beckman Institute of the California  
              Institute of Technology is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and  
              Computational Chemistry Program to perform research involving theory and  
              simulation on problems relevant to new catalysts and chemical processes.   The
              goal of the research is to determine a set of general concepts and   principles
               which will form the basis of mechanistic understandings.   These
              understandings would make it possible to predict some of the   properties of
              new systems without measurements or calculations. The   strategy to achieve
              this goal is to make  use of ab initio quantum   mechanical, QM, results
              combined with molecular dynamics, MD, studies of   reaction kinetics. The need
              to perform these QM and MD calculations on   realistic models of systems of
              practical industrial interest is given   high priority. The  work is divided
              into method development and the   application of QM and MD to specific
              catalytic problems of industrial   importance.  There is enormous opportunity
              for theory and simulation to aid in   designing, developing, and engineering
              the catalysts and chemical   processes important to industry and society. With
              reliable simulations to   reduce the number of experiments, U.S. industry could
              save many millions   of dollars per year and could cut years off development
              cycles by   focusing on the most promising catalysts and processes. To help
              provide   the scientific basis for designing, characterizing, and optimizing
              new   catalysts, the supported research involves a broad attack on the  
              mechanisms of several industrially significant catalytic processes. This  
              theoretical work involves collaborations with industrial and university  
              experimentalists. From detailed studies which combine ab initio quantum  
              theory and molecular dynamics simulations, it is expected that the   concepts
              and principles needed to design new types of catalysts will be   extracted.
              These studies will demand size and time scales which stretch   current
              methodologies and, hence, considerable emphasis is placed on   developing new
              methods.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
