Title       : Acquisition of equipment for shared embryonic stem-cell and transgenic animal
               facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1994 
File        : a9413521

Award Number: 9413521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimi S. Hatton   (Principal Investigator current)
              E. P. Reddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Germain Rivard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT      In this project, we request (1) one high-quality  microscope
              with phase contrast and  DIC optics; (2) two vibration free air tables with one
              base  plate, (3) two  rnicromanipulators, (4) one dissecting microscope, (5)
              one  computer, (6) one cage-  washer, (7) one CO2 incubator, (8) one biosafety
              cabinet and  one laminar flow hood, and  (8) caging and racks. The requested
              equipment is focused on  the central theme of normal  mouse development,
              genetics and molecular biology and will  facilitate and provide for  research,
              research services and research training for  undergraduates, graduates, 
              postdoctoral students and investigators. The equipment will  enable maintenance
              of state-  of-the-art research initiatives in cutting-edge research and 
              accommodate newly recruited  faculty at Temple in the Fels Research Institute.
              The  specialized equipment is a  requirement for our program in Developmental
              Biology. To  maintain our position at  the frontier of research, we have
              developed five well-  defined basic science programs (1)  Molecular Biology and
              Oncology program, (2) Immunology  program (3) Biochemistry  program (4)
              Developmental Biology Program, and (5) Molecular  Pharmacology/  Chemical
              Carcinogenesis program. The Fels Institute brings  together at one location a 
              diversity of intellectual skills and research experience.  Our goal is to
              address questions of  critical importance in each program, particularly in the 
              area of Developmental Biology  using the most powerful methods of analysis
              currently  available. Over the last year, we  have actively recruited a number
              of new investigators to  Fels. Acquisition of the  requested equipment will
              help fulfill a major research  objective of our Program in  that we will
              effectively address questions concerning the  normal role of a particular  gene
              during development and the basic biology and regulation  of gene sequences 
              during development. This equipment will help to bridge the  gap between an 
              investigator's ability to define the r ole of a gene in  simple tissue culture
              systems and in  the organism.    In this proposal, we ask for a related series
              of equipment  dedicated for the purpose of  conducting gene-targeting and
              transgenic experiments in our  basic Developmental  Biology Program. The
              equipment will be placed in a pathogen-  free Barrier animal  facility of
              Temple University. This facility is a shower-in  facility staffed by two animal
               technicians, one manager and one Veterinarian. Experiments  are conducted in
              the  facility and common-use equipment is located there for all  investigators
              using the  barrier. The area is currently providing IACUUC and AALAC  approved
              housing and  care of animals used in research and research training. In a 
              separate initiative, we are  planning repair and renovation of this space;
              however, the  proposed series of  instruments will function for the same
              purpose whether or  not building renovations  occur.    In this project, the
              acquisition of this equipment will  allow us to perform blastocyst  and egg
              injections at the same time, will allow efficient  functioning of the animal 
              facility, and will allow participation of more research  laboratories in
              Developmental  biology research and research training.
