Title       : Acquisition of Improved Laser System for New Experiments in Atomic Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1998   
File        : a9413457

Award Number: 9413457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terrence W. Rettig                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob J. Leventhal jake@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9413457  Leventhal  The equipment supplied by this grant consists of laser 
              systems that will significantly increase the wavelength  range and the quality
              of the laser radiation available in  the Atomic Physics Laboratory at UMSL. 
              This upgrade will  permit maximum utilization of the facilities and fuller 
              exploitation of experimental techniques recently developed  in this laboratory.
               The experiments, all of which rely on  sequential excitation of atoms using
              multiple laser beams,  are aimed at elucidating fundamental properties of
              atoms.  Recent work has exploited new experimental techniques  developed in
              this laboratory for measuring atomic parameters  with unprecedented accuracy. 
              Two of these techniques,  precision dc Stark spectroscopy and Floquet
              spectroscopy,  are based on the dc and ac Stark effects respectively.  Both 
              employ highly excited atoms to magnify atomic responses to  the fields. A third
              technique, developed for the study of  photoionization of excited atoms,
              employs a variety of laser  beam polarization schemes to acquire data which, in
               conjunction with angular momentum algebra, make it possible  to determine the
              cross sections for photoionization to  specific final angular momentum states. 
              The increased range  of available laser wavelengths will greatly expand 
              experimental capabilities.  The new state-of-theart device  would make it
              possible to study a wider variety of atomic  processes in considerably greater
              detail than currently  possible.  The narrower bandwidth would permit finer 
              resolution of spectral features while the higher available  intensity would
              allow excitation of atomic transitions that  cannot currently be accessed.  As
              with all laboratory resources, the requested system would  provide experience
              and training for the many undergraduate  students who participate in this
              research.  It would also  benefit the secondary school teachers who gain
              valuable  laboratory experience during summer training sessions.  Thus, this
              equipment, in addition to its intrins ic value as  a laboratory tool, would
              serve an educational function,  training students and teachers in the operation
              of state-of-  the-art instrumentation. ***
