Title       : Digital Particle Image Velocimetry for the National Diagnostic Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9413741

Award Number: 9413741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147647             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Cardell Cardell@iitmax.acc.iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Candace Wark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1415,9157,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9413741  Greg Cardell    The Fluid Dynamics Research Center (FDRC)
              at the Illinois Institute of Technology will purchase a dual Nd:YAG laser
              system, two high-resolution digital CCD video cameras, two high-performance
              framegrabbers with image processing capability, and associated supporting
              equipment, to develop and implement a high-speed Digital Particle Image
              Velocimetry (DPIV) system dedicated to research in fluid dynamics at the FDRC. 
              In particle image velocimetry, small particles in the flow are illuminated by
              an intense light sheet and the resulting scattering light is imaged using
              either photographic film or video cameras.  By taking two such images,
              separated by a short time interval, the velocities of the imaged particles may
              be determined.  The technique provides two components of the instantaneous
              velocity field everywhere in the imaged region of the flow, and there is some
              possibility that the technique may be extended so that all three velocity
              components may be obtained in the plane of the light sheet.  With the advent of
              high resolution, high sensitivity CCD arrays, it is now possible to obtain the
              spatial and temporal resolution required for the study of turbulent high speed
              flows using DPIV.    The FDRC currently has funding for several projects
              utilizing the Photographic PIV (PPIV) technique and its application to the
              study of turbulence, and is in the process of developing a very high
              performance processing system for photographic PIV images.  However, the two
              different techniques, PPIV and DPIV, are complementary:  PPIV still has a
              significant advantage in spatial resolution and sensitivity (allowing the study
              of high velocity flows at higher spatial resolution) so that it is the method
              of choice for extremely high resolution experiments.  The DPIV technique is
              much more convenient for obtaining and processing data quickly, particularly
              since there is no film to be developed, and it is more convenient to digitally
              process and archive the images.    The DPIV syst em will be used for several
              research projects, including, the study of equilibrium and non-equilibrium high
              Reynolds number boundary layers, unsteady and separated flows, transitional
              boundary layers, and high subsonic jet flows.  The DPIV system will be used to
              support research in all of the FDRC facilities, although it will be
              particularly useful in the National Diagnostic Facility, which is a national
              resource for fundamental research on high Reynolds number, high subsonic Mach
              number flows.  The NDF will be used by outside researchers for academia,
              industry, and government laboratories the two-thirds of the time, and by
              researchers from the FDRC the remaining one-third of the time.  Hardware
              designs and software developed under this grant will be made available to the
              community through the archives of the Center for Quantitative Visualization at
              the California Institute of Technology.
