Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research: The Reflection, Transmission and Absorption
               Effects of Electromagnetic Wavesin Advanced Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1994    
File        : a9413424

Award Number: 9413424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bor Z. Jang bzjang@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1305,9161,9200,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9413424  Jang    This project, between Dr. Bor Jang, Auburn University, and Gan 
              Yongxue, Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics is  supported under
              the U.S.-China Cooperative Research Program.   Scientists at Beijing University
              of Aeronautics and Astronautics  (BUAA) and Auburn University will form an
              international research  team to investigate the interactions between
              electromagnetic (EM)  waves and advanced fiber reinforced composites.  The
              reflection,  transmission, and absorption effects of EM waves in a composite 
              will be correlated with the characteristics of the constituent  fiber, matrix
              and their interfaces.  Models will be developed to  analyze EM wave-composite
              interactions in terms of correlations  between basic EM parameters
              (permeability and permittivity) and  the constituent materials properties. 
              This investigation will  initially  be concentrated on a model class of
              functional fibers  and composites that can exhibit an unusually wide spectrum
              of  electrical behaviors, covering more than 12 orders of magnitude  in
              conductivity ranging from highly insulating to highly  conducting.  The fibers,
              termed "quasi-carbon" (QC) fibers, will  be obtained by oxidizing (stabilizing)
              and then partially or  fully carbonizing polyacrylonitrile (PAN) fibers.  The
              QC fiber  reinforced QC matrix composites (QC/QC) will be prepared by 
              impregnating QC fibers with a PAN or phenolic resin and then  stabilizing and
              carbonizing the matrix resin.  Correlation  between the electrical properties
              and the molecular and crystal  structures of these thermally treated fibers and
              composites will  be established.  Proper heat treatment conditions will be 
              identified for the fabrication of advanced composites with good  structural
              integrity, high thermal stability, and a unique EM  wave-absorbing capability.
