Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Establishment of a Center for Molecular
               Structure in the California State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9413955

Award Number: 9413955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296597             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Kantardjieff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at  California State
              University, Fullerton (CSUF), is embarking  on a major new initiative to
              develop a Center for Molecular  Structure which will serve the largest
              four-year and  Masters' degree- granting public university system (CSU) in  the
              United States. We have recently been designated as the  site for a core
              facility for research and training in this  area by the California State
              University Program for  Education and Research in Biotechnology (CSUPERB). Our 
              campus, the University system and industry enthusiastically  support this
              project and have committed well over 50% of the  costs of developing this core
              facility.  The x-ray  laboratory of the Center will be housed in renovated 
              facilities specifically designed for this Center, to be  located in McCarthy
              Hall adjacent to our new 60,000 square  foot Science Laboratory Center (SLC).  
                   Critical to the efficient and timely establishment of  this core facility
              are NSF funds which we are requesting  here to acquire a modern, high-powered
              crystallographic  system and computer workstations for small molecule and 
              macromolecular applications. The Siemens instrumentation we  have selected is a
              completely integrated multiwire area  detector/rotating anode crystallography
              system for  macromolecules that can also be used as a small molecule 
              diffractometer. The configuration of the Silicon Graphics  workstations and
              software library, the first of its kind in  the CSU system, is ideally suited
              to meeting the needs of  our students and faculty in a variety of structural
              studies.  These include 1 ) structural studies on bacterial toxins,  bovine
              ceruloplasmin, horse spleen and serum ferritins, gly-  and phe-tRNA synthetases
              from E. coli, and model complexes  of heme proteins; 2) structural studies of
              novel  organometallic compounds, di- and trinuclear platinum  compounds, and
              lithium salts of dianions; 3) molecular  modeling studies of hemoproteins and
              organotin-based polymer  systems; 5) comput ational studies on oxyallyl cation 
              chemistry; 6) lipid bilayer simulations. The Director of the  Center is Dr.
              Katherine Kantardjieff, who joined the CSUF  faculty in 1989 from the Molecular
              Biology Institute and  Department of Chemistry at UCLA, where she worked in
              David  Eisenberg's group studying the structure of diphtheria  toxin.       
              The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at CSUF  is committed to
              high-quality  research programs as an integral part of both our  undergraduate
              and graduate education programs.  The 20 full-  time faculty in the Department
              have established an exemplary  record of external funding and consistently
              publish in the  top peer-reviewed journals in their field. This project, 
              however, will advance not only the research and training  capabilities of our
              Department, but also those of the entire  20 campus CSU system. Facilities
              within the Center will  complement, not duplicate, existing NMR, EPR and
              electron  microscope facilities at CSUF and within the CSU.  Facilities within
              the Center will provide molecular modeling  capabilities and computational
              power to the entire CSU by  means of the existing high-speed fiber optic
              network. The  Center for Molecular Structure will promote the advancement  of
              knowledge at the mainstream of scientific endeavor and  make a significant
              contribution to the training and  development of the next generation of
              scientists.
