Title       : New Methods for the Exploratory Analysis of Geographical Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1994       
File        : a9410612

Award Number: 9410612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luc Anselin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9410612  ANSELIN       The available methodology to carry out an "exploratory" 
              analysis of geographic data is limited, especially for the  analysis of large
              data sets that combine information from several  points in time with large
              amounts of geographic detail.  In such  instances, which are often
              characterized as data rich but theory  poor, the discovery of significant
              patterns of association  (across space, over time, and between multiple
              variables) is a  crucial aspect of the initial phase of scientific inquiry
              (i.e.,  the formulation of hypotheses).  This situation is increasingly 
              encountered in empirical research as large computerized data  bases become
              available to researchers studying such topics as  global change, the spread of
              contagious diseases, and socio-  economic dynamics.  The research proposed here
              will remove these  impediments to the exploratory analysis of geographical data
              by  developing a set of new methods to assess association in space-  time, with
              special emphasis placed on categorical variables.  The  new methods will be
              developed as an extension of the idea of a  general class of Local Indicators
              of Spatial Association (LISA)  developed earlier by the principal investigator.
              The proposed  research consists of a rigorous assessment of the statistical 
              properties of the new methods by means of a series of carefully  designed
              simulation experiments.  The new techniques will be  disseminated to the
              research community in the form of a software  toolbox for exploratory data
              analysis, based on an object  oriented design. The potential of the new methods
              for providing  new insights in the analysis of large geographical data bases 
              will be illustrated in a case study of the human impacts of  global change.    
                This project will provide much needed new statistical tools  for exploring
              relationships throughout space and over time and  thus taking better advantage
              of the large data bases that are  being constructed and organized in geographic
              information  systems.  The project  will result in a set of new software tools 
              that will be made accessible to, and have a significant impact  on, the large
              research and business community who use such data  bases.
