Title       : Coordination of Cognitive Activity during Group Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1996  
File        : a9410584

Award Number: 9410584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Garold Stasser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9410584  Stasser                              ABSTRACT         Members of
              decision-making groups often have access to  different information, and one aim
              of discussion is to pool  members' unique knowledge.  Pooling information is
              particularly  important if the combination of members' unique information will 
              reveal a superior decision alternative.  However, previous work  shows that
              discussions tend to focus on commonly-held knowledge,  and groups risk
              overlooking an option supported by their  collective knowledge. This program of
              empirical work examines how  perceptions of knowledge distribution and task
              demands affect  information processing and communication styles.  Of particular
               interest is the process of tacit coordination whereby members of  a group
              adjust their selection, rehearsal and communication of  information to obtain
              varying degrees of informational diversity  depending on perceived task
              demands.  This coordination can be  based on direct knowledge of others' access
              to information or on  acquired knowledge of what others have done on similar
              tasks in  the past.  It is hypothesized that some types of tasks  (collective
              recall, idea generation, intellective problems) will  encourage diversity of
              informational input whereas other types  (judgmental tasks) will promote
              uniformity of input. It is also  hypothesized that concerns about recall
              accuracy may promote  redundancy of informational sampling in order to provide
              social  validation.           It has been found that, in the process of
              decision making,  groups tend to focus on the information that is commonly held
              by  all members, ignoring information that is not shared by all but  that could
              lead to a better decision.  By advancing our  understanding of the conditions
              under which unique information is  likely to be shared, this research will
              provide knowledge  relevant to improving the quality of decision making in
              groups.   As such, it will have implications for various initiatives in 
              industry and government that have emphasi zed the importance of  basing
              decisions on the best information available from groups or  teams.  At the
              heart of these initiatives is the goal of  empowering people who are uniquely
              aware of crucial information  that could be used to improve processes and
              procedures, getting  them to speak up and make a difference.  The proposed
              research  will help to provide a sound basis for such attempts to enhance 
              worker productivity.
