Title       : Multidimensional Mechanism Design: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9410747

Award Number: 9410747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55903              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ennio Stacchetti   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9410747  Stacchetti    Mechanism design problems arise naturally in numerous
              economic  situations, including the regulation of a monopolist, auctions, 
              government procurement, nonlinear pricing, and the provision of  public goods. 
              There is a vast literature in each one of these  major fields of application by
              now, but for the most part, the  analysis has been reduced to the case in which
              uncertainty is  modelled by a single parameter, and the number of goods is 
              restricted to two (one of the two goods is typically money).  The  technical
              difficulties presented by higher dimensional cases have  impeded progress, and
              delayed our understanding of economic  applications.  The project develops new
              techniques in the theory  of multidimensional mechanism design, and applies
              these  techniques to several important economic problems.      More
              specifically, the techniques for multidimensional mechanism  design developed
              by this project are based on the work of Rochet  and Armstrong.  For problems
              with a certain linear structure  (including auctions with externalities and
              pricing in  multiproduct monopolies) conjugate duality leads to an envelope 
              condition and a full characterization of incentive compatible  mechanisms.  The
              divergence theorem takes the place of  integration by parts, which is used in
              the one-dimensional case  to simplify the objective function of the principal. 
              In a  symmetric auction with externalities, these techniques allow one  to
              identify the only buyer type whose participation constraint  binds at the
              optimal solution.  Myerson's notion of "regularity",  which is so crucial in
              one-dimensional problems, has a more  complicated but useful analog in higher
              dimensions.  The  symmetric auction model with externalities of Jehiel,
              Moldovanu  and Stacchetti is extended by relaxing the assumption of symmetry 
              and considering the case where buyers experience externalities  even when the
              seller keeps the object.  Dynamic games are  investigated where there is a
              strategic motive for buying t he  objective, namely, to resell it later.  The
              generalized  regularity analysis alluded to above would extend Armstrong's 
              results on pricing and regulation to multiproduct monopolies to a  much wider
              range of economic environments.
