Title       : Time-Resolved Photochemical Footprinting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1994     
File        : a9410748

Award Number: 9410748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Horowitz                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Brenowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Chance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9410748  Brenowitz  Photochemical techniques have been researched and tested
              enabling  time-resolved determinations of the structures of protein-DNA 
              complexes that allow the reaction intermediates to be examined.   This project
              will 1) Determine the mechanism and specificity of  cleavage of DNA by
              photolyzed cobalamins; 2) Develop a rapid  mixing-laser photolysis method to
              attain the goal of millisecond  time resolution for photochemical footprinting;
              and 3) Test the new  technology by examining the reaction mechanism of two
              sequence-  specific DNA binding proteins.  This new technique will be immensely
              valuable in bridging the gaps  in present thermodynamic and structural analysis
              of protein-DNA  interactions.  Since complex formation can be followed at
              single  basepair resolution, detailed structural information will be  available
              at time resolutions on the order of milliseconds to  microseconds.  The
              photochemical footprinting protocols will be  tested using the binding of the
              Eco RI restriction endonuclease to  its recognition sequence and the binding of
              the 'TATA' Binding  Protein (TBP) to a promoter.  Thus, it will be possible to
              study  for the first time the intermediate steps in the formation of the 
              protein-nucleic acid complex.  %%%  Understanding the mechanisms by which
              proteins recognize and bind  to specific DNA sequences is a key step towards
              understanding  cellular function and dysfunction.  Protein-DNA interactions
              play  important roles in cellular processes such as gene replication, 
              recombination and regulation.  The formation of protein DNA  complexes is a
              complex process involving multiple steps and many  different chemical
              interactions.  Significant insights have been  made into the mechanisms by
              which proteins bind to specific DNA  sequences using techniques that determine
              the three-dimensional  structure of the complexes, and independently by
              techniques that  probe the chemistry of the interactions.  However, a severe 
              limitation of such data is that they report only on  the endpoints  of the
              binding reaction.  Thus, the intermediate events in the  binding reaction, such
              as identification of initial recognition  sites and induction of changes in the
              conformation of the DNA have  not been observed or studied.  Techniques are
              under development that utilize visible light to  trigger chemical reactions
              that will enable the time dependence of  the reaction of proteins with specific
              DNA sequences to be  examined.  This approach will greatly advance our
              understanding of  the molecular mechanism by which proteins recognize and bind
              to  specific sequences of DNA.  ***
