Title       : Collaborative Research: Developmental Ecology of Mayapple
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1997  
File        : a9410086

Award Number: 9410086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia S. Jones CJONES@UCONNVM.UCONN.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9410086  Jones   Whether a plant is able to persist in a particular natural
              environment is determined by its reproductive success, or fitness, through
              evolutionary time.  Among the determinants of reproductive success are the
              schedule of reproduction, i.e. the life history, and the resources available
              for reproduction.  Because a plant's reproductive success is directly
              influenced by the number of reproductive structures (flowers), plants face a
              tradeoff between  producing flowers that increase reproductive output
              immediately, versus producing new vegetative structures (leaves and roots) that
              enhance resource uptake and may lead to higher reproductive success over the
              life of the plant.  This tradeoff is complicated by the interaction between (1)
              a plant's inherent developmental program, which influences when and what type
              of new structure will be made, and (2) the efficiency of that structure in
              resource accumulation, which in turn influences the plant's subsequent
              developmental program.  The influence of this interaction between a plant's
              developmental program and resource accumulation on the proportion of
              reproductive individuals in the population, i.e. the population's demography,
              is poorly understood.  Interactions between developmental program, resource
              uptake and use, and demography in an herbaceous perennial clonal plant,
              mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum) will be examined.  Mayapple is an ideal plant
              for such a study because each year each rhizome faces a simple developmental
              decision--to produce either a single foliage leaf, or a simple reproductive
              shoot bearing a single flower and two foliage leaves.  Long-term studies of
              naturally occurring populations will be used to (1) construct a timetable of
              developmental decisions for mayapple, emphasizing how and when the type of new
              aerial "shoot" is determined, (2) examine the interaction between resources
              acquired in the past and those acquired in the current year on current and
              future determination of shoot type and (3) determine whether dif ferences in
              the timing of developmental events among different clones affects their
              reproductive output over the long term.  The results of this study will reveal
              how variation in developmental timing and resource uptake affect demography. 
              Moreover, this study will reveal at what points selection may act to alter the
              timing of the expressed developmental program, thus contributing to our
              understanding of how different life histories evolve, a critical issue for
              plants facing a rapidly changing environment.  These results will contribute to
              understanding how variation in developmental timing affects vegetative and
              reproductive productivity in economically important plants as well.
