Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Nodal Problems and Perturbation Theory in Higher
               Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1994  
File        : a9410700

Award Number: 9410700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27302              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce R. McLaughlin mclauj@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9410700  McLaughlin       This project is concerned the problem of determining 
              which properties of an elastic membrane can be deduced from  knowledge of the
              natural frequencies and the nodal lines of  the membrane.  The nodal lines are
              places on the membrane  where there is no excitation when the membrane is
              excited at  a natural frequency.  There are two major  parts to the  project. 
              The first is to obtain perturbation results for  the natural frequencies and
              mode shapes.  Since the  frequencies are not well spaced in higher dimensional 
              problems, small divisor problems must be solved. The second  major part of the
              project is related to the fact that nodal  domains (connected domains in the
              membrane defined by the  nodal lines) can be long, thin strips whose diameter
              is as  large as the diameter of the membrane.  What is required  then is to
              define approximate nodal domains whose diameter  goes to zero as the order of
              the eigenvalue goes to  infinity.       The goal of this research is to
              establish methods for  finding properties of vibrating systems from indirect 
              measurements, in particular, measurements of natural  frequencies and nodal
              lines.  The natural frequencies can be  determined by spectral analysis of
              impulse response data.  The nodal lines can be measured by directing a laser at
              the  vibrating surface when the membrane is excited at a natural  frequency. 
              The lines where the Doppler shift in the  backscatter is minimized are the
              nodal lines. From this data  the amplitudes of external forces on the membrane
              and an  expression for a (nonconstant) density of the membrane may  be
              determined from explicit formulas for these quantities.  These formulas are
              expected to be very useful for obtaining  efficient numerical algorithms to
              identify the quantities in  question.  ***
