Title       : The Experimental Study of a Culture of Honor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9410568

Award Number: 9410568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59979              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Nisbett nisbett@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      A program of experiments will examine the "culture of honor" reputed to
              exist both in the southern United States and in parts of the western United
              States initially settled by southerners. In cultures of honor, men are expected
              to defend their reputations for strength and toughness by responding
              forcefully, and with violence if necessary, when these are impugned.  Insults
              and reactions to insults constitute a key social dynamic in such cultures.  An
              unretracted insult must be punished if the target is to retain his "honor,"
              that is, his credibility as a powerful agent who can deter more genuine threats
              to his well-being and livelihood.  Experiments are expected to show the
              southerner's greater sensitivity to insults, as indicated by various measures
              of aggressiveness and desire to display toughness.  The research is also
              expected to show that southerners mutually enforce standards of "honor" by
              withdrawing respect from the person who, when affronted, fails to do anything
              about it.  Finally, southerners are expected to have a wider variety of means
              of preventing and reducing conflict, because conflict places them at more risk
              than it does others.  Conflict avoidance techniques are only sometimes
              effective in preventing violence, however.  The research is expected to show
              that, if provoked beyond a certain point, southerners will express anger later
              than northerners, but more explosively.        Thousands of people are killed
              every year in the context of arguments and conflicts; and tens of thousands
              more are severely injured as the result of similar conflicts and as a result of
              spouse and child abuse.  Much of this violence is the result of perceived
              affronts.  It is important to know what sorts of situations create a sense of
              affront and provoke violence in different subcultures, what psychological
              mechanisms mediate between perceived affront and violence, what sorts of norms,
              sanctioned in what ways, sustain the norms allowing violence, and what social
              behaviors serve to avoid or reduce  conflict.  In addition to its theoretical
              and methodological contributions, this program of research will make pragmatic
              contributions by providing answers to the foregoing questions.
