Title       : Theoretical and Computational Studies of Quantum Dynamical Processes in
               Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1994  
File        : a9410608

Award Number: 9410608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Voth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gregory Voth is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to perform studies of quantum dynamical   processes in
              condensed phase systems.  He will employ the dynamical   properties of the
              imaginary time path centroid in the Feynman path   integral formulation.  The
              time position correlation function in   many-body systems will be computed
              using centroid molecular dynamics.  In   this method classical-like equations
              of motion generate centroid   trajectories which are correlated and
              statistically weighted with the   phase space Feynman path integral centroid
              density.  The resulting   correlation function can then be related by Fourier
              transform to the   quantum position correlation function.  New algorithms will
              be developed   to solve the centroid molecular dynamics equations, and they
              will be   applied to a number of condensed phase studies including: 1) quantum 
               tunneling and mode quantization effects in liquid water; 2) diffusive  
              transport of the hydrated electron in quantized water; and 3) the quantum  
              dynamical motion of an excess proton in water and related systems.    Gas phase
              chemical systems have been studied for a number of years, and   excellent
              theoretical and computational techniques have been developed to   model their
              behavior.  More recently theoretical and computational   methods are being
              developed which make it possible to treat more complex   condensed phase
              systems.  Most of the current theoretical models are   classical in nature, and
              cannot deal with the additional complications   imposed by quantum effects.  
              Voth's research addresses this additional   degree of complexity, and proposes
              the development of computational   approaches which will permit the treatment
              of condensed phase systems   which include various quantum degrees of freedom.
