Title       : Comparing Democracies: Electoral Politics in New and Old Societies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1995   
File        : a9410345

Award Number: 9410345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Niemi niemi@rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pippa Norris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence LeDuc  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9410345  Niemi    This project involves an international conference arising from
               the expansion of scholarly work on democratic processes, fuelled  by recent
              historical events.      The key goals of the proposed conference are fourfold: 
                1) to develop a thematic understanding of elections in  established
              democracies.    2) to integrate, synthesize and consolidate theoretical, 
              empirical and institutional studies comparing elections, parties,  and voters. 
                3) to disseminate the conference results widely to an  international
              readership through publication of an edited book.    Comparative research on
              democracies has traditionally drawn  heavily on the experience of major Western
              countries.  Through  this conference, the research will be updated to take
              account of  substantial changes within many established democracies during  the
              last decade, as well as the growth of 'third wave'  democracies in the Southern
              Mediterranean, Central and Eastern  Europe, Latin America, Asia, and Africa.   
              The conference will bring together colleagues with expertise in  established
              and emerging democracies.  One set of participants  will contribute papers
              providing an overview and synthesis of  existing theoretical and empirical work
              on key topics associated  with the study of political parties and elections in
              established  democracies.  A second set of participants will write papers 
              focussing on similar themes from the perspective of newer  democracies.  The
              conference objective is to integrate these sets  of papers to develop a broad
              understanding of democratic systems  that includes established and emerging
              democracies.
