Title       : Air-Sea Gas-Transfer in Coastal Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9410537

Award Number: 9410537
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $739251             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik J. Bock ebock@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Edson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nelson M. Frew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,9197,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 9410537  Bock    Research will be undertaken in response to a one-time
              Program  Announcement (NSF 93-101) for the Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) 
              Coastal Air-Sea Chemical Fluxes pilot study.  The NSF/CoOP Study  will augment
              and collaborate with the ONR-sponsored Marine Boundary  Layer (MBL) Advanced
              Research Initiative (ARI) project scheduled  for 1995 off the coast of
              Monterey, California.  The overall  scientific project is interdisciplinary,
              with the NSF/CoOP efforts  addressing chemical and biological parameters, while
              the ONR study  focuses on physical oceanographic and meteorological parameters.
                  This is a collaborative project between investigators from the  University
              of Rhode Island and from Scripps Institution of  Oceanography.  The research
              will improve our understanding of  air-sea gas transfer under different
              environmental conditions at  the air-sea interface.  A new in situ instrument
              will be developed  to measure the gas transfer velocity (k) on time scales of
              minutes  to hours that are much shorter than conventional tracer techniques 
              (days or longer).   The instrument will be integrated into a small  research
              catamaran called LADAS which is towed behind a research  vessel.  LADAS carries
              a scanning laser slope gauge, to measure the  three-dimensional
              capillary-gravity wave spectrum, meteorological  instruments, and a long-wave
              monitoring capability.  Additionally  a surface microlayer sampler will be
              installed on the catamaran to  enable coincident measurements of the gas
              transfer velocity, small  scale roughness, wind stress, and surface chemical
              parameters.   LADAS will be deployed in several field experiments to determine 
              air-sea gas transfer rates under realistic ocean conditions and  especially to
              relate these observations over different spatial and  temporal scales in
              coastal environments.  Such analyses will not  only provide a more accurate
              parameterization of gas transfer  velocity by avoiding biases caused by long
              time averaging, but will  also provide insights  as to the transient nature of
              gas flux.  The  correlation of surface roughness and gas flux will benefit
              future  global remote sensing of air-sea gas exchange since surface  roughness
              is one of sea surface parameters than can be remotely  measured from aircraft
              and satellites.
