Title       : Organizational Improvisation in New Product Development and Introduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1994     
File        : a9410419

Award Number: 9410419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118948             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne S. Miner aminer@bus.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine Moorman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9149,MANU,
Abstract    :
              For many decades, management theorists have stressed the value of planned
              action.  In contrast, emergent theories of organizational action have stressed
              the presence and even potential benefit of unplanned action in organizations. 
              This research defines organizational improvisation as unplanned but deliberate
              organizational action, and explores its presence and impact on organizational
              performance during new product development and introduction activities.
              Grounded in a framework of organizational learning, the study seeks to go
              beyond popular admonitions urging managerial flexibility. Instead, it seeks to
              provide systematic insight into the weaknesses and potential of improvisation
              as a tool for escalating the speed of new product actions, increasing the
              short-term financial effectiveness of these actions, and permitting long-term
              organizational learning.    The research develops theory regarding the role of
              various antecedent factors on the degree of organizational improvisation and
              the role of a number of moderating factors on whether organizational
              improvisation translates into the above noted performance outcomes.  Analysis
              will involve careful collection of observational, self-report, and interview
              data on twenty new product development action phases (e.g., actions to fund the
              new product idea or actions to build and design a commercially relevant
              prototype) within product-development projects in four firms.  The study also
              provides an empirical analysis of specific learning subprocesses.  This type of
              work is fundamental to generate a solid empirical literature on organizational
              learning.
