Title       : Collaborative Research on Political Parties and Electoral Landscapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9410948

Award Number: 9410948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth W. Kollman kkollman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9410948  Kollman    This research projects concerns theories of electoral
              competition  between political parties competing for public office in 
              democracies.  Electoral politics are dynamic.  This research  examines the
              dynamic interactions between election rules, public  opinion, and the behavior
              of political parties.  A distinguishing  feature of the proposed research is
              that it employs computer  models to discover patterns of political party
              behavior over a  series of elections and across electoral institutions.  The 
              models in the project are advanced forms of computer simulations  that are new
              to the social sciences though they have been used  extensively in the natural
              sciences.  Among their advantages,  these models allow for flexibility and
              descriptive accuracy in  developing theories of political behavior.  The
              current research  will continue to develop theories of electoral competition 
              through the use of computers and mathematical modeling, and then  test these
              theories using survey data from the United States and  Europe.    The research
              consists of three parts.  The first part is the  computer modeling, which
              continues previous research of the  collaborative research team.  This research
              has already generated  explanations and predictions about the effects of
              electoral  institutions and public opinion on the behavior of political 
              parties, both in the way parties campaign for public office and  in the
              policies they enact once in office.  The second part of  the project involves
              using mathematics to substantiate the  findings from the computer model.  using
              both techniques, the  researchers have so far confirmed the validity of earlier
               computer findings and made several predictions of political party  behavior. 
              The third part uses survey data from election studies  in the United States and
              Europe to test the predictions generated  by the computer models.  One central
              theoretical finding from  their previous research has generally been supported
              by survey  data from the American Nat ional Election Study 1972-1988.  The 
              collaborators intend to undertake more research on real election  data as a
              portion of this research project.    The research has two main objectives. 
              First, to understand more  fully the way different democratic institutions
              create incentives  for political elites to change governmental policies to
              appeal to  voters.  Knowledge from this research may be helpful in the  design
              of constitutions for emerging democracies.  The second  objective is to extend
              the use of computer modeling in the social  sciences, and to establish
              computational standards for testing  social science models for completeness and
              accuracy.
