Title       : Selecting random peptides that interact with intracellular proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1994       
File        : a9410847

Award Number: 9410847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42287              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Brent   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9410847  Brent  This award is to facilitate an attemp to develop a method for
              selection of peptides which bind to a given target protein.  The method
              involves displaying a collection of  random, 20 amino acid peptides as part of
              a fusion protein with thioredoxin.  The peptides are inserted into an internal
              region of this protein such that they presumably will be displayed on the
              surface of the protein in a conformation determined by their amino acid
              sequence and fixed by the tether to the protein.  This library will then be
              sampled by the two-hybrid screening technique in S. cerevisiae.  An appropriate
              "bait" construct will serve as a target for binding by one or more of the
              library members.  The goal is to develop a general method for identifying 
              peptide ligands to specific proteins.  If successful, the method will have
              broad applications as a potential mechanism for in vivo inhibition of the
              activity of any target protein.  %%%  The award will be used to test the
              possibility that a system using protein-protein interactions in yeast can be
              applied to the identification of random, synthetic peptides that can bind to a
              specific target protein in any cell type.  If the system works, it will be
              possible to identify peptides from a large, random collection which have very
              specific properties.  Peptides with specific binding properties have an
              extremely broad range of potential application in regulating the activities of
              their targets inside living cells.  These properties will be useful to
              biochemists studying mechanisms and properties of important proteins.  Further,
              the potential to apply the method for the development of clinically useful
              anti-viral and anti-bacterial agents has not escaped our notice.  ***
