Title       : Microeconomics of Political Economy and Policy Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9410190

Award Number: 9410190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156282             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Green   (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio Merlo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9278,GLCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9410190  Green       Recent developments in economic theory make it possible to 
              address a broad range of policy questions more satisfactorily  than in the
              past.  Such developments include models of  bargaining, optimal decisions and
              equilibrium under risk, and  optimal provision of incentives to individuals who
              possess  private information.  This project applies such models to two  issues:
               (1) how democratic institutions emerge and  (2) the relationship between
              gender, fertility, education, and  growth both at a theoretical and an
              empirical level.         Most of the countries with outstanding records of
              sustained  economic growth throughout most of the past several centuries are 
              the same countries that have had some sort of democratic system  throughout
              most of that period.  This project focuses on the  association between stable
              democratic government and sustained  economic growth in these nations.  This
              relationship is poorly  understood.  In fact, our scientific understanding of
              why  democratic systems emerge at all is still sketchy.  This project  extends
              and evaluates (in light of historical data) a new theory  by the investigators
              on how parliamentary governments emerge.   This theory emphasizes how
              parliamentary systems can emerge  initially as a rational response to the
              incentive problems of  rulers caused by private information.         The other
              part of the project examines the relationship  between women's status and
              economic development, with particular  emphasis on the role of fertility and
              education.  Several  economic models to date have examined education and
              fertility  choices and their importance for economic development.  However, 
              all of these models completely ignore gender by studying the  behavior of
              fictitious, genderless economic agents.  But  empirical evidence for a number
              of developing and developed  countries shows that women receive less education
              that men.  This  project develops a two-sex bargaining model of endogenous
              growth  and explores the relationship bet ween gender, fertility,  education,
              and growth both at a theoretical and an empirical  level.
