Title       : Evolution of Tetrodotoxin Sensitivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9410565

Award Number: 9410565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. V. Anderson paa@whitney.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9410565    Anderson    Animals such as sea anemones, jellyfish (Phylum Cnidaria)
               and flatworms (Phylum Platyhelminthes) are modern-day  representatives of
              organisms in which the nervous system, as  we know it, first evolved.  As such,
              they present us with a  window into the evolution of the early nervous system
              and of  the various molecules that enable nervous systems to  function as they
              do.  An evolutionary approach to  neurobiological questions has an added
              benefit inasmuch as  it is possible to identify groups of relatively closely 
              related animals that differ subtly in some aspect of their  neurobiology.  A
              case in point concerns the action of  tetrodotoxin (TTX) a toxin that blocks
              sodium channels  extremely specifically and with high affinity.  Tetrodotoxin 
              blocks sodium currents in flatworms and higher animals, but  is completely
              ineffective in jellyfish.  Thus one might ask,  what are the structural
              differences between the flatworm and  jellyfish sodium channels that account
              for this differential  sensitivity.  Armed with this information, it should be 
              relatively easy to identify the equivalent site on mammalian  sodium channels
              thereby enabling the development of new  classes of highly specific, and highly
              potent anesthetics  and channel blockers that target this hitherto unexploited 
              site on this very important class of proteins.    The overall aim of the
              proposed work is to take advantage of  this difference in the TTX sensitivity
              of flatworm and  cnidarian sodium channels to identify the requirements for 
              TTX binding to sodium channels.  In addition to using  molecular cloning
              techniques to determine the primary  structure of sodium channels from a sea
              anemone, and a  flatworm, the PI will use conventional lipid analysis and 
              protein biochemical techniques to determine the lipid  environment of the
              native sodium channels in these groups,  and the types of sugar moieties linked
              to these proteins.  The PI will compare these data with equivalent data 
              previously obtained from a jell yfish.
