Title       : Control of Neurohormone Release at Nerve Endings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9410834

Award Number: 9410834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward L. Stuenkel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The communication between nerve cells ultimately depends on  release of chemical
              messengers termed neurotransmitters from  one nerve cell and subsequent
              activation of another nerve  cell by the released neurotransmitter. 
              Neurotransmitters  are released from a specialized portions of a nerve cell 
              called nerve endings or nerve terminals.  The most important  initiator of
              neurotransmitter release at nerve terminals is  the concentration of free
              calcium within the terminal.  As a  consequence of their small size and of
              their being mixed  with glial cells and other nerve cell regions in intact 
              tissue, direct investigation of the basic secretory  mechanisms at nerve
              endings of vertebrates has been limited.  It is the purpose of this proposal to
              utilize a unique nerve  terminal preparations of vertebrates which overcomes
              the  above limitations to characterize the fundamental  relationships between
              calcium and induction of secretion of  the chemical messengers.  State of the
              art  electrophysiological and optical approaches which provide  high
              quantitative and high time resolution will be used in  the proposed studies. 
              Specific questions that will be  addressed include:  What are the qualities of
              the changes in  intracellular calcium that are most important for initiation 
              of secretion?  Which calcium entry pathways are most  important for induction
              of the secretory response?  Does  continued activation by electrical activity
              alter the  importance of these influx pathways?  In addition, a number  of
              specific proteins have recently been implicated in the  chain of events leading
              to secretion by biochemical  evidence.  To date, the specific functions of
              these proteins  have not been elucidated and is a specific aim of this 
              proposal.
