Title       : The Architecture of Functional Categories in American Sign Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9410562

Award Number: 9410562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol J. Neidle carol@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy Kegl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Neidle       Although some research on American Sign Language (ASL) syntax has 
              been done, the field still lacks consensus on even the most basic  questions
              regarding ASL phrase structure.  Many theoretical  controversies may, in fact,
              be a consequence of inadequate means for  written transcription and reporting
              of visual-gestural data.  This has  precluded both the replicability of results
              and accessibility of the  raw data for direct inspection by the scientific
              community.  The  representation of ASL signs using English-like glosses has 
              obliterated-and implicitly undervalued-extremely important manual and 
              non-manual information expressed through signing.  Glosses are  inconsistent
              and frequently ambiguous or misleading. Reliance on  glosses may well have
              given rise to incompatible and contradictory  theoretical claims found in the
              literature.       We will develop a prototype of a linguistically oriented 
              computerized multimedia database of ASL that allows simultaneous  access to raw
              video data and to representations of that data in  linguistically useful
              formats. It is our hope that our prototype will  lead to subsequent funding for
              the development of a large-scale sign  database, accessible through a server,
              via the Internet, to the ASL  research community.       We come to this task
              with a very specific research agenda: to  test and refine the hierarchical
              representation of functional  categories in ASL that has emerged from our
              recent studies focusing on  Agreement; grammatical relations; and Tense and
              Aspect.  We have  achieved sufficient understanding of the syntactic
              organization of ASL  to lay out the major components of its phrase structure,
              and to  identify what is needed to complete the picture.  To answer those 
              outstanding questions, we will investigate several constructions in  detail:
              the tag construction, rhetorical questions, and relative  clauses.  We intend
              to use standard methods of linguistic elicitation  and argumentation, supported
              by multimedia documentation of our da ta.        While the two parts of the
              project are different in nature, we  believe that significant progress in the
              understanding of ASL syntax  can only be achieved by syntactic analyses based
              on the kind of  rigorous attention to data that current technologies now make 
              possible.
