Title       : Heavy Metal Concentrations in Stream Sediments: Analyses of Local Variability
               and Hydraulic Controls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1994   
File        : a9410957

Award Number: 9410957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Andrew Marcus uesam@msu.oscs.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nazrul Khandaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9187,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9410957  MARCUS       Heavy metals are found within stream beds as the result of
               natural processes, but they also have been introduced through  human
              activities.  Concerns over the environmental damage and  risks associated with
              the dumping of radioactive and toxic  substances into streams has heightened
              public awareness of this  problem and of the need to better understand the
              distribution  patterns of heavy metals in stream beds and the dynamics through 
              which they are transported in order to avoid hazards and  facilitate clean-up
              operations.  This project will measure and  analyze the spatial and temporal
              variability of concentrations of  heavy metals in gravel and cobble deposits of
              a southern Montana  stream that passes through an area that was intensively
              mined  over the last century.  Measurements of copper, lead, arsenic,  zinc,
              and other metals will be taken in different parts of two  200-meter reaches of
              this stream over a two-year period, thereby  permitting analysis of seasonal
              variations.  Analyses will be  made of the form and origins of the metals, and
              spatial  statistical analyses will be undertaken to evaluate their  location
              patterns and associations with other factors.  A model  of hydraulic processes
              will be adapted and tested in order to  determine whether variability in metal
              concentrations can be  predicted as a function of sediment size, hydraulic
              conditions,  and characteristics of the minerals.       This project will yield
              new understandings with both  fundamental and practical implications.  The
              project will provide  valuable new insights into the locational patterns of
              heavy metal  concentrations in stream beds over time, and it will expand 
              knowledge of the processes through which metals are transported  and
              concentrated in stream deposits.  This knowledge will be of  immediate benefit
              to those people responsible for maintaining  water quality, especially those
              assigned to monitor and restore  streams that have excessive concentrations of
              heavy metals.
