Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Wavelets and their Applications to Neural Network Theory,
               Vision, and Image Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1994       
File        : a9410859

Award Number: 9410859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Kon mkon@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9410859    Kon       The investigator and his colleagues study wavelets and
              their  applications to neural network theory and processing of visual  images. 
               It has been shown recently that wavelets are useful as  activation functions
              in neural networks, permitting faster  adaptation to required tasks than do
              sigmoidal activation  functions, in common use up to now.  The success of
              wavelet  methods has already been impressively demonstrated in important 
              optimization problems using radial basis functions.  The work of  this project
              develops better theoretical underpinnings for the  construction of neural nets
              that learn efficiently, and studies  minimal complexities of neural nets that
              emulate "intelligent"  tasks, e.g., recognition of visual images.  The
              investigators  also  study the construction of wavelet-based algorithms for
              image  compression.  They examine the optimization of signal  compression, 
              aiming at an improved theoretical understanding of how such  signal 
              compression works from the standpoint of the mapping between  functions and
              their wavelet transforms.       Applications of the mathematics proposed here
              are closely  related to the creation of "intelligent" systems using neural 
              network technology.  This technology in many ways emulates the  operation of
              biological nervous systems.  The present work is  based on indications that the
              actions of biological neurons have  in some cases been too well emulated in
              artificial neural  systems.  It has been shown in the work of Girosi and Poggio
              and others  that  attaining desired behavior in neural networks can be better 
              achieved with networks that have "localized activation  functions,"  i.e., ones
              for which output eventually decreases with very large  inputs.  An additional
              issue related to effecting proper  input-output behavior using neural networks
              is knowledge of the  basic complexity of certain desired tasks, and how neural 
              networks  can best achieve this level of complexity.  Such tasks (e.g., the 
              visual recognition of object s) can already be performed by  biological neural
              networks, and have a complexity that can be  defined and studied in a
              relatively precise way, to determine how  complicated artificial neural
              networks need to be in order to  emulate the behaviors of the biological
              networks.  In addition,  the work on signal compression using wavelets has a
              two-fold  impact.  The first involves the improvement of techniques for 
              compression, e.g., storage of large quantities of video, audio or  other data
              on compact media (such as compact discs, hard disks,  or  random access
              memory).  The second is related to the fact that if  such data are compressed
              to smaller sizes, certain kinds of  information may be extracted from them more
              easily.  For example,  it is easier to find evidence of an irregular heartbeat
              (or  precursors to arhythmia) using a computer if the cardiological  data have
              been compressed in a way that allows them to be more  easily manipulated. 
              These and other applications have made the  data compression issues that are
              studied here an area with high  priority in mathematical signal processing.
