Title       : Development of Machine-Coded Event Data Techniques for the Analysis of Political
               Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1995     
File        : a9410023

Award Number: 9410023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70011              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. Schrodt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah J. Gerner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9410023  Schrodt      This project extends and demonstrates the use of software
              for the  automated coding of political event data.  Event data are  generated
              by coding news reports for specific types of political  interactions: 
              meetings, agreements, threats, military  engagements, etc.  These data can then
              be used to test hypotheses  about political behavior.  Historically, human
              coders created  event data.  Earlier work supported in part by the NSF's Data 
              Development in International Relations project demonstrated,  however, that
              machine coding is capable of assigning event data  codes to wire service
              reports of political events with a  reliability at least as great as that
              achieved by human coders.   The initial machine-coding system was tested by
              generating an 11-  year event data set based on Reuters news service reports
              for the  Middle East.  These data produced statistical results almost 
              indistinguishable from those produced from human-coded data.  The  data set and
              the machine-coding program have been available to  political science
              researchers for the past two years; the system  runs on conventional
              microcomputers.    The current project will extend this research in three ways.
                First, the project will develop an integrated data acquisition  and coding
              system to code event data in real time.  These data  will be made available on
              an Internet server for use by other  researchers.  This system will provide a
              significant improvement  over existing human-coded event data, which typically
              are not  available until years after events have occurred.   Second, the 
              project will enhance the machine coding program in several ways  that have been
              suggested by research experience with the program.   Finally, the project will
              use the machine-coded data to study two  cases of complex political behavior: 
              the Israeli-Palestinian  conflict and the ECOWAS international subsystem in
              West Africa.   These two cases are designed to demonstrate the use of the full 
              capabilities of machine coding, particula rly the facility for re-  coding
              texts to detect political activities that may have been  missed in the standard
              event coding systems.    In addition to developing techniques for event data
              analysis,  these studies will contribute to understanding the interactions 
              between the international and domestic political systems.
