Title       : A Redesign of the College Algebra Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1994     
File        : a9254117

Award Number: 9254117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221097             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda A. Kime kime@umbsky.cc.umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith A. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              A cross disciplinary team from the University of Massachusetts                 
              at Boston is developing a new approach to the introductory                     
              college algebra course.  This course has a large enrollment                    
              nationally, including a disproportionately large number of                     
              women and underrepresented minorities.  It is often the first                  
              and only mathematics course taken by many undergraduates,                      
              including prospective teachers. Rather than encouraging, it too                
              often serves to discourage students from pursuing paths that                   
              emphasize quantitative skills.  Thus it is a critical target                   
              for reform, identified by the National Research Council (NRC)                  
              as the linchpin of national mathematics education reform                       
              efforts.                                                                       
              This project will develop, implement, evaluate, and start                      
              dissemination of a new approach to introductory college                        
              algebra, designed to increase enthusiasm for and competence in                 
              quantitative reasoning.  It will cover approximately 80% of the                
              traditional material and fully prepare students for subsequent                 
              mathematics courses.  It will, however, approach the topics in                 
              a nontraditional way, with a particular focus on mathematical                  
              reasoning, problem solving, and communication, as recommended                  
              by the NRC and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.                
              The course is computer based and requires access to a                          
              spreadsheet and function graphing program.  The materials                      
              themselves are machine and software independent.  Students work                
              in small groups, using algebraic and technological tools to                    
              work on open-ended questions based on real world data and                      
              physical phenomena.  Half the course will be from a social                     
              science point of view, half from a "hard" science viewpoint,                   
              using topics in astronomy, physics, and the life sciences.                     
              Formative evaluation will be accomplished by using teams to                    
              simultaneously co-teach and develop the course, by student                     
              responses and writings, by tracking students through subsequent                
              placement tests and quantitative courses, and by feedback by                   
              outside reviewers.  An outside evaluator will provide a                        
              summative evaluation.                                                          
              UMass/Boston is an urban, commuter, comprehensive university                   
              with the highest percentage of minority students of any college                
              or university in New England.  Collaborating institutions are                  
              Roxbury Community College, an historically black college,                      
              Bridgewater State College, a suburban college with a large                     
              teacher preparation program, and Wentworth Institute of                        
              Technology, a private college that focuses on educating                        
              students for technical careers.                                                
              This project is designed to aid in the revitalization of                       
              undergraduate mathematics teaching by providing a successful                   
              national model for introductory algebra.
