Title       : Improving Introductory Biology Laboratories at Allegheny College Through the
               Development and Implementation of Computer-Based Modules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9254168

Award Number: 9254168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen G. Wurst   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald L. Mumme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Rankin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Goliber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ann M. Kleinschmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny College
	      520 North Main Street
	      Meadville, PA  16335    814/332-5380

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the overall problem of keeping students                 
              in the science pipeline.  The Biology Department faculty are                   
              providing computerized pre-laboratory exercises that involve                   
              students in the challenge and excitement of scientific                         
              investigation and discovery.  Specifically, our project                        
              addresses common "roadblocks" to learning faced by biology                     
              students, such as: the limitations of time and finances on the                 
              laboratory experience; a lack of understanding of the                          
              scientific process; a lack of analytical, critical thinking,                   
              and quantitative skills; differing cognitive styles; and a lack                
              of comfort with advanced technology.  Project objectives                       
              include: 1) Development and refinement of computer-based                       
              applications, such as experiment simulations, systems models,                  
              data collection and analysis tools, and visual image libraries                 
              of organisms, preparations and dissections; 2) Expanding the                   
              faculty's use of investigative laboratory activities; students                 
              will be expected to design experiments, execute them, analyze                  
              data collected, and draw conclusions and generate ideas for                    
              further investigations; and 3) Utilizing the talents and                       
              experience of advanced-level biology students to help faculty                  
              develop and test computer applications for introductory labs,                  
              and to work with underclassmen on their laboratory and                         
              independent investigations.                                                    
              Working with the College's Educational Computing Services, a                   
              group of six biology faculty, each of whom has release time,                   
              are developing 12 pre-laboratory computer modules.  They are                   
              using the multi-media, multi-tasking capacity of the NEXT                      
              computer workstation and the NeXTStep development environment                  
              to create lessons specifically designed to meet the needs of                   
              students in the three introductory biology courses.                            
              Advanced-level students are taking advantage of NeXTStep                       
              development workshops held on campus so that they can assist                   
              faculty in applications development.  They also assist the                     
              faculty in the labs.                                                           
              We plan to use formative and summative evaluation tools to                     
              assess the effectiveness of this project.  An Advisory Board                   
              comprised of biologists from other institutions will meet at                   
              least yearly to monitor the program to determine whether parts                 
              of the program ought to be redirected, replaced or augmented.                  
              A summative evaluation will be conducted by this Board and by                  
              the Allegheny faculty.  Final project results will be                          
              disseminated to the Advisory Board and to other colleagues                     
              nationwide.  In addition, Allegheny is planning a symposium to                 
              mark the opening of its Hall of Advanced Biology in 1993, and                  
              this project and other advances in the educational uses of                     
              computing technology will be featured.                                         
              This project will help our students to discover the excitement                 
              of science, and it will help Biology Departments at other                      
              colleges which use Unix-based workstations.  Colleges that do                  
              not use Unix-based workstations can emulate Allegheny's                        
              approach by identifying roadblocks to learning and addressing                  
              them through interactive computer lessons.
