Title       : The Innovative Use of Software in Introductory Computer Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9254013

Award Number: 9254013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Popyack JPopyack@MCS.Drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nira Herrmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              We propose the development of a new approach for teaching                      
              introduction to computing courses, tailored to the needs of                    
              students in different curricula.  This approach is based on the                
              following precepts:                                                            
                                                                                             
              1.  There is a strong need for students in all curricula to                    
              understand the concepts of programming a computer, particularly in             
              the sciences and engineering fields.                                           
                                                                                             
              2.  It may no longer be necessary for students in many majors to               
              know how to write programs in traditional block-structured                     
              languages (such as Pascal).                                                    
                                                                                             
              3.  There is a wealth of software in wide use today which allows               
              the user to write programs in specialized built-in macro languages.            
                                                                                             
              4.  Teaching programming concepts through the use of powerful,                 
              user-friendly software with programmable features allows the user              
              to write programs immediately which produce nontrivial results.                
              This provides stronger motivation to learn programming than                    
              traditional approaches.                                                        
              Moreover, the essential concepts of computer programming, (such as             
              variable, branching, iteration, etc.) can be readily illustrated               
              and implemented using the sophisticated features of a variety of               
              commonly available software packages, such as word processors,                 
              spreadsheets, and databases.  The main intention of our approach is            
              to teach programming concepts and techniques, not simply how to use            
              software.  Students will be exposed to the kinds of functionality              
              common to all languages, thus facilitating the learning of a                   
              general purpose language or new, innovative software they will need            
              for pursuing both their education and their careers in science,                
              engineering, or teaching.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This project will focus on two courses, a general introduction to              
              scientific and statistical programming for science majors and an               
              introductory programming course for computer science majors.  It               
              will focus on developing a set of modules to illustrate the                    
              programming concepts exhibited by various pieces of software in the            
              Drexel "bundle" which each freshman obtains. In addition to the                
              modules, examples and exercises will be created in the two subject             
              matter areas.
