Title       : A Creative Approach to Teaching Undergraduate Mechanics Emphasizing Development
               of Instructional Tools to Enhance Spatial Visualization and Inductive Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1993     
File        : a9254129

Award Number: 9254129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79999              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. M. Krousgrill krousgri@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil K. Bajaj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of the proposed project is the development of            
              a creative approach to the teaching of sophomore-level engineering             
              mechanics courses which stimulates the students' thinking beyond a             
              problem-solving level and helps students overcome fundamental                  
              deficiencies in their ability to conceptualize problems.  The                  
              stimuli is to be supplied by adding both visual and hands-on                   
              components to the teaching and learning experience, two components             
              which are known to be critical in the retention of learned                     
              material.  Specifically, there are three distinct, yet                         
              interrelated, components to this proposal:  development of                     
              graphical software emphasizing the visualization of relationships              
              such as load distribution is static systems and force/motion                   
              relationships in dynamical systems:  design and development of a               
              mechanics toolbox consisting of basic building block components for            
              individual experimentation by the students; and the development of             
              more sophisticated in-class experimental demonstrations emphasizing            
              the relations between qualitative and quantitative perspectives of             
              static and dynamical systems.  The immediate impact of these                   
              learning tools will be that students develop an improved physical              
              insight, engineering relevancy and spatial visualization of                    
              mechanics problems.  The long range impact of the usage of these               
              tools will be to help capture the interest of the students at an               
              early stage of their education thereby fostering an increased                  
              interest and enthusiasm in engineering.  In addition, the proposed             
              work will allow for exploration of problems from a perspective                 
              which encourages inductive learning, a learning style which is more            
              natural for the students than the traditional deductive style.                 
              Critical review and evaluation of the proposed work will be                    
              conducted through formative evaluations by participating students              
              and faculty, through a 2nd year evaluation workshop using external             
              reviewers, and through quasi-experimental testing of student                   
              performance and long-term retention.  Finally, deliverables from               
              this work will be in the form of graphical software from the                   
              visualization component, a working mechanics toolbox set and                   
              development of experimental in-class demonstrations.  These                    
              deliverables along with the pedological contributions of the                   
              research will be disseminated through technical publications, a                
              summer workshop during the third year and a videotape summary of               
              the project.
