Title       : A Two-Piece Program to Develop and Support a Nationwide Corps of Human and
               Molecular Genetics Resource Teachers at the Secondary Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9254626

Award Number: 9254626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lowell J. Bethel                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $854150             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Micklos micklos@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark V. Bloom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Willis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Project staff from the DNA Learning Center, Cold Spring                        
              Harbor Laboratory, NY plan to bring instruction in human and                   
              molecular genetics to 216 precollege advanced biology                          
              teachers in rural/non-urban areas of the western half of the                   
              U.S. and the upper Midwest regions.  Three 5-day DNA Science                   
              institutes (24 participants each) are to be held with 3                        
              follow-up workshops.  In addition, leadership and advanced                     
              training will be provided for a cadre of 72 "Human and                         
              Molecular Genetics Resource Teachers" throughout the United                    
              States who have already implemented model units on molecular                   
              genetics and have proven networking abilities.  This                           
              training will consist of a 27 day leadership institute at                      
              Cold Spring Harbor and three 3-day regional follow-up                          
              conferences associated with regional NABT or NSTA meetings.                    
              The proposal contains specific follow-up and evaluation                        
              programs, and includes provisions for participation by                         
              minority faculty.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This proposal is appropriate for teacher enhancement because                   
              it will select participants regionally for discipline-                         
              focused summer institutes utilizing new approaches and                         
              content (DNA and molecular genetics) to enhance the                            
              participants' current leadership component for teachers with                   
              more advanced backgrounds in the field.                                        
                                                                                             
              Non-NSF cost-sharing is approximately 35% of the amount                        
              requested from NSF.
