Title       : Alliance of Mentors For Physics Instruction: A Teacher Leadership Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9254454

Award Number: 9254454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1983774            (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Jewett   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Nanes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Alliance of Mentors for Physics Instruction: A Teacher                         
              Leadership Institute is a joint project of California State                    
              Polytechnic University, Pomona and California State                            
              University, Fullerton.  The project is designed to train 42                    
              experienced high school physics teachers with strong                           
              backgrounds in physics in content and leadership training in                   
              the seven-County Southern California metropolitan area and                     
              to develop and establish this group as an Alliance of                          
              mentors to be used as a resource for other teachers.  The                      
              focus of the content training will be modern physics concept                   
              enhancement along with directed studies in the incorporation                   
              of modern physics topics throughout the classical high                         
              school curriculum.  There will be three residential summer                     
              institutes, during which content enhancement will be                           
              performed with lecture presentations, laboratory                               
              experiences, computer technology training (using Interactive                   
              Physics, Physics Explorer and other software), guest                           
              presentations and problem solving sessions.  In addition to                    
              these activities, summer institutes will include leadership                    
              training, preparation and design of academic year workshops                    
              and development of strand activities described below.                          
                                                                                             
              Academic year activities will include professional                             
              development workshops offered through County Offices of                        
              Education, during which mentors will disseminate content and                   
              strategies to additional physic teachers.  These workshops                     
              will be of two types: 1) Modern Physics Workshops, designed                    
              for experienced physics teachers and aimed at passing on                       
              strategies for incorporating modern physics into the high                      
              school curriculum; and 2) Conceptual Physics Workshops,                        
              designed for junior high school teachers, new high school                      
              teachers and crossover teachers, and focused on building                       
              strength in fundamental concepts in physics.                                   
                                                                                             
              In addition, each mentor will be responsible for pursuing                      
              professional development activities in one of three                            
              "strands": 1) Elementary In-Service Strand, in which                           
              participants will work with the California Science                             
              Implementation Network (associated with the California State                   
              Systemic Initiative) in improving the abilities of                             
              elementary school teachers to teach physical science; 2)                       
              Research Strand, in which participants will establish and                      
              implement an educational research project at their local                       
              site; or 3) Scope, Sequence and Coordination In-Service                        
              Strand, in which participants will work with California                        
              Scope, Sequence and Coordination (SSC) representatives in                      
              assisting SSC teachers in their abilities to teach                             
              integrated science.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The mentors will attend Topical Conferences on three                           
              academic year Saturdays each year, at which research                           
              scientists will share information in morning presentations                     
              about applications of physics in the research world.  In                       
              addition, all high school physics teachers in Southern                         
              California will be invited to attend these Conferences.  In                    
              the afternoons of these days, the mentors will hold meetings                   
              designed to share information about workshop and strand                        
              activities and maintain networking relationships.  These                       
              networking relationships will be further enhanced through a                    
              link to CSUNET, an existing computer network that links the                    
              California State University campuses.                                          
                                                                                             
              The mentors' strand activities will form the basis of a                        
              thesis project.  After completing the three-year program,                      
              mentors in the Alliance will be eligible for a Master of                       
              Arts in Teaching Science degree, using their thesis project                    
              in conjunction withcontent enhancement from the summer                         
              institutes and a series of science education courses offered                   
              along with the summer institutes.                                              
                                                                                             
              The PI for the project is Dr. John Jewett of CSU-Pomona.                       
                                                                                             
              Cost-sharing equals 29% of the NSF award.
