Title       : Science Enrichment Education Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9254708

Award Number: 9254708
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger D. Mitchell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $471606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar Muniz-Torres   (Principal Investigator current)
              Pedro Velez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Osvaldo Cotte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yamil Quijano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Agenol Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  The goal of the three-year Science Education Enrichment                   
              Program is to provide 720 Puerto Ricans, six to fourteen years of              
              age, with exploratory learning opportunities to observe, judge, and            
              value scientific experiences.  The program will be administered by             
              the Agricultural Extension Service of the University of Puerto                 
              Rico.  The 4-H curriculum will be strengthened by incorporating                
              interactive learning in six science components:  Composting as a               
              Means to Conserve the Environment: The Role of Soil and Water in               
              Protecting Life; Food Discoveries: Starchy (Farinaceous)                       
              Vegetables:  From Field to Market; Getting to Know about Insects;              
              and Hurricanes and Earthquakes: Events Requiring Disaster                      
              Mitigation>  Extension Specialists in the subject matter and a                 
              research scientist from the Experiment Station will supervise                  
              groups of 10-20 children at 63 sites in sessions lasting from six              
              months to a year.  Trained volunteers and teen leaders will also               
              participate.  A distinguished group of external advisors will serve            
              on an Advisory Committee to provide recommendations on scientific              
              accuracy and future development.  Three implementation phases ate              
              planned.  In Phase I a draft of a unique Puerto Rican science                  
              curriculum model for the Extension Service will be prepared.  The              
              skills and knowledge of component directors will be enhanced                   
              through collaboration with local and mainland groups to leverage               
              resources for special training on exploratory approaches to                    
              learning science.  In Phase II the curriculum will be tested and               
              refined.  Resources will be mobilized for exploratory science                  
              activities.  A pilot session will be held for 80 youth.  During                
              Phase III all components will be operational>  Approximately 640               
              youth will participate in 58 science session.  A dissemination                 
              plan will allow for the curriculum materials to be distributed to              
              groups in Puerto Rico and the mainland. The current level of effort            
              will be continued and plans will be made for expansion to other                
              sites.  Institutional commitments to the development of this                   
              project include an in-kind contribution amounting to approximately             
              22 percent of the total project amount.  In addition to creating an            
              interest in science, the outcomes of the program will seek to build            
              self confidence in science exploration, promote critical thinking,             
              and develop knowledge in youth about career options in the                     
              agricultural sciences.
