Title       : Science and Language: A Transitional and Integrative Approach to the Learning of
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1993  
File        : a9254215

Award Number: 9254215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte A. Zalewsky czalewsky@carlow.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine O. Lees  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carlow College
	      3333 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133109    412/578-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to address the needs of                               
              African-American women who do poorly in science upon entering                  
              the academic world.  Students in the Program, which targets                    
              disadvantaged minority women in Pittsburgh, often find science                 
              courses a roadblock in their academic path and a place for                     
              failure. Despite a high level of motivation and eagerness to                   
              succeed in science, many students struggle with the combined                   
              effects of inadequate science study skills, years of separation                
              from secondary math and science courses, and a lack of                         
              confidence.  Yet these students have ability and the potential                 
              to pursue careers in science.  A specific objective of the                     
              project includes designing a "Science and Language" course that                
              1) examines science in a non-traditional way by integrating a                  
              4-credit science class with a 3-credit writing class so that                   
              students use writing as a tool to learn science and use science                
              as the content in developing writing skills; 2) facilitate                     
              students' transition between previous course work and their                    
              study of science; 3) maximize connections among science                        
              principles, real-life situations, and issues familiar to                       
              African-American women; 4) engage students in designing their                  
              own experiments; 5) engage students in collaborative teaching                  
              and peer tutoring experiences in which they learn as teachers                  
              of the content; and 6) creates a partnership between students                  
              and instructors that provides flexibility in designing                         
              approaches to learning.  The project's objectives are: 1) to                   
              design Biology Study Groups modeled after those of Uri Treisman                
              in math to further integrate the course's content and foster an                
              experience of an academic science community; 2) to design a                    
              "safety net" of tutorial support involving Carlow's Learning                   
              Center and Hill College's new Peer Tutoring Program, and 3) to                 
              collect data for evaluation.                                                   
              The planned Science and Language course begins by helping                      
              students eliminate barriers such as anxiety as they become                     
              conversant with science through reviewing a science-fiction                    
              film, analyzing a report on the state of Science Education in                  
              the U.S. and examining essays and texts related to science.  In                
              the writing class, students explore the investigative nature of                
              science, the human element of science, and science as language                 
              through reading and discussions, written summaries, outlines,                  
              abstracts, essays and lab reports.  On-going science classes                   
              and laboratories parallel the ongoing writing class.  The                      
              science half of the class requires student participation and                   
              student-designed experiments with de-emphasis on canned labs                   
              and instructor-dominated lectures.  Students study major themes                
              in Natural Science such as DNA and Heredity, Inter-dependence                  
              and Ecology, Diversity and Evolution.                                          
              Assessment and evaluation are given the highest priority in the                
              project. Activities include 1) monitoring the program as it is                 
              implemented with data collected regarding student attendance,                  
              participation, success of study groups, etc., and 2) assessment                
              of included taped interviews, student's before and after                       
              completion of the course to determine impact in the ares of                    
              self-esteem, reasoning ability, and academic performance.                      
              Additional data will be collected regarding demographic                        
              characteristics of the students (age, race, number of children,                
              etc. and academic background.                                                  
              Planned dissemination of results include local, regional, and                  
              national presentations and conferences; publications; and                      
              informal hosting of teachers of science at the College to                      
              observe the courses.  The Science and Language course is a                     
              proposed solution to reverse the failure of African-American                   
              adult women in introductory science.  It pulls together what is                
              known about how to teach science, how students best learn                      
              science and our own experiences in teaching it, with the goal                  
              of offering a multifaceted approach for success.  If this                      
              course "works" it opens the door to science for majors and non-                
              majors and can serve as a model for students failing in                        
              science.  The model itself can be easily adapted to other                      
              institutions and implemented without excessive cost or                         
              dependence on Federal funding.
