Title       : InTech National Dissemination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1994  
File        : a9254583

Award Number: 9254583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy A. Brown jbrown@miamisci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Museum of Science In
	      3280 South Miami Avenue
	      Miami, FL  331292832    305/854-4247

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              "Integrating Technology into the Elementary Mathematics and                    
              Science Curriculum (InTech)" is an inservice program for                       
              elementary teachers developed by the Miami Museum of Science                   
              through support by the Florida Department of Education.                        
              InTech trains teachers to train other teachers in the                          
              classroom use of microcomputers, probes, databases, CD-ROMs,                   
              videodiscs, and simulation software.  To date, two hundred                     
              teacher trainers from 27 Florida school districts have been                    
              trained using state funds.  Dr. Judy Chen, InTech project                      
              director, now plans to expand this training effort to a                        
              national audience.  Four of the US Department of Education's                   
              Regional Educational Research Labs (the NETWORK, North                         
              Central Lab, SERVE, and the Far West Lab) will act as                          
              dissemination agents using the recently established                            
              Inter-Lab National Science and Math Collaborative.  Dr. Chen                   
              will also develop one additional workshop module (on                           
              telecommunications), thereby extending the InTech training                     
              workshop to a full week.  Each Regional Lab will host one                      
              workshop for states in that region.  A total of 96 teacher                     
              trainers will be trained in teams of four (science                             
              supervisors, university faculty, district coordinators for                     
              technology, representatives of state education associations)                   
              from 24 states (six per region).  Each participant will be                     
              expected to conduct at least of nine days of training, and                     
              their employers must commit support for this inservice                         
              training in the application to the workshop.                                   
                                                                                             
              Relatively few elementary school teachers are comfortable                      
              with computers and computer-related instruction.  Therefore,                   
              the proposed training and dissemination effort will address                    
              a pressing need in elementary schools across the country.                      
              Creating a network of teacher-trainers will generate an                        
              ever-expanding pool of teachers capable of integrating                         
              technology into their classroom instruction.                                   
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing represents 62% of the NSF contribution.
