Title       : Using a Hypermedia System to Integrate 3-D Animations into an Introductory
               Biology Text
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1993     
File        : a9254263

Award Number: 9254263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carey R. Phillips cphillip@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              Students have a difficult time visualizing complex biological                  
              structures and understanding how the shapes of these structures                
              relate to their function.  This is especially true when a                      
              number of structures are spatially integrated in order to                      
              produce a single function or complex changes in shape are                      
              necessary to perform a function.                                               
              To address this problem, three-dimensional models of biological                
              structures are being animated and rendered onto video format.                  
              Text descriptions of the objects and events occurring within                   
              the animation are linked via a hypermedia system to provide                    
              additional information about these structures and events as                    
              requested by the student.  Various other forms of related                      
              information such as time lapse video, electron micrographs,                    
              serial sections etc., are also available to the student within                 
              the hypermedia framework.  During the grant period a three-                    
              dimensional model of a cell and its organelles is being                        
              created, and an animation of a journey around each organelle                   
              within the cell is being linked through a hypermedia system to                 
              a text description of each structure or event.  Also an                        
              animation depicting gametogenesis and fertilization is being                   
              produced and linked to text descriptions and other related                     
              media forms through a hypermedia system.  The animations and                   
              related media data bases are being used in teaching                            
              Introductory Biology and Developmental Biology.                                
              The ability of students to conceptualize and utilize the                       
              information presented by the animation/hypermedia format will                  
              be evaluated by comparison with student progress from previous                 
              years.  Students will also be examined on their ability to                     
              visualize the spatial relationships of cellular components as                  
              they relate to biological events.                                              
              The animations will be made available to other institutions by                 
              distributions on CD's and made compatible with available                       
              hypermedia systems.  The animations will also be used as                       
              demonstrations in local high school and middle school science                  
              classes.  The teachers of these classes will evaluate the use                  
              of this technology to interest and stimulate students in the                   
              secondary education system.  It is hoped that three-dimensional                
              animations will provide students with a much better view of the                
              structure and dynamic nature of biology.  It is also hoped that                
              the use of the additional information sources through the                      
              hypermedia will encourage students, of all ages, to ask                        
              questions and learn to investigate in a very non-threatening                   
              and personal environment.
