Title       : A Preparatory Course for Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1993   
File        : a9254186

Award Number: 9254186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki H. Allan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Veronica Kolesar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              The first course in computer science is overwhelmingly populated by            
              students from outside the discipline. A high dropout rate as well              
              as a low rate of successful completion of the course indicates a               
              need for a new approach. Poor retention in the following classes               
              and extremely low numbers of women and minorities point to the need            
              for better preparation. We propose a preparatory course to address             
              these concerns that would cover problem solving, some basic                    
              mathematics, and computer use.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Goals include: (1) Improve the success rate for incoming computer              
              science majors; (2) Serve as a "magnet" course to attract new                  
              majors; (3) Improve the problem solving skills and increase                    
              awareness of computer science as a discipline among the general                
              student population; (4) Give a more accurate introduction to                   
              computer science as a discipline; and 5) Attract women to computer             
              science.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The proposed class will give students a firm foundation in the                 
              mathematical and problem-solving skills needed for success in this             
              and subsequent classes, as well as give them a better understanding            
              of what computer science is, i.e., there is more to computer                   
              science than programming. By motivating learning through a                     
              "recreational" approach to the introduction of mathematical and                
              computer science concepts, the proposed class will attempt to make             
              learning "fun" and to minimize the typical frustrations                        
              encountered. The text "Mathematics: Problem Solving through                    
              Recreational Mathematics" by Averbach and Chein will be revised to             
              include computer science topics development of cooperative work                
              habits will he encouraged through the use of study groups. Proposed            
              laboratory exercises will allow students to apply the concepts                 
              presented and to investigate them more fully.
