Title       : Recreating Teaching Mathematics in the Elementary School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1996  
File        : a9254939

Award Number: 9254939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $859370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Wood   (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Lehman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet E. Warfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Cennamo  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9254939  Wood    The project focuses on teachers and the nature of teaching 
              mathematics in early elementary classrooms which are compatible  with current
              reform initiatives.  This project seeks to advance  previously funded NSF
              research projects that emphasized  primary-level children's mathematical
              learning in these classroom  environments to consider the teachers.  The
              project has 4  interwoven goals which interrelate research and development to 
              create realistic classroom video-based instructional materials for  beginning
              teacher professional development.  The first goals is to  analyze the nature of
              instruction in classrooms in which teachers  have been teaching in a manner
              compatible with reform initiatives  for the past 6 years.  The second goal is
              to analyze the process by  which teachers starting to teach in this manner
              change their  beliefs about mathematics and teaching as they learn about 
              children's mathematical thinking, and how this process is related  to and
              enhances their own understanding of the mathematics they  teach.  The third
              goal is to use the information acquired from the  research analyses to develop
              prototype video-based instructional  materials to deepen and enrich beginning
              teachers' content  knowledge by developing an understanding of the mathematics
              that  underlies children's conceptual development and forms the basis for 
              their solution strategies.  The fourth goal is to create prototypic 
              video-based instructional materials to aid beginning teachers in  creating
              images for classrooms in which the reform initiatives  characterized by problem
              solving and mathematical reasoning are  illustrated.  The investigation of the
              nature of teaching is  accomplished in collaboration with 20 experienced
              teachers  currently teaching in a reform-based instructional materials for 
              beginning teacher development both as a source for exemplary  examples of
              classroom teaching and as collaborators in the  selection and design of the
              classroom-based materials.  These  materials will th en be used in a university
              teacher preparation  program, evaluated and revised.  ***
