Title       : Gateway Labs for a Problem Solving Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1993   
File        : a9254252

Award Number: 9254252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83919              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg W. Scragg scragg@cs.geneseo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Geneseo
	      
	      Geneseo, NY  14454    716/245-5211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              We claim that short hands-on laboratories make text books                      
              obsolete for many purposes. This is particularly true for those                
              topics which are largely implementation-dependent or "how to"                  
              topics, or deal with purely representational aspects of                        
              material. This material is better presented in small                           
              interactive modules, which we call gateway labs. The name                      
              gateway was used in part because these labs share some of the                  
              properties of both open and closed labs: they are open because                 
              the student works independently, but the tasks comprise closed-                
              end introductions, which can be much shorter than either of the                
              two more common formats, open or closed labs. We claim students                
              should receive the bulk of their "how to" instruction through                  
              direct hands-on interaction with gateway labs. The lectures,                   
              the text, and the traditional labs can, thus, be devoted to the                
              more intellectual aspects of the course, such as problem                       
              solving. We believe gateways should be implemented as a                        
              coordinated set of as the principal means of instruction in the                
              use of specific software tools. Gateway labs will be assigned                  
              regularly and frequently, just as most courses currently employ                
              reading assignments. We expect roughly as many gateway labs as                 
              there are lectures. Thus, a full course will incorporate 30 to                 
              40 specific modules.  We presently incorporate several gateway                 
              labs in our primary course for non-majors, CSc 104: problem                    
              solving with computers, a problem-solving course, in which the                 
              actual use of computer tools is subordinate to the generalized                 
              problem-solving techniques. Although we focus on problem                       
              solving, students must still have experience in the use of                     
              specific tools. Such experience is best gained through                         
              laboratories, but we want to use our traditional-format labs                   
              for problem-solving experiences.
