Title       : A Slice of Life: An Introductory Biology Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9254280

Award Number: 9254280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane Ebert-May   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stan L. Lindstedt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jayshiro Tashiro  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We propose a project designed to increase the scientific literacy              
              of undergraduate non-majors at Northern Arizona University and                 
              community colleges in Arizona with predominantly ethnic minority               
              populations, Navajo Community College, Pima Community College, and             
              Cochise Community College.                                                     
              The project has four major foci:  (1) We intend to restructure an              
              introductory biology course for non-majors so that it enhances                 
              students' scientific literacy and their understanding of                       
              multidisciplinary approaches to real-world problems.  The                      
              laboratory component for the course will provide students the                  
              opportunity to do inquiry-based and research-oriented science.  (2)            
              We would effect systemic change at NAU and the three community                 
              colleges by developing and implementing professional development               
              seminars and practical workshops for graduate teaching assistants              
              and faculty.  These workshops would explore new approaches to                  
              developing relevant and substantive curricular frameworks for                  
              introductory biology for non-majors.  3) We would test the                     
              restructuring of introductory biology through an experimental                  
              design that will enable us to  determine what is the most effective            
              design for two kinds of academic communities, state comprehensive              
              university and a sample of community colleges in Arizona.  4) We               
              would follow faculty and their students in a longitudinal study of             
              the course's impacts.  Our project -- A Slice of Life: An                      
              Introductory Biology Course -- represents an experimental approach             
              to curriculum development that will determine "what works" in non-             
              majors biology courses.
