Title       : Genetic History of East Asia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0213857

Award Number: 0213857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Li Jin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              East Asia marks one of the key areas for understanding the origin and
              prehistoric migrations of modern humans. In particular, the relative continuity
              of hominid fossils found in China has challenged the well-known "Out of Africa"
              hypothesis which states that the modern humans originated only once in Africa,
              subsequently migrated out of Africa and replaced all the archaic forms of human
              in the rest part of the world. The aforementioned observation suggests an
              independent origin of modern humans in East Asia and it contradicts the results
              obtained from genetic studies. Unfortunately, no systematic genetic study has
              been conducted to describe the spectrum of genetic diversity in East Asian
              populations. This project aims to describe the genetic profile of East Asian
              populations, to trace the ancient migratory routes in East Asia, and to study
              the origin of modern humans in this region by analyzing a battery of mtDNA, Y
              chromosomal, and autosomal markers. This project will evaluate the genetic
              diversity of a group of linguistically and geographically diverse but
              ethnically defined populations in East Asia using a set of mtDNA, Y
              chromosomal, and autosomal polymorphisms. It will investigate the prehistoric
              migrations of modern humans in this area and study the genesis of the
              significant genetic differences between northern and southern Mongoloids using
              both Y and mtDNA haplotypes. Then, it will examine the competing hypotheses of
              origin of anatomically modern humans in East Asia. Finally, it will
              characterize the relationship between linguistically versus geographically
              affiliated populations, and study the origin and dispersal of major language
              families in East Asia.
