Title       : Photochemistry of Sulfoxides and Analogs: The Hunt for Oxene, Nitrenes, and
               Carbenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0213375

Award Number: 0213375
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Jenks wsjenks@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes experimental work involving photochemically initiated
              deoxygenation, alpha-cleavage and stereomutation of sulfoxides as well as the
              potential photogeneration of nitrenes and carbenes from sulfilimines and
              sulfonium ylides.  A collaboration with Miguel Garcia-Garibay at UCLA will be
              used to investigate the possible involvement of heavy atom tunneling in the
              photoinduced oxygen atom transfer experiments.  Irradiation of sulfoxides
              generates extremely reactive oxidizing agents and the Jenks group will be
              determining whether these oxidations occur by oxygen atom transfer or
              generation of oxygen atoms followed by their reaction with the molecules which
              are oxidized.  Similar irradiations of sufilimines and sulfonium ylides should
              also provide organic chemists with access to other reactive intermediates such
              as nitrenes and carbenes.  

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. William S. Jenks of the
              Department of Chemistry at Iowa State University.  Dr. Jenks and his
              collaborator will work on understanding the mechanisms of photochemically
              initiated oxidation reactions and other photochemical reactions which generate
              reactive intermediates.  Oxidation reactions are some of the most ubiquitous
              reactions in nature and oxygen atom transfer reactions occur widely in plants
              and animals and are used in the synthesis of speciality chemicals.  Research
              students who work on this project will gain interdisciplinary training in
              aspects of synthesis and theoretical organic chemistry, both of which are
              skills needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals industries. 
