Title       : The Allosteric and Chemical Mechanism of Methylglyoxal Synthase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0213347

Award Number: 0213347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441448             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Harrison harrison@eeyore.biochem.mcw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Medical Col of Wisconsin
	      8701 Watertown Plank Road
	      Milwaukee, WI  532263548    414/257-8296

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The allosteric regulation of enzyme activity is one of the most direct
              mechanisms for a cell to respond to fluctuations in its environment.  While the
              allosteric properties and mechanism of a number of enzymes have been studied in
              great detail, there is relatively little known about the solution dynamics of
              these systems.  E. coli methylglyoxal synthase, an allosterically regulated
              homohexameric enzyme, will be used to understand the role of protein dynamics
              in the allosteric regulation of a multisubunit enzyme.  The 1H-15N backbone
              amide NMR resonances will be assigned using TROSY pulse-sequence technology,
              and the dynamics of each resonance will be measured on the picosecond to
              millisecond timescale in both the T-state and the R-state.  Isothermal
              microcalorimetry will be used to determine the heat associated with the
              conformational change and to independently determine if a pre-existing
              equilibrium exists between the two allosteric conformations.   

In a
              reaction reminiscent of that catalyzed by triosephosphate isomerase, MGS
              catalyzes the elimination of phosphate from dihydroxyacetone phosphate to form
              the enol of methylglyoxal via an enediolic intermediate.  Both the mechanism of
              proton transfer from oxygen to oxygen and the mechanism of phosphoryl
              elimination will be studied by a combination of site directed mutagenesis,
              mechanistic enzymology, computational analyses, and X-ray crystallography.  The
              extent and importance of phosphoryl polarization to catalysis will be
              determined both by examining the structure of methylglyoxal synthase complexes
              of novel sulfur analogues of known inhibitors and by the kinetics of
              corresponding sulfur analogues of the substrate, dihydroxyacetone phosphate. 
              The catalytic surfaces of methylglyoxal synthase and triosephosphate isomerase
              will be compared to understand how each enzyme controls its corresponding
              reaction pathway. 
