Title       : Data Management in International Relations: Expanding the EUGene Software
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0213727

Award Number: 0213727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Scott Bennett sbennett@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EUGene is a software program that scholars use to build quantitative data sets
              in order to analyze international conflict.  The software routinizes a set of
              data preparation tasks that are cumbersome and difficult, merging data from
              input data sets with differing formats into output data sets according to
              easily specified user choices.  EUGene also generates data for variables
              concerned with an important expected utility theory of conflict initiation and
              escalation.  EUGene was initially developed under a prior National Science
              Foundation grant and released publicly in 1998.   It was expanded, with other
              additions made without NSF funding.  EUGene is available for free download to
              the research community from http://www.eugenesoftware.org.

The current
              project further develops the EUGene software.  To this point, key analyses have
              been accomplished using the expected utility data generated by EUGene;
              continued program development will remain focused on expanding the program's
              data management  aspects.  In this next phase, the Principal Investigator adds
              additional user data sets to the program and deals with problematic user data,
              adds another unit of analysis to create datasets to better analyze processes of
              dispute escalation and conflict joining behavior, adds additional conflict
              data, tracks data sets for easier replication, makes additional alliance data
              available, and implements various other small improvements.  Other expansion
              items may be added over the next two years in response to user requests. 
              Continued development of EUGene provides the community of quantitative
              international relations researchers with a tool that facilitates new research
              and expands ongoing research agendas.




