Title       : Oxidesulfurization (ODS) of Petroleum Sulfur Compounds for Simultaneous
               Reduction of Sulfur Emissions and Production of Valuable Chemicals:A Novel
               Environmentally Benign Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0213377

Award Number: 0213377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Israel E. Wachs iew0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to explore the vapor-phase oxidesulfurization
              (ODS) of various organosulfur compounds found in petroleum feedstocks and to
              upgrade those compounds to valuable chemical products.  Simultaneously, a basic
              understanding of ODS catalysis will be investigated.  Preliminary studies have
              revealed that such organosulfur compounds can be selectively oxidized to
              valuable chemical intermediates (e.g., phenol, maleic anhydride, and
              formaldehyde). The objectives of the fundamental scientific ODS studies are to
              determine the: (1) molecular nature of the active surface sites present in
              model supported metal oxide catalysts, (2) number of surface sites required for
              the various reactions, (3) role of surface redox, acidic and basic sites, (4)
              role of the specific oxide support (ligand effect),  (5) fundamental kinetics
              and mechanisms and (6) molecular structure-reactivity/ selectivity
              relationships for ODS. 

In terms of broader impacts, the advantages offered
              by an ODS process are: (1) the use of free oxygen, rather than expensive
              hydrogen, (2) eliminates the need for costly reactor units for methane steam
              reforming, water-gas shift and Claus reactions, (3) production of significantly
              lower amounts of global warming carbon dioxide due to the minor unselective
              oxidation reaction pathways, (4) direct production of sulfuric acid that can be
              used in the alkylation processes in the petroleum refinery and (5) a supply of
              relatively inexpensive sulfur-containing feedstocks for the production of
              valuable chemical intermediates. The educational aspect will be the mentoring
              of graduate and undergraduate students.  Thus, an ODS process to remove sulfur
              from fuels is a potentially attractive pollution control strategy. It is
              environmentally benign with low emissions.

