Title       : Sales, Consumer Inventory and Non-Linear Prices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0213976

Award Number: 0213976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igal Hendel igal@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The distinctive feature of storable goods is that they can be purchased for
              inventory.  Consumers can stockpile during sales. Numerous products like
              groceries, and intermediate goods are storable. The goal of this project is to
              develop a tractable model for demand estimation that handles inventories, as
              well as multiple brand purchases, and purchases of different quantities
              (sizes).

We propose a three-step estimation procedure. The first step,
              consist of maximizing the likelihood of the observed brand choice conditional
              on the size (quantity) bought in order to recover those parameters that do not
              directly affect the dynamic behavior. As shown, we do not need to solve the
              dynamic programming problem to recover them. We estimate a discrete choice
              model, restricting the choice set to available options of the same size
              (quantity) actually bought in each period. In the second step, using the
              estimates from the first stage, we compute the "inclusive values" for each size
              (quantity), namely, the expected utility to the consumer from purchasing each
              container size. The inclusive values aggregate all the relevant information
              about a size into a scalar. Finally, we apply the standard nested algorithm for
              dynamic estimation to the simplified dynamic problem to estimate the rest of
              the parameters by maximizing the likelihood of the observed sequence of sizes
              (quantities) purchased. The advantage of the framework is that breaks the
              estimation into three steps.  Estimates from the first two stages help
              substantially reduce the computational burden of the latter. The dynamic
              programming problem is solved only in the third stage.
Intuitively, the model
              enables the decomposition of the individual choices into two different
              components that can be separately identified. First, at any specific point in
              time, when the consumer purchases a product of a given size, we can estimate
              her preferences for the different brands. Second, we can estimate the key
              parameters that determine the dynamic (storing) behavior of the consumer by
              looking at a simplified version of the problem. The simplified problem treats
              each size of purchase as a single choice whose expected utility (appeal) is
              determined by the inclusive values (estimated in the first stage).
There are
              several reasons why we care about sales and demand for storable goods. First,
              when a good is storable, there is a distinction between the short run and long
              run reaction to price changes. This distinction has implications for demand
              estimation. We study how market demand should be treated and how short run and
              long run price responses can be distinguished.  The distinction is important
              for any study that relies on demand estimation, be it merger analysis,
              computation of welfare gains from new goods, or building price indices.
              Conclusions based on estimates that disregard demand dynamics are likely to be
              misleading. Second, the rich scanner data on storable products presents an
              interesting opportunity to study whether household behavior fits a model with
              dynamic forward-looking behavior. Third, understanding demand allows us to
              study sellers' incentives to intertemporally price discriminate. The estimates
              will help identify the key factors to be considered in modeling sellers'
              behavior.


