Title       : Investigation of the Crustacean Molt-Inhibiting Hormone Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0213047

Award Number: 0213047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319390             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Douglas Watson rdwatson@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A long-range goal of the research is to understand the mechanisms by which
              hormones control growth and development in crustaceans.  The crustacean
              carapace (exoskeleton) restricts growth.  Therefore, as crustaceans grow and
              develop the exoskeleton is periodically shed (molted) and replaced by a new and
              larger version.  These cycles of growth and molting, and associated
              developmental processes including regeneration, are controlled by the
              crustacean endocrine system.  The cellular events that lead to molting are
              stimulated by steroid hormones termed ecdysteroids.  Ecdysteroids are secreted
              by paired endocrine glands, the Y-organs.  The production of ecdysteroids by
              Y-organs is negatively regulated (inhibited) by a peptide hormone,
              molt-inhibiting hormone (MIH), produced by neurosecretory cells in the
              eyestalks.  Thus, it is hypothesized that MIH inhibits Y-organs during much of
              the molting cycle, and that a molting sequence is initiated when MIH secretion
              diminishes.  Recent progress has been made in understanding the structure of
              the MIH peptide and gene.  Progress has likewise been made in understanding
              cell signaling pathways in Y-organs.  However, a major gap in current
              understanding of the regulation of crustacean molting is lack of information on
              the MIH receptor.  It is hypothesized that the effect of MIH on Y-organs is
              mediated by a cell surface receptor, but the MIH receptor has not been isolated
              or thoroughly characterized for any crustacean species.  The specific aims of
              the current research are to (1) isolate a cDNA encoding the MIH receptor of the
              blue crab (Callinectes sapidus), (2) determine the tissue distribution of MIH
              receptor mRNA, (3) determine whether there occur changes in the level of
              receptor mRNA during a molt cycle, and (4) begin characterizing the native MIH
              receptor in Y-organ cell membranes.  The aims will be achieved using methods of
              modern cellular and molecular biology and biochemistry, including recombinant
              DNA technology, nucleic acid blotting and hybridization, and protein
              cross-linking.  The research will answer fundamental questions about the
              neuroendocrine regulation of growth and development in this abundant and
              economically important group of animals.  In addition, study of the crustacean
              model system may provide conceptual insights into general questions about the
              regulation of steroidogenesis and the structure and function of neurosecretory
              cells.  Finally, it is anticipated that the research will provide information
              that will enable development of methods for specifically manipulating growth
              and molting in crustaceans, a benefit to fisheries managers, the aquaculture
              industry, and consumers of shellfish.
