Title       : Developmental Control and Significance of knotted1 Intercellular Trafficking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0213025

Award Number: 0213025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Jackson jacksond@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The development of a multicellular organism requires careful regulation of
              protein activity and localization. As genome projects are beginning to reveal
              the complement of genes required to build a plant, scientists now face the
              complex issue of where and when genes are expressed and where proteins are
              localized.  Imposed on this complexity is the fact that specific plant gene
              products traffic between cells through specialized channels called
              plasmodesmata, so their final location may be distant from the cell where they
              are made. Specifically, some developmental transcription factors are known to
              traffic between cells, though little is known of the developmental significance
              and regulation of this process. This project aims to understand the
              developmental regulation of cell to cell trafficking of plant proteins, using
              the KNOTTED1 (KN1) gene as a model system. Dominant Kn1 mutants have
              non-autonomous effects on cell fate in the maize leaf, and using microinjection
              assays it was shown that KN1 protein and mRNA can traffic between leaf cells,
              through plasmodesmata.  These assays were constrained by the type of tissue
              that could be targeted, limiting the ability to ask developmentally relevant
              questions pertaining to the role of KN1 trafficking in its function for stem
              cell maintenance. Protein fusions of KN1 to the green fluorescent protein were
              therefore developed and used to visualize trafficking in vivo in intact plant
              tissues. In the future research, these studies will be extended to ask
              significant questions about control of plasmodesmal trafficking in the
              meristem.  Specifically, the size exclusion limit of plasmodesmata in the
              meristem will be estimated, and the experiments will test if symplasmic domains
              for protein transport exist. Trafficking signal sequences in KN1 will also be
              localized.  The study will contribute to the understanding of cell to cell
              communication in plants.  It will also increase basic knowledge of
              plasmodesmata, which are poorly characterized at the molecular level. 
              Plasmodesmata are important for the allocation of photosynthetic products, for
              plant morphogenesis and for defense against pathogens. Therefore these studies
              of protein trafficking could have significant implications for improving
              agricultural productivity.



