Title       : RUI: Collaborative Proposal: Visible and Near-Infrared Electronic Spectroscopy
               of Metal-Containing Diatomic Radicals by Intracavity Laser Absorption
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0213356

Award Number: 0213356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156901             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. O'Brien obrien@jinx.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this collaborative research project, funded by the Experimental Physical
              Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, O'Brien will conduct research on
              the electronic spectroscopy of metal containing diatomic radicals CuO, NiH,
              NiCl, and NiF.  The goal of the work is to provide new or improved molecular
              constants for a series of electronic states and to construct the energy level
              scheme and potential curves of these species.  These species are characterized
              by their open shell structure, which give rise to a host of interactions
              between nuclear, electronic, vibrational, and rotational degrees of freedom. 
              Besides being of intrinsic interest, the results of this research will also
              have bearing on other fields such as astrophysics.  Experimental techniques are
              based on intracavity laser absorption spectroscopy, the equipment for which is
              located at the University of Missouri at Saint Louis.  This research will be
              conducted with undergraduate and MS level graduate students who will receive
              knowledge and training in the techniques of contemporary experimental and
              theoretical spectroscopy.

This project consists of a collaboration between
              researchers at a primarily undergraduate institution and a major research
              university.  The research program is designed to provide new information about
              the energies of a set of metal containing diatomic molecules, the results of
              which will be useful to other fields such as astrophysics.  The project
              provides training in research to undergraduate and intermediate level graduate
              students in advanced contemporary techniques of laser spectroscopy.  The
              project also contains an outreach program that will allow gifted high school
              students to participate in the research.  

