Title       : Computational Studies of Liquid Water, Ice, the Ice/Water Interface and Protein
               Hydration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0213488

Award Number: 0213488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Rick srick@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
              the Chemistry Division and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
              Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Steven Rick of the University of New
              Orleans will study water interactions using computer simulation techniques.  As
              part of this project Rick and his co-workers will use polarizable molecular
              mechanics force fields (TIP4P-FQ models) to simulate the melting behavior of
              water, the ice-water interface, and water in the interior of protein
              structures.  The results will be used to compare, improve, and develop new
              methods and intermolecular potentials.  

Despite the fact that water is a
              key element of many computer simulations of biological systems, most potentials
              used for water are flawed.  Information obtained in this project can be used to
              improve such potentials.  The results of this work are potentially very
              important in a wide variety of applications, such as to biological systems,
              cryobiology, extra-terrestrial environments, and crystallization processes for
              pharmaceuticals.  Furthermore, what can be learned about water can be applied
              to other systems that are less well characterized.  In the course of this work
              Rick will provide a meaningful research experience for minority students from a
              four-year historically black, primarily undergraduate institution at which he
              has a joint appointment.

