Title       : Stereochemistry of Nanoscale Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0213323

Award Number: 0213323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay S. Siegel jss@chem.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Jay S. Siegel, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Calfornia,
              San Diego, is studying the stereochemistry of nanoscale molecules. Professor
              Siegel is carrying out the synthesis of molecules representing unusual
              topological stereoisomers, including chiral catenanes, enantiopure D3 trefoil
              knots, and Borromean links. As these molecules are prepared, properties arising
              from their unusual structures, including highly efficient fluorescence
              emission, are studied. The synthesis of bowl-shaped polycyclic aromatic
              hydrocarbons similar to corranulene and the dynamics of their bowl-to-bowl
              inversion are also under investigation. Chiral derivatives of these structures
              will be prepared and their chiroptical and molecular recognition properties,
              including affinities for ions, gases, and polar molecules, will be studied.
              Liquid crystalline and dendrimeric corranulene-based structures will also be
              prepared.

Molecular design, coupled with chemical synthesis, offers the best
              approach to the development of truly new molecular materials. Nanoscale
              molecules represent a relatively unexplored family of synthetically designed
              chemical structures, intermediate between classical natural products and
              biomolecules and polymers. Design principles for this area are still in their
              infancy, and the three-dimensional structures (stereochemistry) of these
              compounds remain fascinating. Professor Jay S. Siegel, of the Department of
              Chemistry at the University of California at San Diego, applies experimental,
              theoretical, and computational techniques to the synthesis and stereochemical
              elucidation of nanoscale molecules representing a variety of classical
              stereochemistries which are unrepresented by synthetic organic chemical
              systems, including trefoil knots and Borromean links.
