Title       : Heterochromatic Loci and Position Effects in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0213163

Award Number: 0213163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara T. Wakimoto wakimoto@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The chromosomes of most higher organisms show two cytologically distinct domains
              known as euchromatin and heterochromatin. These domains differ in biases in DNA
              sequence composition and chromosomal protein distributions along the length of
              the chromosome.  They also differ in gene expression, as first revealed by
              studies of chromosome rearrangements in Drosophila.  Rearrangements that create
              novel junctions between euchromatin and heterochromatin result in the mosaic
              inactivation of genes near the breakpoint, a phenomenon known as Position
              Effect Variegation (PEV).  The most popular models of PEV propose that it
              results from the invasion of one chromatin state into the other across the
              rearrangement breakpoint.  These models view heterochromatin as a highly
              condensed chromatin state that represses gene expression. 

This project is
              aimed at critically evaluating existing models of heterochromatin to account
              for its activating influence on transcription of heterochromatic sequences. 
              The studies will focus on a block of heterochromatin located on the left arm of
              Chromosome 2 (2Lh) of Drosophila melanogaster.  The transcription of specific
              2Lh sequences will be examined in individual flies with structurally normal
              chromosomes and in mutant strains carrying chromosome rearrangements that
              induce PEV on heterochromatic genes.  Studies of transcription will involve
              comparing promoters of the 2Lh genes to determine if they differ in structure
              from euchromatic gene promoters.  The effects on 2Lh transcription of reducing
              the nuclear concentrations of three proteins, HP1, ORC, and HOAP, which modify
              and bind heterochromatin, will be assayed genetically and molecularly.  The
              chromatin immunoprecipitation technique will be used to determine if these
              proteins associate directly, as a complex or individually, with 2Lh sequences
              in vivo.  These studies should identify cis- and trans-regulators of
              heterochromatin.  The findings should  help reveal the molecular determinants
              of heterochromatin and the role of its binding proteins in activating
              transcription.  

In her position as Director of Biology Programs at the
              University of Washington, the PI helps guide the education of all undergraduate
              biology students there.  Each year in her own laboratory she typically mentors
              several undergraduates carrying out research projects.

