Title       : Collaborative Research:Modeling Issues with Time-Series--Cross-Section Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0213549

Award Number: 0213549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111835             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan N. Katz jkatz@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Time-Series-cross-section (TSCS) models have become popular in political
              science, since they allow students of comparative politics (broadly defined) to
              use powerful statistical methods that have been the province of students of
              American politics (typically studying voting behavior via large surveys). 
              While there are many applications, the prototypical application is the study of
              political economy, and in particular the impact of political arrangements on
              economic performance in advanced industrial societies.  TSCS data has also
              become of interest in International Relations (IR).  Many quantitative IR
              researchers use a "dyad-year" design, where pairs of nations are observed
              annually for long periods of time (ranging from 40 to over 100 years).  The
              dependent variable of interest in these studies is often the binary indicator
              of whether a dyad was in conflict in a given year.  Binary dependent variables
              cause special problems.

Most studies either ignored TSCS issues or treated
              those issues as a nuisance, using a Feasible Generalized Least Squares (FGLS)
              estimation method to treat those nuisances.  These FGLS procedures either have
              poor statistical properties (in finite samples) or seem dangerous on other
              grounds.  One reason that TSCS data is of interest is that the richness of the
              data allows researchers to do many things; but many of those things should not
              be done.

 By now most political science scholarly publications appear to use
              the methodology developed by the researchers in earlier research where they
              recommended the use of Ordinary Least Squares estimates coupled with panel
              correct standard errors, with dynamics modeled via a lagged dependent variable.
               However, this still treats TSCS issues as problems of estimation and not
              specification.   The researchers will develop the next generation TSCS
              methodology that focuses on specification.  They are interested in studying the
              best way to model unit heterogeneity directly as well as to account for spatial
              correlation that is typically seen in these data.  In addition, for binary TSCS
              data they explore how best to model temporal dynamics.

The research entails
              developing appropriate estimators and testing them on both actual and simulated
              data.  In addition, the investigators develop practical advice and software for
              the applied researcher using TSCS data that implements this methodology.  In
              addition to developing the next generation TSCS methodology they gather and
              catalog a set of reference datasets for use in evaluating TSCS models.  By
              developing a reference set of datasets that will be made freely available, the
              researchers will make it easier to evaluate future proposed estimators for TSCS
              data in political science and therefore improve the field of political
              methodology.

