Title       : Vertebrate Ranging Scale and Tree Dynamics in a Congo Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0213001

Award Number: 0213001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Walsh pwalsh@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wildlife Conservation Soc
	      2300 Southern Boulevard
	      Bronx, NY  104601099    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1182,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
A central question in community ecology is how species diversity will
              typically respond to
the removal of a one or a few species. Are species highly
              redundant so that the loss of one species
is easily compensated for by other,
              functionally equivalent species? Or, do species tend to play
unique functional
              roles so that the loss of one species can propagate out to cause a
              catastrophic
loss of diversity. These questions assume ever greater practical
              importance as the global wave of
extinctions accelerates. And, although some
              progress has been made in simple model systems, we
still have a vague
              understanding of more complex communities with dynamics that evolve over
large
              temporal and spatial scales. It is not clear whether anthropogenically induced
              extinction of
individual species will generally cascade across these
              communities. Most notably, we have little
ability to predict how the mounting
              loss of the largest mammals to hunting is likely to affect
diversity in
              tropical forests, which are home to a large proportion of the world's
              species.
The primary focus of this study will be the collection of empirical
              data linking the ranging
behavior of terrestrial mammals to tree species
              diversity in a Congo forest. The study site typifies
tropical forests
              worldwide in that its  mammals act both as seed dispersers for a species rich
              guild
of spatially rare trees and seed predators of a species poor guild of
              spatially aggregated trees.
Even though mammals of many body sizes disperse
              and predate the same tree species, they may
not be functionally redundant
              because mammalian body size is highly correlated with ranging
scale. Thus,
              large mammals are particularly mobile seed predators that are drawn to dense
              stands
of the species poor guild from great distances. Large mammals also tend
              to disperse seeds over a
great area, which provides a number of benefits to
              mutualists in the species rich tree guild,
including escape from predators &
              pathogens. Consequently, local extinction of large mammals
may well tip the
              competitive balance between guilds, triggering a loss of diversity in the
              species
rich tree guild that propagates out through a myriad of dependent
              plants and animals, including
smaller mammalian seed dispersers.
This project
              will include both animal and vegetation studies and use a combination of
              ground
and remote sensing methods. Aerial video and satellite imagery at
              several resolutions will be used
to develop detailed maps of the distribution
              of the two tree guilds over a large scale. Line transect
methods will then be
              used to quantify how the spatial grain of mixing between the two tree
              guilds
influences both fruit availability and the spatial distribution of
              mammals varying in body size
from mice to elephants. Trapping studies on
              rodents, the first GPS telemetry study on several
duiker species, and the
              first telemetry study of any kind on red river hogs will quantify how
              body
size influences the spatio-temporal pattern of fruit availability within
              an animal's home range.
And an attempt will be made to identify a set of
              individual tree species using high-resolution
digital photography and aerial
              videography. If this proves successful, it will allow the first large-
scale
              scale study of tropical tree distribution and phenology. The empirical data
              collected in the
study will be used to parameterize coupled, spatially
              explicit models of animal ranging and
vegetation dynamics with the goal of
              predicting how large mammal extirpation is likely to affect
tree species
              diversity.
In addition to addressing basic theoretical issues, data collected
              in this project will be of
direct value to wildlife management, both guiding
              management at the study site and informing
park planning and sustainable
              hunting programs across the region. Remote sensing methodologies
developed in
              this project will also provide the tools for studying how the wave of
              logging
currently sweeping Central Africa is likely to affect tree species
              diversity. And African personnel
trained and employed in the study will
              bolster feeble research and management capacity in the
region.
