Title       : Function of Arabidopsis thaliana Proline Rich Proteins in Root Hairs and Guard
               Cells of Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0213437

Award Number: 0213437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Tierney mtierney@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The plant cell wall is a dynamic structure that can be modified in response
to
              developmental and environmental signals.  In this manner, the cell
              wall
provides structural information that helps maintain cellular form
              and
function during plant growth.  The structure of the cell wall also
              changes
in response to pathogen infection and stresses, such as drought, high
              salt
and cold temperature, in a manner that helps protect plants from biotic
              and
abiotic stresses when grown in natural environments.  Expression of many
              of
the structural proteins in the wall have been shown to be
              cell-type
specific, suggesting that these proteins play novel roles in
              modifying cell
wall structure in order to provide mechanical strength and
              assist in proper
wall assembly.

Proline-rich proteins (PRPs) represent an
              integral family of structural
cell wall proteins whose expression has been
              linked to active growth in a
number of plant systems.  We have used a
              combination of PRP promoter/GUS
fusions and epitope-tagging to characterize
              the expression of these genes
in arabidopsis and their localization to the
              walls of specific cell types.
Two of these proteins, AtPRP1 and AtPRP3, are
              expressed during the early
stages of root hair outgrowth but are localized
              within different regions of
the root hair cell wall.  These results suggest
              that individual PRP gene
family members may play distinct roles in helping to
              establish root hair
cell wall structure during wall assembly.  In addition, we
              have shown that
AtPRP4 is expressed in guard cells and localizes to the inner
              shelf of the
guard cell wall.  We have isolated several T-DNA insertion
              alleles for
these three proteins and we propose to characterize the
              loss-of-function
phenotypes in these mutants associated with root hair and
              guard cell
function.  In addition, we will examine the ability of
              epitope-tagged PRP
sequences to become cross-linked within the wall in wild
              type and mutant
PRP backgrounds.  In combination, these experimental
              approaches should
provide new insight into the nature of the amino acid
              sequences encoded
within individual AtPRPs that are sufficient for their
              targeted
localization within the cell wall and their insolubilization within
              the
extracellular matrix.

Identification of the function of structural cell
              wall proteins in defining
cell-type specific matrix structures is an important
              first step in our
ability to modify the cell walls of plants in a manner that
              will let them
grow in adverse environments.  We have shown that the AtPRP
              proteins
participate in determining cell wall structure in guard cells and
              root
hairs, two cell types that are crucial for nutrient uptake and
              maintenance
of water balance during growth.  Further analysis of the function
              of these
proteins may allow us to devise novel mechanisms for enhancing plant
              growth
under conditions of water and/or nutrient limitation.


