Title       : Mechanism of Chromophore Formation in Green Fluorescent Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0213091

Award Number: 0213091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383728             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebekka M. Wachter rwachter@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, green fluorescent protein (GFP) technology has revolutionized
              molecular and cellular biology.  GFP has proven extremely useful as a fusion
              tag for detection of gene products, and as a biosensor for monitoring specific
              cellular events.  Yet, the level of understanding of the underlying mechanism
              of fluorophore generation is lagging behind the development of novel
              applications. This project is designed to learn more about the structural and
              catalytic requirements for chromophore formation in GFP.  When the protein
              folds into its native three-dimensional structure, a spontaneous, autocatalytic
              peptide backbone cyclization occurs in the protein's interior, initiating a
              series of chemical events that lead to the generation of the fluorophore.  This
              highly unusual backbone cross-link has been identified only in GFP and in
              histidine ammonia lyase, though it might be present in a number of other, less
              well-characterized proteins.  In this project, structural and catalytic
              requirements for GFP chromophore formation will be explored, using techniques
              such as site-directed mutagenesis, kinetics, and x-ray crystallography. 
              Crystal structures of GFPs without chromophore will be analyzed with respect to
              preorganization towards chromophore formation.  A detailed kinetic
              investigation of the individual steps leading to fluorescence will be carried
              out, with the aim of clarifying how backbone cyclization is coupled to protein
              folding and oxidation. Improved understanding of the factors leading to
              chromophore formation in GFP will aid in predicting similar unusual
              post-translational modifications and chemistries in unrelated proteins.
