Title       : An Information Infrastructure for Vegetation Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0213794

Award Number: 0213794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1050000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Peet peet@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn D. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis H. Grossman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Jennings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Vegetation classification is critical for resource mapping, conservation
              planning and ecological monitoring.  This project will provide the information
              infrastructure, VegBank, that will include field plot data, the plant taxa
              used, the community classification, and mechanisms for proposing changes. 
              Vegetation plot records support not only classification, but also most research
              in plant community ecology.  A working prototype of a system for acquiring,
              searching and disseminating field plot records for classifying North American
              vegetation has been developed and is available on the web.  VegBank is a
              collaboration of four institutions that represent major data sources and users.
               VegBank will be expanded and tested as a robust, public system for use by the
              broader plant ecology community.  The plant and community classification
              modules will provide a technical solution for taxonomic ambiguities.  The
              module will be populated with data from collaborating groups. Sharing and
              replication of data will enable several databases by allowing for linkages that
              would make an international network supporting distributed queries.  A plug-in
              tool will foster future development by the user community.  All of the data
              will be web accessible.
