Title       : US-Tunisia Cooperative Research: Analysis of Interrupt Latency Using Hybrid
               Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0213651

Award Number: 0213651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Feng Lin flin@ece.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5928,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0213651
Lin

Description: 
This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Feng Lin, Department of Electrical and Computer
              Engineering, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan and Dr. Nejib Ben
              Hadj-Alouane, Department of Applied Computer Sciences at the Ecole Nationale d'
              Sciences Informatique (ENSI) in Tunis, Tunisia.  This project is to investigate
              the interrupt latency problem in software design.  Most
              microprocessor/microcontroller systems contain sources of interrupt and
              interrupt service routines, which are software components executing in response
              to the assertion of an interrupt in hardware.  Because the interrupt service
              routines execute on the same Central Processing Unit (CPU), they compete for
              the CPU and interfere with each other's latency requirements.  Latency is
              defined as the delay between the assertion of the interrupt in hardware and the
              start of execution of the associated interrupt service routine. An important
              problem is whether a specific set of sources of interrupt and interrupt service
              routines can coexist in the same microprocessor/microcontroller software load
              without causing interrupt latency violations.  The investigators plan to use a
              recently developed framework of hybrid machines to solve this problem. They
              will model sources of interrupt and interrupt service routines as hybrid
              machines.  The main task of this project is to develop models for common
              microprocessor/microcontroller systems, efficient algorithms to check
              co-reachability in hybrid machines, efficient ways to represent hybrid machine
              models in programming languages such as C, and software tools that will help
              engineers to check interrupt latency violations in software and the how to
              eliminate the violations.

Scope:  The two scientists have collaborated and
              published jointly in 1994 and in 1997 while Dr. Hadj-Alouane was employed at
              Dow Chemicals Company and at the University of Michigan respectively. The model
              they propose in this project may result in important changes in practice for
              software design. The project will allow for visits by Dr. Lin to Tunisia and
              will encourage a mutually beneficial international collaboration between the
              Wayne State University and the ENSI in Tunisia.  Funds for this project are
              provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering, the Division
              of Computer-Communications Research and Division of Experimental and
              Integrative Activities. 

