Title       : RUI: Physiological Adaptations for Resolving the Conflicting Metabolic Demands
               of Lactating While Fasting in Northern Elephant Seals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0213095

Award Number: 0213095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Crocker crocker@sonoma.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dorian Houser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sonoma State University
	      1801 East Cotati Avenue
	      Rohnert Park, CA  949283609    707/664-2156

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,9169,9178,9179,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The amount of investment that females place in their offspring (maternal
              investment), whether it is behavioral (such as protection from predators) or
              material (such as milk), must be balanced against future efforts at
              reproducing.  Understanding how females of different species balance current
              and future investment in offspring provides insight on the evolution of
              alternative reproductive strategies.  In mammals, quantifying maternal
              investment can be difficult.  This occurs for several reasons: 1) it is
              difficult to assign value to maternal behaviors; 2) offspring may stay with
              their mothers for many years making observation periods unrealistically long;
              and, 3) the material directly transferred from mother to offspring through
              gestation and lactation may be hard to determine.  Northern elephant seals
              (Mirounga angustirostris) provide a unique system within which to study
              maternal investment.  The investment period for elephant seals is limited to
              the period of lactation.  This period is brief (~ 25 days) and almost all
              investment is given in the form of milk making it more feasible to quantify
              maternal investment.  Furthermore, elephant seal females do not eat or drink
              during lactation.  This combination of fasting and lactation constrains the
              ability of females to invest in their pups because the nutrients (fat and
              protein) used to meet their own energy needs are also used to produce milk for
              the pup.  Material and energy investment in elephant seal pups has been
              previously determined but its relationship to the energetic costs of the mother
              has not been characterized.  The study proposed here will investigate how
              lactating elephant seals utilize nutrient reserves to support their metabolism,
              identify and quantify physiological mechanisms that protect maternal nutrients
              for milk production, and characterize the strategy for nutrient use that
              contributes to maximizing investment in pups.  Isotopically labeled compounds
              will be used to study biochemical paths important to supplying energy to
              lactating female seals.  Specifically, changes in the importance of glucose and
              fat as fuel sources over the time course of lactation will be estimated and the
              contribution of glycerol, a byproduct of fat breakdown, to the production of
              glucose (gluconeogenesis) will be determined.  Insulin and glucagon, two
              hormones important in regulating how the body uses sugar and fat, will be
              manipulated to determine whether these hormones interact in a manner unique to
              this system.  This information will provide insight on how elephant seals
              optimize investment in their offspring under fasting constraints, and thus,
              will provide insight on ultimate strategies that contribute to future
              reproductive effort.  As part of the NSF-RUI initiative, undergraduates will be
              actively involved in field research and data analysis.  A graduate student, who
              will derive a research question for a thesis from the proposed work, will also
              be financially supported through this program.  Integration of undergraduate
              and graduate students into the research will insure that students experience an
              innovative and dynamic curriculum with an emphasis on integrative approaches to
              organismal biology.	
