Title       : The Soil Microhabitats, Functional Diversity, and Ecological Roles of Uncultured
               Bacteria Within the Novel Divisions Acidobacterium and Verrucomicrobia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0213048

Award Number: 0213048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199969             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Goodman Rgoodman@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Liles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa C. Balser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : ,1305,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0213048
Goodman
Soil microorganisms impact biogeochemical structuring and
              nutrient cycling on a global level. It has been estimated that a gram of soil
              can contain as many as 5 x 10 11 bacterial cells and over 13,000 distinct
              phylotypes. However, only a small fraction of the microorganisms from most soil
              samples can be readily cultured. The fraction that has been cultured rarely
              includes the most abundant species and frequently is biased towards or against
              particular taxonomic or physiological types. Since most of what is known about
              soil microbes has come from studies of cultured species, we still know very
              little about soil microbial ecology. Therefore, culture-independent methods are
              an important tool in soil microbiology and promise major new insights into the
              roles of soil microflora in ecosystem function. 
Culture-independent methods
              have revealed that diverse members of two bacterial divisions,
Acidobacterium
              and Verrucomicrobia, are abundant in soils. While they have a
              cosmopolitan
distribution and can be numerically dominant, we know very little
              about their ecology and activity
within the soil community. Using information
              derived from the application of newly developed
genomic approaches, we will
              test hypotheses about the distribution and functions of these uncultured taxa
              in response to soil environmental gradients.
First, we will sequence,
              annotate, and analyze large insert genomic DNA clones derived from
bacterial
              taxa in these two divisions (Acidobacterium and Verrucomicrobia taxa). Each of
              these genomic DNA clones contains rRNA genes as well as functional information
              derived from sequence analysis and annotation. These data will be integrated
              into a publicly available and searchable database. We will next use the
              phylogenetic information contained within these clones to develop taxa-specific
              primers and probes. We will then use these molecular primers and probes to test
              hypotheses concerning the ecological niches inhabited by these taxa, shedding
              light on their distribution within various soil fractions, their size and
              membrane charge distributions, their
relative abundance within plant
              rhizospheres, and their distribution along soil environmental
gradients.
The
              results of this research will provide hitherto unavailable information on
              specific uncultured soil
microorganisms, including genomic organization, gene
              content, and environmental distributions. The knowledge gained from these
              studies will lead to further ecological hypotheses, and provide new approaches,
              tools and a database that will significantly advance microbial ecological
              studies of one of the most important microbial habitats on Earth-the soil. The
              long-term goal is to contribute to a platform of technologies and results that
              can be used to elucidate the variability, activity and significant ecological
              roles of uncultured soil microorganisms in their natural habitats.
