Title       : The Role of Localized Interactions and Dispersal in the Ecology and Evolution of
               Model Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0213198

Award Number: 0213198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brendan J. Bohannan bohannan@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ecologists have long recognized that spatial heterogeneity can be crucial for
              the generation and maintenance of biological diversity. For example, a diverse
              array of species can be maintained if environmental conditions vary from place
              to place, and if each species has a distinct set of conditions under which it
              can exclude other species.  Recently, theoretical studies have also shown that
              diversity can be maintained even if conditions do not vary from place to place;
              this can occur through a process called "self-organization." Self-organization
              is the emergence of large scale patterns of coexisting species due only to
              local interactions among different species.  Whether self-organized spatial
              heterogeneity is generated by actual ecological communities (as opposed to
              communities simulated by a computer) is controversial.  This research project
              will use laboratory communities of microorganisms to study whether localized
              interactions can result in self-organized spatial heterogeneity, whether
              self-organized heterogeneity is sufficient to promote the coexistence of
              populations, and how self-organized communities change through
              evolution.

Among the most critical challenges facing humanity are the
              conservation, restoration and wise management of the Earth's diverse living
              resources.  To meet these challenges, society requires basic information
              concerning how these resources are generated and maintained.  This research
              project will generate such information. 

