Title       : Assembly and Higher Order Oligomerization of Telomere Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0213162

Award Number: 0213162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $536893             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olve Peersen Olve.Peersen@ColoState.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The class of microbes known as the macronuclear ciliates are instrumental in
              telomere research because its members have macronuclei that contain hundreds of
              thousands of linear gene-sized "mini-chromosomes" that have telomeres at both
              their ends. Electron microscopy of macronuclear chromatin has shown that these
              chromosomes are organized into rosette structures in which the telomere ends
              are anchored in a central core structure while the DNA of the macronuclear
              chromosomes form large loops. The X-ray crystal structures of two different
              macronuclear telomere complexes from Oxytricha nova show that its two-subunit
              telomere end binding protein (OnTEBP) can form two distinct macromolecular
              assemblies with telomeric single-stranded DNA. One is a protective a:b:ssDNA
              end-capping complex involving both the a and b subunits of the protein and the
              other is a dimeric (a:ssDNA)2 complex that can link telomeres together. These
              structures have led to a model of how the two OnTEBP complexes can mediate the
              condensation and decondensation of macronuclear chromatin through the formation
              of telomere anchored rosette structures. This project examines the role of the
              (a:ssDNA)2 dimer in the formation of higher-order telomere complexes. The
              experiments will use a multi-disciplinary approach to measure the kinetics and
              thermodynamics of DNA binding to OnTEBP complexes, elucidate the structural
              basis for the DNA dependent dimerization of the OnTEBP a subunit, and determine
              the role of (a:ssDNA)2 dimers in the formation of the a:b:ssDNA end capping
              complex. The results will increase our understanding of the structure and
              dynamics of macromolecular complexes at telomeres.
Telomeres are the
              protein-DNA complexes that protect the ends of linear eukaryotic chromosomes
              from recombination and degradation. Telomeres are required for proper cell
              growth and viability. This research project focuses on the protein-DNA and
              protein-protein interactions found at telomeres and the manner in which larger
              complexes formed via telomere-telomere interactions are assembled. The results
              will provide insights into how the genetic integrity of chromosomes is
              maintained in cells.


