Title       : Collaborative Research: Responses of Productivity and Nutrient Dynamics to
               Elevated CO2 in an Intact Mojave Desert Ecosystem.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0213055

Award Number: 0213055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375236             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Arnone jarnone@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Nevada Desert FACE Facility (NDFF) is a long-term research project examining
              the responses of an intact Mojave Desert ecosystem to elevated CO2.  In the
              first four years of NDFF operation, we found that primary production increased
              substantially at elevated CO2, but only in wet years, and that an exotic annual
              grass responded more strongly than did native shrubs and annuals.  Therefore,
              our initial results suggest that an ecosystem type (drylands) that represents
              30% of the earth's terrestrial surface area may not respond to elevated CO2 in
              a simple manner, as predicted by existing models of global change.

In the
              context of these results and the long-term nature of our desert FACE
              experiment, we propose to address three overarching questions in this
              study:

1.	Will elevated CO2 alter community composition and structure in the
              Mojave Desert by continuing to stimulate a disproportionate increase in an
              exotic annual species?
2.	Will the increases in production and changes in
              nutrient dynamics that we have observed in response to a step-change increase
              in CO2 be sustained over time?
3.	Can we adapt proven models of desert
              ecosystem function to predict how this Mojave Desert ecosystem will respond to
              elevated CO2 in the future?

The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in
              our conceptual approach in which we are focusing on the functional interactions
              between species composition and ecosystem function, tied together by an
              explicit modeling component.  The model will be an adaptation of an
              established, validated desert model (PALS, the Patch Arid Lands Simulator) that
              will be used to develop a synthetic understanding of biotic and abiotic
              controls on carbon, nitrogen, and water fluxes to elevated CO2 in this arid
              ecosystem.  The broader impact of this proposed study will be an examination of
              the potential invasion of an exotic species in response to elevated CO2, and
              how this process may impact ecosystem function, and therefore ecosystem
              services, in a desert environment.  Through this research program, we are also
              forging a cohesive network between five research campuses.  To date, our
              research group has an excellent record of training undergraduate, graduate, and
              postdoctoral scholars at the NDFF, including members of underrepresented
              groups.  This study will similarly train a wide spectrum of students and
              postdocs, both at the NDFF and in our support laboratories.

