Title       : Cooperative Behavior and the Frequency of Social Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0213658

Award Number: 0213658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65187              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Ochs jochs@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Duffy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cooperation may be in everyone's long-term interest, but in any single social
              interaction each individual may have an incentive to defect from cooperative
              behavior.  This is the essence of social dilemmas.  When individuals are paired
              in an indefinitely long-term relationship, the threat of triggering
              non-cooperative responses by others to a non-cooperative act may be sufficient
              to sustain cooperative behavior.  However, individuals may live in a community
              for a long time, frequently interact with various members of that community,
              but have only short-term, intermittent, relationships with any particular
              member of that community.  In such circumstances, it is not be possible for the
              victim of an opportunistic act to directly punish the defector.  Nevertheless,
              Kandori has shown that, under certain conditions, a social norm of cooperative
              behavior can be sustained by the same kind of history-dependent strategies that
              can sustain cooperative behavior in long-term relationships between fixed pairs
              of individuals.  Kandori's theorem is an extension of the Folk Theorem for
              infinitely repeated games.  Like the Folk Theorem, it only proves that
              cooperation can be sustained by history-dependent trigger strategies.  
              Whether, and under what conditions a group will develop a social norm of
              cooperative behavior are the questions this study addresses. Specifically, a
              behavioral experiment has been designed to investigate the degree to which
              cooperative behavior in an indefinitely repeated prisoners' dilemma stage game
              is influenced by both the nature of the matching technology and the character
              of the information transmitted about the play of one stage game to the players
              of the next stage game.  The study will compare the extent of cooperative
              behavior observed when fixed pairs play an indefinitely repeated Prisoners'
              Dilemma stage game with that observed in a fixed group that is anonymously and
              randomly matched after each stage game.  In the random matching condition, the
              amount of information that players have concerning their opponent's past
              behavior will also be varied so as to determine whether more information leads
              to increases in the frequency of cooperative behavior.

The question of what
              kinds of social interaction promote or inhibit cooperative (competitive)
              behavior in environments where agents have both incentives to cooperate over
              time and incentives to opportunistically compete at any particular moment of
              time is of obvious importance in many settings where cooperative arrangements
              must be self-enforcing.  These include such diverse settings as the design of
              test-ban treaties, the design of relative performance pay systems, and the
              administration of anti-trust laws to deal with implicit collusion.  Beyond
              these matters of practical importance, the results of this experiment are also
              of methodological importance for experimental economists who often use random
              matching protocols to study learning behavior in strategic situations that are
              meant to represent one time encounters.  
.

