Title       : Reproductive Tactics in an Androdioecious Crustacean - Laboratory and Field
               Tests of a Model for the Maintenance of a Mixed Mating System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0213358

Award Number: 0213358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344082             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Weeks scweeks@UAKRON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Duff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,1160,1174,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Outcrossing sexual reproduction has intrigued evolutionary biologists for
              decades, for the individual that can produce offspring by self-fertilization or
              asexually has an immediate advantage over outcrossers. Mixed mating systems
              (with both self-fertilization and outcrossing) provide an excellent way to
              identify the selective advantage of both modes of reproduction. One form of
              mixed mating, androdioecy (males + hermaphrodites), is particularly interesting
              because theoretical treatments suggest such a mixture should be evolutionarily
              unstable. A recently discovered crustacean (Eulimnadia texana) exhibits a
              persistent form of androdioecy. In a previous grant, we implemented an
              integrative approach to the study of androdioecy, using genetic, cellular,
              physiological, behavioral, and ecological studies to quantify the parameters of
              a model in two populations. Although these projects proved quite fruitful, many
              questions remain. The current proposal will address those questions with two
              integrated projects. (a) Laboratory tests that combine behavioral and genetic
              studies will be used to further explore two of the model's parameters. (b)
              Field Collections, that estimate relative male to hermaphrodite survival,
              inbreeding depression and male mating success to estimate three of the four
              parameters of a model in natural habitats. Two sets of field data will be
              collected (data from naturally-filled ponds and from artificially-filled) at
              the Jornada LTER site in New Mexico.  Data collected from both the field and
              laboratory studies will be used to estimate the four model parameters, which
              will in turn be used to test the ability of the model to predict the
              proportions of sex types found in each pond. The results of these tests will
              provide a thoroughly integrative understanding of the maintenance of
              outcrossing in this system, which will further our understanding of mating
              system evolution in general. Broader Impacts: Both PIs have strong commitments
              to student training and are on projects designed to bring inquiry-based science
              experiences to high school and undergraduate students in the Akron area. The
              proposed research will mentor graduate and undergraduate students who will gain
              training in modern genetic techniques, and be enriched by field experiences.
              


