Title       : A Contextual Perspective on Gender and Negotiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0213474

Award Number: 0213474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Babcock lb2k@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hannah Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michele J. Gelfand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the last two decades, there has been an upsurge in research in social
              psychology on the relationships among gender, cognition, and social behavior. 
              Over the same period, studies of gender in negotiation have declined.  In
              contrast to the movement in social psychology from tests of gender as a
              personality variable to investigations of gender in context, the negotiation
              field has largely abandoned the gender variable as an inconsistent predictor of
              negotiator behavior or performance.  In this research program, we argue that
              gender has mostly been treated as a static, decontextualized demographic
              variable in the negotiation literature, and that we have yet to understand the
              complex nature of gender as a labile yet influential psychological construct in
              negotiation.  Our focus is on the situational factors and psychological
              processes that mediate the relationship between gender and negotiation.  We
              thus begin to answer the questions "under what conditions and why does gender
              matter in negotiation?"

	We take as a central proposition in this research
              that gender effects are not invariant across situations; rather we emphasize
              that gender is a "context-dependent phenomenon."  We investigate how contextual
              factors, such as the strength of the situation and the relevance and salience
              of gender to negotiator's roles or the type of resource being distributed,
              activate distinct gender-based expectations, cognitions, and behavior.  In the
              first set of studies, we present preliminary laboratory evidence about the role
              the situational factors play in moderating gender differences in negotiation
              outcomes.  We propose a series of new experiments to further explore these
              contextual moderators and importantly, to develop interventions that eliminate
              gender differences.  Our goals in this research are to further illuminate the
              psychological mechanisms that cause gender to matter in negotiations and
              develop practical advice that can help women improve their negotiated
              outcomes.

	In the second set of studies, we turn our attention to a greatly
              understudied area - the initiation of negotiations.  We develop a two-stage
              model of the decision to initiate a negotiation.  Using data from a preliminary
              field study, we find that women are less likely to initiate negotiations and
              that the psychological process in our model help to explain the overall
              individual differences as well as gender differences in initiating
              negotiations.  We propose a new field study and a series of laboratory
              experiments to further investigate the contextual moderators of gender
              differences in the initiation of negotiations.  
