Title       : Characterization of Grain Structure in Block Copolymer Thin Films by Guided-wave
               Depolarized Light Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0213508

Award Number: 0213508
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Garetz bgaretz@duke.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nitash P. Balsara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice C. Newstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposal describes the development of guided-wave depolarized light
              scattering, a novel technique for characterizing the structure of ordered block
              copolymer thin films. This technique will enable cost-effective,
              nondestructive, real-time quantification of order formation and defect density
              in these two-dimensional systems. 

A planar optical waveguide will be
              fabricated by depositing the polymer film on a low refractive index substrate
              (fused silica). Standard optical waveguide elements such as prism couplers will
              be used to couple the laser beam into the film and the scattered light out of
              the film. The depolarized scattered beam will be guided through the film and
              detected using a CCD camera. Considerable effort will be devoted to the
              development of tractable models for relating the detected optical signal to the
              grain structure within the film. The models that have been established for the
              optical properties of bulk block copolymer samples will serve as a starting
              point for this development. Preliminary predictions indicate that the
              guided-wave geometry will lead to fundamental differences in the nature of the
              detected signal.  The grain structure determined in reciprocal space by the
              guided-wave depolarized light scattering studies will compared with position
              space data obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force
              microscopy (AFM) experiments on the same samples.

The proposed work builds
              on earlier work by the co-PIs on optical characterization of grain structure in
              three-dimensional block copolymer samples. This information is crucial for a
              number of recently proposed applications for block copolymer thin films such as
              information storage and photonics. The proposed research will also answer
              fundamental questions regarding the influence of substrates and interfaces on
              order formation and defect annihilation in thin block copolymer films.

