Title       : A Study of Nonlinear Behavior in the Electrochemical Oxidation of Oxygenated
               Organics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0213490

Award Number: 0213490
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Schell mschell@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1312,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mark Schell of Southern Methodist University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to study the electrochemical oxidation of
              oxygenated organics, using experimental and theoretical approaches to explore
              these processes and the nonlinear behavior that they exhibit.   Most of the
              effort will focus on formic acid oxidation.  Objectives are to characterize the
              different ways that anions affect the oxidation process, to find the origin of
              these effects, and to investigate whether these effects can be used to probe
              electrochemical mechanisms.  Substantial new understanding is expected to be
              gained by studying anion interactions with surrounding stationary and transient
              neighbors.  Research outcomes are expected to enhance the understanding of
              oxidation reactions that are important in fuel cell applications.  This project
              will provide valuable introductory research opportunities to undergraduate
              students in both theoretical and experimental chemistry. 

The
              electrocatalyzed oxidations of oxygenated organic compounds are important
              because of their applications in fuel cells.  It is a goal of many academic and
              industrial researchers to improve the viability of commercial ambient
              methanol-air fuel cells to replace conventional fossil fuel sources.  This goal
              is important because greenhouse gases are increasing in the environment, and as
              well because future fossil fuel energy shortages are probable.  A practical
              objective of this research is to enhance methanol oxidation by methods similar
              to those used to enhance formic acid oxidation.  Enhancing methanol oxidation
              translates into more efficient fuel cells. 

