Title       : GOALI: Fixation of CO2 for Use in Radiopharmaceuticals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0213165

Award Number: 0213165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Kemp rakemp@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bahram Moasser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1504,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Richard Kemp, Department of Chemistry, University of New Mexico, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              of the Chemistry Division for research into the rapid fixation of carbon
              dioxide into organic molecules.  There is a need for C-11 containing compounds
              for several applications, including positron emission tomography (PET). Due to
              the short half-life of C-11 rapid incorporation of C-11 carbon dioxide is
              required if these species are to be obtained. The objective of this research is
              to develop routes to incorporate C-11 carbon dioxide into organic products in
              less than one hour. Carbon dioxide is known to slowly insert into subvalent
              group 14 amides to produce isocyanate and/or carbodiimide. Building on the
              observation that changes in ligand structure and main group metal can
              dramatically affect CO2 incorporation rates, low-valent Ge, Sn, and Pb reagents
              will be prepared with a variety of ligands. Their reaction with carbon dioxide
              will be studied in order to determine the factors that influence the reaction
              rate. Group 14 compounds will then be developed into catalysts by using various
              silylated organic amines as substrates. Finally, related compounds not based on
              Group 14 bis(amides), which should also react with CO2 to produce isocyanates,
              will be studied. 

In this project, methods will be developed to rapidly
              incorporate radioactive C-11 into organic molecules. These species are required
              for several applications including PET. This is a GOALI project that involves
              collaborative efforts between the University of New Mexico and General Electric
              Corp. The research includes developing the basic science behind rapid carbon
              dioxide incorporation. The eventual goal is new industrial preparations of
              valuable radioactive products. Both graduate and postdoctoral students will
              gain experience in multitask interdisciplinary objectives as part of a
              collaboration with industry. It is likely that students from traditionally
              under-represented groups will participate in this research.


