Title       : Phylogenetic Utility of Rapidly Evolving Mammalian Reproductive Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0213171

Award Number: 0213171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Gatesy johnga@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Willie J. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. John Gatesy at the University of California,
              Riverside to study the evolution of reproductive protein genes in mammals.
              Recently, "reproductive proteins" that are important for fertilization have
              been characterized in several mammalian species.  Preliminary studies suggest
              that many of these proteins, both egg and sperm-specific, have evolved at a
              rapid rate.  In this proposed research, modern molecular techniques will be
              used to survey reproductive protein gene sequences from several species of
              even-toed hoofed mammals.  These data will be used to better characterize the
              pattern of molecular evolution in mammalian reproductive proteins, to determine
              which regions of these molecules are prone to mutation, and to test whether
              reproductive proteins are useful for reconstructing the evolutionary history of
              mammals.
	Dr. Gatesy will mentor teams of undergraduate students at the
              University of California, Riverside within the context of this
              multidisciplinary project. In addition to getting first-hand experience in a
              wet lab, the students will integrate their laboratory work with library
              research and computer analysis.  The combined research group will produce basic
              data that are relevant to diverse biological sub-disciplines by exploring
              reproduction, a foundation of evolutionary biology, at the genetic level.  A
              detailed understanding of reproductive proteins also is important for studies
              of human fertility and infertility.  Some of the species utilized in this study
              (cow, sheep, goat) are standard model organisms for fertility research. 
              Comparative analyses of reproductive molecules from these species and close
              relatives will facilitate experimental research on reproduction.

