Title       : Hormonal Control of an Avian Neuromuscular System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0213194

Award Number: 0213194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barney A. Schlinger schlinge@lifesci.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1193,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 Hormonal control of behavior extends to physically complex courtship displays
              in many bird species, but is not well understood.  In a tropical bird of
              Panama, the golden-collared manakin, the males execute characteristic loud
              wingsnaps as part of a courtship dance.  The males have three wing muscles that
              differ from those in females in size and/or biochemical composition, and there
              are motor neurons in the spinal cord that show more molecular receptors for
              androgenic sex steroid hormones than in females, suggesting that manakins are
              useful models for evaluating steroid control of complex peripheral
              neuromuscular systems.  This project integrates molecular biology,
              biochemistry, anatomy and behavioral work to determine how hormones seasonally
              regulate this behavior in this sexually dimorphic system.  Gene expression and
              metabolic enzyme activity provide data on distributions of steroid hormones and
              their receptors, and for comparisons between male and female spinal cords. 
              Determining which particular muscles are involved in the wingsnap allows
              determining how sexual dimorphism of the muscles and the androgen-sensitive
              motoneurons in the spinal cord are relevant to the behavior.  Use of
              androgen-blocking agents tests whether seasonally fluctuating androgens may
              cause changes across the breeding and non-breeding seasons in the anatomy and
              physiology of the spinal cord and muscles.  Results from this work will provide
              important information on how steroid hormones act on this peripheral
              neuromuscular system to control behavior.
   The impact of this work extends
              beyond neuroendocrinology to reproductive physiology and evolutionary biology,
              and may have use in bird breeding.  This project also involves excellent
              opportunities for student training and an important international component
              with Panama.  


