Title       : Mechanism of Closed Hairpin End Generation in Linear DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0213124

Award Number: 0213124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wai Mun Huang waimun.huang@path.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Bacterial chromosomes and plasmids are usually circular. Borrelia
              burgdorferi, the Lyme disease agent, has linear chromosomes and harbor linear
              as well as circular plasmids. These linear replicons have closed hairpin ends
              (one DNA strand turns around and continues but becomes the complementary strand
              to form a linear duplex without free ends). In the temperate lambda-like phages
              N15 of E. coli and KO2 of Klebsiella oxytoca, upon lysogeny the prophage DNA's
              are not integrated into the circular bacterial chromosome, but exist as linear
              plasmids with closed hairpin ends. Occurrences of this type of DNA ends, though
              not common, have recently been recognized in different branches of the
              bacterial kingdom. The goal of this research is to study the mechanism with
              which these closed hairpin ends are generated using both genetic and molecular
              biological approaches. Both the phage encoded as well as the Borrelia bacterial
              encoded systems will be investigated. An integrase/recombinase-like protein
              called protelomerase has been identified as the enzyme that acts in a
              sequence-specific manner via a cleavage-rejoining mechanism to generate the
              closed hairpin ends. The specific interaction between the protein and the
              target site, as well as the pathway of hairpin end generation will be
              investigated in detail. A saturation mutagenesis will be conducted to identify
              critical amino acids needed for function. This project can also lead to the
              design of new linear cloning vehicles especially for cloning lethal genes. The
              study of linear hairpin-ended replicons will provide new insight into
              chromosome maintenance. Since all pathogenic Borrelias have linear chromosomes
              with hairpin ends, this research will also contribute to the understanding of
              the biology of Borrelia diseases.

