Title       : IRCEB: Ecological Forecasting and Risk Analysis of Nonindigenous Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0213698

Award Number: 0213698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2989645            (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Lodge lodge.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Lamberti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1356      INTEGRATED RSCH CHALL IN ENVIO
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1356,9169,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Intellectual merit. Numbers of nonindigenous species--species introduced from
              elsewhere - are
increasing rapidly worldwide. They are a major cause of
              biodiversity loss and environmental
change, and are estimated to cost the US
              $137 billion/yr. The 2001 National Invasive Species
Management Plan
              (www.invasivespecies.gov) highlighted the urgent need for more rigorous
              and
comprehensive risk analysis frameworks for nonindigenous species so that
              prevention and
control strategies can be targeted appropriately. The central
              public policy consideration is how
much of society's resources should be
              expended in response to nonindigenous species, and how,
for example, should it
              be allocated between prevention and control? These considerations,
though,
              include a nexus of interacting ecological and economic factors that
              require
interdisciplinary effort. Species invasions are caused by economic
              activities, and in turn affect
economic activities. This ecological and
              economic linkage and feedback means that the
assessment of risk interacts with
              the management of risk, which contradicts the common notion
that risk
              assessment and risk management are independent. Social welfare and risk
              assessment
are both determined jointly by ecological and economic
              processes.
In response to the need for interdisciplinary risk analysis, this
              project brings together
experts from invasion biology, mathematical modeling,
              and economics. The main goal is to
develop and apply a bio-economic modeling
              framework for nonindigenous species that
integrates risk assessment and risk
              management, includes uncertainty distributions, and
optimizes prevention and
              control strategies in a landscape context. The overall bio-economic
model uses
              Stochastic Dynamic Programming, which allows the investigators to
              incorporate
ecological-economic feedbacks in such a way to optimize
              combinations of prevention and
control strategies to maximize social welfare.
              This framework will be extended to the landscape
scale with Neural Network
              models.
The applications will focus on freshwater nonindigenous species in the
              Great Lakes
region. A preliminary application to zebra mussels suggested, for
              example, that society should
be spending about $240,000/yr to keep zebra
              mussels from invading each lake with a power
plant (to prevent fouling of
              pipes). This is in sharp contrast to the $825,000 that the Fish &
Wildlife
              Service spent in FY2001 for prevention and control efforts for all aquatic
              nuisance
species for all lakes. Our analyses will be directly relevant to
              policymakers and natural resource
managers.
Broader impacts. The
              investigators will partner with the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago to
educate
              schoolchildren and the public about the general problem of nonindigenous
              species, about
what individuals can do to reduce the problem, and about the
              role that science plays in public
policy decisions. By partnering with an
              educational software firm, they will convert research
models into
              user-friendly formats for use by schoolchildren, the public, policymakers,
              resource
managers, and stakeholders. In partnership with the Great Lakes
              Commission, research methods,
results, and user-friendly products will be
              disseminated in workshops to policymakers, managers,
and stakeholders.
              Finally, they will develop international collaborations and a
              reciprocal
exchange of information and techniques with top researchers in
              Australia, where NIS research is
advanced relative to North America.
