Title       : Applications of Irreversible Photooxidation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0213445

Award Number: 0213445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Gould igould@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Ian Gould, of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Arizona State
              University, is studying applications of irreversible photooxidation in the
              elucidation of the mechanisms of oxidative processes in DNA. N-O bond cleavage
              of N-alkoxyheterocycles affords the radical cation of the parent heterocycle
              and an alkoxy radical. These irreversible photocleavage reactions allow
              exploration of the reaction chemistry of each of these reactive species.
              Following elucidation of the mechanisms and scope of the photochemistry of
              N-alkoxyheterocycles, Professor Gould will determine the oxidation potentials
              and lifetimes of purine radical cations in duplex DNA and explore the factors
              controlling their reactivity. Finally, oxidative damage in DNA will be studied
              using a mechanistic approach based on accurate measurements of quantum yields,
              quantifying the absolute and relative efficiencies of single-strand cleavage
              via one-electron oxidation of purine bases and via radical abstraction from the
              sugar backbone.

Oxidation of DNA leads to reactive intermediate species.
              Exploration of the fundamental reaction chemistry of these reactive
              intermediates will lead to a more detailed understanding of oxidative processes
              which are of central importance in DNA chemistry and biochemistry. By
              developing unique reagents allowing the efficient formation of oxidized DNA
              species, Professor Ian Gould, of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
              at Arizona State University, is exploring the reaction chemistry of these
              important but only transiently existent reactive intermediates.
