Title       : New Methods in Stereoselective Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0213009

Award Number: 0213009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amir H. Hoveyda amir.hoveyda@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The foci of this research are twofold.  First, a structurally new class of air
              stable, recyclable, efficient and selective chiral Ru catalysts for asymmetric
              olefin metathesis will be developed.  The new chiral Ru complexes will allow
              for specific steric and electronic modifications that can shed light on the
              general mechanism of Ru-catalyzed olefin metathesis.  Further, the
              corresponding  glass-supported chiral catalysts will be prepared and examined 
              as easily used and highly recyclable chiral catalysts that can directly afford
              libraries of a range of functionalizable organic molecules of high chemical and
              optical purity.  Second, a wide range of Ru-catalyzed olefin metathesis
              reactions will be developed to afford optically enriched organic molecules that
              are not accessible via Mo-catalyzed reactions nor by other available enzymatic
              or non-enzymatic catalytic methods.  The methodology will be demonstrated by
              the total synthesis of the natural product (+)-africanol.

With this renewal
              award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
              research of Dr. Amir H. Hoveyda of the Department of Chemistry at Boston
              College.  Professor Hoveyda will focus his work on the development of new
              Ru-based chiral catalysts for various olefin metathesis processes and he will
              develop a wide range of Ru-catalyzed olefin metathesis reactions that will
              afford optically enriched or pure organic molecules.   The work has broader
              implications for the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries and the project
              is an excellent venue for the training of graduate students and postdoctorals.
