Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Uniting genre analysis and multidimensional
               analysis: A corpus based analysis of scientific research articles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0213948

Award Number: 0213948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5525               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff Connor-Linton connorlj@gunet.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Jeff Connor-Linton, Ms. Budsaba Kanoksilapatham will
              compile and analyze a corpus of 60 biochemistry research articles. These
              articles will be randomly selected from five core journals in biochemistry
              published in the United States. Previous studies of discourse structure and
              language use in scientific articles have emphasized the communicative functions
              of rhetorical moves (like 'Summarizing previous research,' and 'Identifying a
              research niche') and of a few lexical and grammatical features (like past tense
              and passive voice). Ms. Kanoksilapatham will address both levels of analysis to
              determine how they are connected. She will analyze rhetorical moves to
              determine the rhetorical organization conventionally used in each of the four
              sections of biochemistry research articles (Introduction, Methods, Results, and
              Discussion) and to assess the reliability of move identification. She will then
              analyze the use of dozens of lexical and grammatical features to identify the
              sets of features that are most typically used to construct each type of
              move.

The importance of this research is threefold. Empirically, the study
              will offer the most representative review of the rhetorical structure of
              research articles to date. Theoretically, it is the first study to assess the
              validity of subjective interpretive constructs like rhetorical moves by
              analyzing the use of concrete linguistic features within and across those moves
              and revealing the connection between two ways that meaning is communicated in
              written texts. Pedagogically, this study may guide language teachers and
              materials designers in selecting texts and developing learning activities for
              English as a second or foreign language instruction. Insights from these
              analyses will help scientists who speak English as a second language to better
              understand and contribute to reports of scientific discoveries around the
              world.


