Title       : ITR: Constructing the Computer Science Pipeline: How High School Structures and
               Norms Narrow Access to Computer Science for Underrepresented Minority Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0213662

Award Number: 0213662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Caroline E. Wardle                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Margolis margolis@gseis.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeannie Oakes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1653,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              


EIA-0213662
Margolis, Jane 
UCLA

Title: Constructing the Computer
              Science Pipeline: How high school structures and norms narrow access to
              Computer Science for underrepresented minority students

This ITR- and
              ITWF-sponsored research project seeks to understand the institutional,
              contextual constraints and opportunities that affect underrepresented minority
              students' decisions to study (or not study) computer science at the high school
              level. The researchers will investigate how the computer science pipeline gets
              constructed. "Technological portraits" for three Los Angeles public high
              schools will be developed and in-depth interviews will be conducted with
              approximately forty district-level technology administrators, principals,
              counselors, computer science and math teachers, and technology and magnet
              coordinators at these three schools. Each of these three schools has a high
              numbers of African-American and Latino/a students.

The researchers will
              study the perceptions and thinking of those who help to construct the
              pipeline-namely, state, district, and local educators. In particular, they will
              focus on 1) educators' perceptions of what a computer science curriculum should
              be for their students; 2) the courses and curriculum sequences that these
              educators shape; 3) the criteria they use to judge which students should study
              computer science and which are not capable of success ; and 4) how these norms
              and structures that influence the construction of the pipeline translate into
              educators' role in shaping students' course-taking choices. Dissemination of
              findings is an important part of this proposal and the investigators will hold
              on-going discussions with school educators about these issues. Printed
              materials will be produced for distribution in the three schools, and
              meetings/discussions will be held with the teachers about the research
              findings. The findings will be disseminated nationally.


