Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of Reduced Engineering Models for Prediction of Growth
               of Ternary III-V Semiconductor Materials Grown by Metal Organic Vapor Phase
               Epitaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0213917

Award Number: 0213917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandip Mazumder jls@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    256/726-4800

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I study is aimed toward
              development of an efficient procedure for predicting growth of ternary III-V
              semiconductor materials grown by Metal Organic Vapor Phase Epitaxy (MOVPE).
              These techniques are now used extensively in the semiconductor industry to
              model growth of materials on substrates by chemical vapor deposition. The
              success of such modeling depends largely on the complexity of the gas phase and
              surface reaction mechanisms used to predict the growth process. While
              multi-step finite-rate reaction mechanisms involving approximately ten to
              twenty species are adequate for modeling growth of binary alloys, accurate
              modeling of ternary alloy growth necessitates many more reactions and species.
              This renders the calculations for such scenarios extremely expensive and
              prohibitive. 

This technology can improve a wide variety of electronic and
              opto-electronic are devices. Optimization and characterization of their growth
              is crucial to the success of the opto-electronic and semiconductor industry.
              While commercial these codes have been used with great success for modeling
              growth of pure and binary semiconductor materials, their success has been
              limited (if not non-existent) for ternary materials due to the lack of
              knowledge of the chemistry and the extreme computational efforts required o
              perform such calculations.
