Title       : Stress Effects on Kinetic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0213373

Award Number: 0213373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364898             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Aziz maziz@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project involves a combined experimental and theoretical study of the
              effects of nonhy-drostatic stress on the kinetic processes of epitaxial crystal
              growth and diffusion. The impact of stress-dependent activation barrier heights
              for crystal growth and surface diffusion on growth morphology evolution will be
              studied. The effect of simple, uniform stress states on atomic dif-fusion in
              thin films, both parallel and perpendicular to the surface, will be measured.
              The theory of diffusion under nonhydrostatic stress states will be further
              developed. This research is ex-pected to establish methods by which the
              measurement of the stress-dependence of a kinetic pro-cess under a few simple,
              uniform stress states permits the prediction of the effect of an arbitrary,
              nonuniform stress state-deemed important for the design of future semiconductor
              devices. It also permits the determination of processes going on in the
              interior of solids, where they cannot be observed directly, from the results of
              atomistic theoretical calculations and experimental ob-servations of the
              response to imposed external stresses. It is anticipated that success in this
              en-deavor will facilitate the creation of new, interesting, and potentially
              useful materials. 

The project addresses fundamental research issues in
              areas of electronic materials science having strong technological relevance. An
              important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the
              integration of research and education. The research program provides excel-lent
              opportunities for hands-on experience in the use of sophisticated scientific
              equipment. The resources available provide special opportunities for education
              and training of students involved in interdisciplinary forefront materials
              science research. 
***  

