Title       : Molecular Phylogeny of the Peronosporomycetes (Oomycota or Heterokonta)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0213076

Award Number: 0213076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Hudspeth mykes@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sally Glockling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah S. Hudspeth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0213076
Hudspeth
	Phylogenetic relationships within the Peronosporomycetes,
              a
diverse group of economically important fungal-like protists often
referred
              to as oomycetes, are poorly understood. In this study the
primary goal is to
              establish an extensive DNA database derived from
mitochondrial and nuclear
              genes of a diverse selection of these
organisms. The resultant database is
              then to be used to infer
evolutionary relationships of major, understudied,
              and newly identified
genera. With the development of peronosporomycete
              specific DNA primers
this study emphasizes both obligate and opportunistic
              parasites of
plants, algae, and terrestrial and marine animals. The
              resulting
inferred phylogeny is expected to provide new insight into
              evolutionary
relationships and trends within the Peronosporomycetes, and to
              identify
anomalously placed taxa for reevaluation using morphological
              and
biochemical data. 
The broader impact of this study stems from the
              inclusion in the
Peronosporomycetes of a significant number of pathogenic
              organisms.
Hosts include representatives from all eukaryotic kingdoms.
              Plant
pathogens encompass a spectrum of cereal and leguminous crops,
              rosaceous
fruit trees, forest trees, and ornamental plants as hosts. The
              societal
impact of the downy mildews Plasmopara and Peronospora (responsible
              for
the decimation of the French wine and Cuban tobacco industries) and
              of
Phytophthora infestans, the causative agent of late blight of
              potato
(famines in Ireland in the mid-1840's and World War I Germany), is
              part
of the historical record. Currently, the worldwide economic impact
              of
these and other peronosporomycete genera amounts to tens of billions
              of
dollars in crop losses and disease control. The newly
              identified
Phytophthora ramorum (causative agent for sudden oak death) with
              its
broad host range currently threatens large stands of trees in the
western
              U.S., and aggressive hybrid variants of other
"phytophthoras" with their
              expanding host ranges are emerging
as additional threats. In the rapidly
              expanding area of aquaculture,
peronosporomycete animal "mycoses" affecting
              roe, fingerlings,
molluscans, and crustaceans are currently being identified.
              Even the
incidence of mammalian "pythiosis" (Pythium isidiosum) in
              an
increasing number of hosts, including man, is being
              recognized.
Establishing a molecular database for this group provides both
              a
resource for the early and rapid molecular identification of pathogens,
and
              a significant step in understanding the evolutionary history and
trends of the
              Peronosporomycetes.

