Title       : RUI: Reaction Dynamics of Small Hydrocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0213374

Award Number: 0213374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Lewis dklew@conncoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bansi L. Kalra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Lewis and his collaborators have successfully studied thermal
              isomerization and dissociation reaction mechanisms for cyclic hydrocarbons such
              as cyclopropanes and cyclohexenes.  This work provides important mechanistic
              information about organic reactions where two or more bonds are broken and/or
              formed simultanteously.  In the new grant period, compounds which are
              specifically deuterium and carbon-13 labelled will be used to investigate
              details of cyclopropane isomerizations and rearrangements and labelled
              cyclohexenes will be used for the study of retro Diels-Alder reactions. Some
              related four-center elimination reactions will also be examined.  Careful
              experimental measurements of reaction rates, energy and entropy barriers and
              branching ratios of competing reactions will be performed and compared with the
              results of computational studies.    

With this award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. David K.
              Lewis of the Department of Chemistry at Connecticut College. Dr. Lewis and his
              collaborators will work on understanding the mechanisms of fundamental chemical
              reactions involving small hydrocarbon molecules.  These molecules come
              primarily from petroleum feedstocks and a careful understanding of their
              reaction chemistry may have relevance to chemcial processes whereby petroleum
              feedstocks are converted into speciality chemicals.  Undergraduate research
              students who work on this project will gain interdisciplinary training in
              aspects of synthesis, kinetics, and molecular modelling, all of which are
              skills needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals industries.
              






