Title       : Development of a Pulsed Helium Droplet Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0213889

Award Number: 0213889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrey F. Vilesov vilesov@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program, Prof. Andrey F. Vilesov of the University of Southern California will
              develop a state-of-the-art pulsed helium droplet spectrometer.  He will develop
              and optimize experimental methods for the generation of pulsed (50-100
              microseconds) helium droplet beams in order to achieve a factor of 100 - 10,000
              higher intensity as compared to contemporary continuous-wave beams.  To fully
              exploit this advantage, he will mate the developed source with other modern
              pulsed experimental techniques such as infrared depletion spectroscopy,
              laser-induced fluorescence, laser photolysis, laser ablation, and
              time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectroscopy.  This will facilitate new experiments
              involving helium droplets, such as (i) studies of large bio-molecules; (ii)
              assembly and interrogation of large metal and molecular clusters; (iii)
              pump-probe experiments; (iv) studies of photochemical reactions; and (v)
              generation and use of very large droplets containing over 100 million atoms. 
              This development will help to establish He droplet spectroscopy as a versatile
              new tool, will make it cost-effective, and will make the technique immediately
              accessible to mainstream scientists.  The ultimate goal is the development of a
              pulsed helium droplet beam apparatus based on a closed-cycle refrigerator,
              equipped with pulsed infrared laser and a TOF mass spectrometer.  

Graduate
              students will be involved in all phases, and will use the instrument as a
              training ground prior to integrating the pulsed nozzle in their own
              experiments.  This system will enable advances to be achieved that are not
              presently possible.  Other chemists interested in spectroscopy, analytics and
              low temperature chemical reactivity and dynamics can also benefit greatly from
              this user-friendly and cost-effective source.  Utilization to more applied
              areas such as interrogation of large biomolecules or development of new
              nano-materials is anticipated.  

