Title       : Computational Tools and A Database for the Analysis of Binding Sites in Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0213832

Award Number: 0213832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $607603             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandor Vajda vajda@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles DeLisi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A major challenge in structural genomics is the elucidation of enzyme active
              sites from molecular structure. The characterization of the ligand/substrate
              binding site provides the basis for a number of applications, including the
              design of inhibitors for the analysis of biochemical and signal transduction
              pathways, drug design, and protein engineering aimed at altered specificity or
              catalytic activity. The primary sources of information on specific molecular
              interactions are the structures of the enzyme (or its homologues)
              co-crystallized with various ligands (substrates, cofactors, inhibitors,
              products, and transition state analogs). Although such structures are available
              for over 70% of the enzymes currently in the Protein Data Bank, collecting all
              binding site information for a particular protein requires substantial efforts.
              

The goal of this proposal is to develop a computational resource and
              database, called Predicted and Consensus Interaction Sites in Enzymes
              (PRECISE), which will provide query and visualization tools for the comparative
              analyses of the interactions extracted from all relevant structures. For each
              enzyme, the web-based analysis tool will determine the consensus binding site,
              obtained by aligning all homologous sequences, identifying the residue
              positions that are important for the binding of any ligand, and assessing the
              roles of amino acids at these positions. A dynamic retrieval system will help
              to examine individual interactions, and to generate various statistics. In
              addition to the interaction extracted from enzyme structures, the database will
              also store putative interactions, based on mutation studies or theoretical
              predictions. Such interactions can be submitted to the website and checked for
              consistency with all the interactions extracted from structural data. The
              submissions will be stored in a separate table, adding a predicted interaction
              component to the database. 

The database will also house the results of
              applying computational solvent mapping, a novel binding site prediction method,
              to a large set of well-characterized enzymes. The method moves molecular probes
              - small organic molecules or functional groups - on the protein surface in
              order to identify the positions that bind the highest number of different
              probes. It was shown that such consensus binding occurs at major subsites of
              the enzyme binding site, and the amino acid residues that interact with the
              probes also bind the specific ligands of the enzyme. Thus, computational
              solvent mapping can be used for the identification and characterization of
              enzyme binding sites. In addition to providing solvent mapping results for a
              set of well-characterized enzymes, an e-mail server will be set up, so that
              solvent mapping calculations can be requested for any enzyme. It is expected
              that the PRECISE website will become a central depository of enzyme binding
              site information, will have a major impact on enzymology research due to the
              solvent mapping web-server, as well as provide an important educational
              resource for studies in biochemistry and molecular biology.  

