Title       : Collaborative Research: Understanding Loss Aversion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0213481

Award Number: 0213481
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251339             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Schkade schkade@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project investigates loss aversion, which is one of the central concepts
              in the decision making and behavioral economics literatures.  Loss aversion is
              said to occur when a loss of a given magnitude has more influence on choices
              than does a gain of the same magnitude (for example, most people will refuse a
              gamble with equal chances to gain or lose $100).  Numerous studies have shown
              that loss aversion plays a key role in important real-world phenomena, such as
              the endowment effect, the status quo bias, the equity-premium puzzle in
              financial economics, the tendency to hold on to 'losing' stocks while selling
              'winners', the discrepancy between valuations of public (especially
              environmental) goods by willingness-to-pay for them or by the compensation
              demanded to give them up, legal principles of compensation for damage, failures
              of negotiations, and many others. 
This project investigates whether a
              positive-negative asymmetry analogous to loss aversion occurs in the experience
              of decision outcomes (i.e., is loss aversion a mistake?).  Preliminary evidence
              reported in the project description suggests that experiences of decision
              outcomes do not always show the good-bad  asymmetry that would be expected from
              loss aversion.  If loss aversion turns out to be a mistake, this work would
              require a major rethinking of the nature of loss aversion, a concept that is
              currently taught to almost every business student in the United States, and
              which plays an important role in many other social science curricula, including
              economics, public policy, law, and psychology.  In addition, the possibility
              that loss aversion in choices could in some cases be a mistake, in the sense
              that it does not reflect an asymmetry in experience, would require a
              wide-ranging reanalysis of the many practical decisions where loss aversion has
              been found to play a significant role. 
 
ABSTRACT

Principal investigator:
              Schkade, David
Institution:  University of Texas at Austin
Proposal ID :
              0213481
Proposal Title:  Collaborative Research:  Understanding loss
              aversion

This project investigates loss aversion, which is one of the
              central concepts in the decision making and behavioral economics literatures. 
              Loss aversion is said to occur when a loss of a given magnitude has more
              influence on choices than does a gain of the same magnitude (for example, most
              people will refuse a gamble with equal chances to gain or lose $100).  Numerous
              studies have shown that loss aversion plays a key role in important real-world
              phenomena, such as the endowment effect, the status quo bias, the
              equity-premium puzzle in financial economics, the tendency to hold on to
              'losing' stocks while selling 'winners', the discrepancy between valuations of
              public (especially environmental) goods by willingness-to-pay for them or by
              the compensation demanded to give them up, legal principles of compensation for
              damage, failures of negotiations, and many others. 
This project investigates
              whether a positive-negative asymmetry analogous to loss aversion occurs in the
              experience of decision outcomes (i.e., is loss aversion a mistake?). 
              Preliminary evidence reported in the project description suggests that
              experiences of decision outcomes do not always show the good-bad  asymmetry
              that would be expected from loss aversion.  If loss aversion turns out to be a
              mistake, this work would require a major rethinking of the nature of loss
              aversion, a concept that is currently taught to almost every business student
              in the United States, and which plays an important role in many other social
              science curricula, including economics, public policy, law, and psychology.  In
              addition, the possibility that loss aversion in choices could in some cases be
              a mistake, in the sense that it does not reflect an asymmetry in experience,
              would require a wide-ranging reanalysis of the many practical decisions where
              loss aversion has been found to play a significant role.

