Title       : Preparation, Studies, and Applications of Lanthanide-Transition Metal Arrays:
               Cyclic Organohydroborate Derivatives of Lanthanides and Metallocenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0213491

Award Number: 0213491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon G. Shore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Sheldon G. Shore, Chemistry Department, Ohio State University, is supported
              by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division for research into lanthanide-transition metal arrays and
              into lanthanide and metallocene complexes that contain cyclic organohydroborate
              moieties. The project has two main objectives. The first is to prepare and
              study complexes that are composed of combinations of lanthanide and transition
              metals. Complexes containing an anionic three dimensional array (CuCN) into
              which a lanthanide element is sequestered will be prepared. Additionally, three
              dimensional extended arrays that contain carbonyl bridges between a transition
              metal such as Co and a lanthanide metal such as Yb and  three dimensional
              arrays that are composed of  hydroxo-oxo-clusters of a lanthanide such as Yb
              linked to transition metal carbonylate anions will be targeted. These species
              will be evaluated as catalysts for a variety of processes. The  second  aspect 
              of the  project involves the preparation and study of cyclic organohydroborate 
              derivatives  of lanthanides and metallocenes which incorporate the cyclic
              organohydroborate [H2BC8H14] anion. Lanthanide hydroborates have received
              sporadic attention over the years and investigations of hydrobroate derivatives
              of lanthanides in the (II) oxidation state have been extremely limited.
              Preliminary results indicate unusual agostic interactions in these species and
              their ability to undergo hydride abstraction from the Ln-H-B bridge will be
              evaluated.  

Inorganic complexes that contain transition metals display a
              great variety of interesting and useful properties. Many such compounds have
              the ability to catalyze important chemical transformations used in industrial
              processes and in the synthesis of new organic compounds, including
              pharmaceuticals. Compounds that contain both transition metal atoms and also
              lanthanide ("rare earth elements" such as ytterbium or gadolinium) atoms have
              heretofore been rare. There are good reasons to expect that such compounds will
              have novel, interesting and important properties, such as the ability to
              catalyze important chemical reactions. Building on experiences gained in
              successful research supported by NSF in the past, Shore and his colleagues will
              devise methods to prepare compounds containing both lanthanide and
              transition-metal atoms, characterize those compounds, and explore their
              properties. In addition, new types of compounds containing groups of two
              interlinked boron atoms will also be prepared and their properties explored. 
              Graduate students involved in this work will acquire expertise in several
              aspects of metal and main group chemistry, as well as in related areas of
              engineering. 

