Title       : Influence of Sensory Input and Environmental Stress on Brain Development,
               Behavior and Genomic Activity in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0213921

Award Number: 0213921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299655             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. deBelle debelle@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1191,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Both inherited and environmental factors influence central nervous system (CNS)
              development, behavior, and gene activity throughout the lifetimes of animals. 
              Sensory enrichment generally has a positive effect on CNS development, although
              the behavioral consequences of sensory enrichment are still in question. 
              Alternatively, stress exposure typically disrupts CNS development, with known
              detrimental effects on behavioral and cognitive abilities.  The proposed
              research focuses on the Drosophila mushroom body, a conserved structure in the
              insect brain necessary for olfactory learning.  Normal mushroom body
              development has been demonstrated in genetic, transgenic and tissue ablation
              studies to be critical for cognitive functions in flies.  Environmental
              conditions greatly affect Drosophila mushroom bodies in several ways. 
              Artificially enriched visual and olfactory conditions enhance its development,
              while exposure to stressful temperatures and chemicals disrupt its anatomy. 
              Hence, the opposite effects of enrichment and stress on CNS development should
              be counteractive and mirror behavioral and cognitive abilities as well as gene
              activity in the CNS.  Specifically, the proposed research will establish the
              consequences of ecologically relevant variation in olfactory enrichment and
              thermal stress during development on (1) mushroom body and general anatomy, (2)
              behavior, and (3) gene expression in Drosophila.  This study will identify
              fundamental relationships between environment, brain development, behavior, and
              gene expression through the integration of molecular, genetic, structural and
              functional perspectives.
