Title       : Study of the ALDOL Reaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0213381

Award Number: 0213381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Williard Paul_Williard@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 0000,1944,1960,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Alkali metal (Li, Na, K and Cs) and a very few additional cationic (B, Zn, and
              Ti) stabilized reagents are among the most widely utilized organometallic
              reagents in organic synthesis. However, many questions remain unanswered
              concerning their solution and solid-state structures and their reactions. A
              better understanding of the aggregation state, the coordination number, the
              geometry of the attached ligands, and the intimate structural features have
              begun to provide a more thorough model for use in predicting the
              stereoselectivity in reactions utilizing these reagents. Professor Williard
              proposes a research program designed to obtain structural information by
              diffraction analyses for many commonly utilized carbanionic reagents. Specific
              to this proposal is a focus on the Aldol reaction. The long-range goal is to
              fit the structural information that is obtained into a more coherent pattern of
              models utilized to control and to predict mechanism and stereoselectivity.
              Controlling stereoselectivity in organic synthesis is especially important to
              the design of new reagents. An emphasis will be placed on the solid-state
              structural studies of highly reactive and synthetically important carbanionic
              intermediates. This project will target specific reactive intermediates, which
              are the basis of almost all of our synthetic mechanistic models. A well-known
              example is the often-cited Zimmerman-Traxler transition state model for
              enolate/aldol reactions. Although this particular structural model is applied
              with reasonable success to the correlation of stereoselectivity of many enolate
              reactions, very little experimental evidence exists to establish the validity
              of this model. Hence, a major goal of this project is to provide structural
              information and specific mechanistic details that can be directly related to
              established models such as the popular Zimmerman-Traxler model.

With this
              Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the research
              of Professor Paul G. Williard of Brown University. Professor Williard is a
              leading x-ray crystallographer and an organic chemist who is interested in
              correlating the structure of enolate salts with their reactivity using aldol
              chemistry, which is the key to carbon-carbon bond formation in organic
              synthesis. His work will involve undergraduate students as researchers and the
              results will be of significant practical importance to the chemical
              manufacturing industry. 

