Title       : Curiae: Digitizing U.S. Supreme Court Records and Briefs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0213999

Award Number: 0213999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Blair Kauffman blair.kauffman@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will digitize historic records and briefs of the United States
              Supreme Court, and make them available to the public through the Project's web
              site and database, at http://curiae.law.yale.edu. The Project web site will
              provide public access to electronic versions of more than 2,000 records and
              briefs from the 300 most important U.S. Supreme Court cases in American
              history. Over 150,000 pages of materials will be provided through a
              user-friendly interface, supported by what will be the most complete, publicly
              accessible database of historic U.S. Supreme Court records and briefs to date.
              Briefs and oral arguments presented to the Supreme Court provide crucial
              information to scholars, to legal practitioners, and to the public at large as
              they seek to understand America's historic constitutional battles and Supreme
              Court decisions. Unfortunately, the public has highly inadequate access to
              these valuable materials. Bound print versions of these materials are rare,
              difficult to locate, and continue to be subject to significant damage through
              use; on-line versions do not provide access to the bulk of the most significant
              case materials and are often costly to use. The web site and documents will be
              searchable both full-text and by individually-indexed fields at the project
              site, in addition to through public search engines. All documents will be
              freely available to all users. Initial case selection will be made based on
              citation information in historical studies of the Supreme Court and
              constitutional law casebooks. Copies of the briefs, oral arguments, and related
              materials will then be transferred to electronic format by a data conversion
              service. The files produced by the service will be located on the Yale
              University institutional web server. The accessibility of these materials will
              not only save researchers time, but will encourage and allow research and
              analysis that would not otherwise have been undertaken. 
