Title       : The Relationship Between Lateral Gene Transfer and Patterns of Diversification
               of Sulfate-Reducing Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0213186

Award Number: 0213186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313198             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Stahl dastahl@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jesse G. Dillon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Drs. David A. Stahl and Jesse G. Dillon of the University of Washington have
              been awarded a grant to study the evolutionary histories of certain
              microorganisms, and how they develop new metabolic capabilities.  Stahl and
              Dillon will focus their research on microbes that respire ("breathe") sulfate
              rather than oxygen, asking how they acquired this ability.  Earlier studies
              have shown that exchange of genetic information between phylogenetically widely
              separated microbial groups has contributed to the evolution of
              sulfate-respiring microbes.   However, the role this process (horizontal gene
              transfer) has played in their speciation and diversification is unknown.  These
              investigators will use molecular and culture-based techniques, in combination
              with high-speed sorting of single cells using flow cytometry technology, to
              better resolve the contribution of horizontal gene transfer to the speciation
              process.

It is known that organisms that live by sulfate respiration were
              present on earth at least as early as 3.5 billion years ago.  Thus, they
              represent one of the earliest types of life on earth.  Today they play a
              central role in the sulfur cycle, a key biogeochemical process on our planet. 
              They are widely distributed in the environment and contribute to the
              biodegradation of organic matter in virtually all habitats lacking oxygen.  For
              example, they can be responsible for one half of the total carbon degradation
              occurring in near-shore marine sediments.  Although sulfate respiring
              microorganisms are central participants in global sulfur and carbon cycles,
              little is known about how this mode of living originated and how it has
              diversified within and among different earth habitats.  The study of how
              horizontal gene transfer has influenced the distribution of sulfate respiring
              organisms will contribute to a better understanding of the microbial speciation
              process, and also address a more fundamental question of the origin of our
              planet's biogeochemical cycles.

