Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0213695

Award Number: 0213695
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12240000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Russell russell@mail.pse.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,9178,9181,9251,AMPP,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the
              University of Massachusetts Amherst supports an interdisciplinary program in
              the area of polymeric materials. The Center is entitled  "Materials Research
              Science and Engineering Center on Polymers". 

The research is organized into
              three interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs).   Tailored Interfaces (IRG 1)
              focuses on controlling the lateral order in thin polymer films using a variety
              of chemical, surface structural, and applied field techniques.  IRG 2 on
              Structured Materials in Supercritical Fluids is concerned with the
              incorporation of supercritical CO2 in polymers with emphasis on gaining a
              fundamental understanding (diffusion, thermodynamics, interfacial interactions)
              of the process.   Aqueous Polymer Assembly  (IRG 3) investigates the assembly
              of polymers in aqueous solutions.  The goal is to understand the contributions
              of various forces (electrostatic, hydrophobic, hydrodynamic, etc) in order to
              predict the final nano structured material. 

The Center has active education
              and outreach programs with special emphasis on undergraduate and K-12 teacher
              education.  Effective links to the liberal arts colleges for women (Smith and
              Mount Holyoke) have been established.  A total of 8 undergraduates will be
              sponsored at Smith and Mount Holyoke.  Other ties to undergraduates are
              developed through faculty links at Howard U. and Harvey Mudd College.  The
              Center's outreach to colleges is leveraged by a NSF Research Site on Education
              in Chemistry award (RSEC) with Smith, Mount Holyoke and Amherst Colleges. 
              

The MRSEC operates eleven shared experimental facilities which are also an
              effective tool in the education outreach program. The Center has a well
              developed industrial oureach program.  The Center for UMass-Industry Research
              on Polymers (CUMIRP) leverages the MRSEC's outreach efforts by linking
              industrial sponsors with UMass research programs, faculty, and students. 
              CUMIRP also fosters education links to industry in the form of the industrial
              visitors program (several week visits by industrial scientists at UMass),
              industrial scientist speaker program, and participation of industrial
              scientists on dissertation committees.

Participants in the Center include 34
              senior investigators, 2 postdoctoral associates, 30 graduate students and
              support for undergraduates and K-12 teachers.  Professor Thomas P. Russell
              directs the MRSEC. 










