Title       : RUI: Testing for Wage Discrimination: Measuring Relative Female Productivity in
               Nineteenth-Century English Agriculture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0213954

Award Number: 0213954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72039              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce Burnette burnettj@wabash.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wabash College
	      301 West Wabash
	      Crawfordsville, IN  47933    317/362-1400

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While it is well known that women have received lower wages than men throughout
              history, there is no agreement about how to interpret this fact.  Economists
              who believe that markets work generally assume that the difference in wages is
              a measure of the difference in productivity between men and women.  Historians
              are often more skeptical of markets, and many assume that these wage
              differences indicate that women were underpaid.  Unfortunately, little work has
              been done to test which of these hypotheses is closest to the truth.  This
              project tests which interpretation is correct by comparing wages to measures of
              productivity derived from an estimated production function.  Using farm
              accounts from English archives, this project creates a data set containing
              measures of outputs and inputs from a number of farms in early
              nineteenth-century England and uses this data set to estimate a production
              function, and thus the marginal productivity of male and female workers.  Once
              the relative productivity of female workers has been determined, comparison
              with their relative wages will show whether women were paid appropriate market
              wages or were underpaid. 
      The results of this study have implications
              for how we understand labor markets.  At issue is the question of whether wages
              are determined by social custom or by productivity.  It is clear that women
              were paid lower wages than men throughout most of history, but why they were
              paid lower wages is still an open question that this project will attempt to
              answer.  This project will leave other questions unanswered.  The production
              function can determine women's productivity relative to men's, but it cannot
              determine the reasons why women's productivity differed from men's.  This
              project tests for wage discrimination, which occurs if wages do not match the
              workers' productivity, but it does not test for discrimination in general. 
              Discrimination comes in many forms, including limited access to some
              occupations, and may exist even if women were not underpaid in farm labor.  

