Title       : Novel Stable Chiral Ligation for Asymmetric Organoborane Conversions via
               10-Substituted-9-borabicyclo[3.3.2]decanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0213595

Award Number: 0213595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Soderquist jas@janice.uprr.pr  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this work involve several aspects of organoboron chemistry. 
              Professor Soderquist and his group will first prepare a number of chiral allyl,
              crotyl, allenyl, and alkynyl boron reagents which contain the
              9-borabicyclo[3.3.2]decane framework.  The allyl, crotyl, and allenyl reagents
              will be utilized in asymmetric addition reactions to prochiral aldehydes and
              ketones.  The chiral alkynyl organoboron reagents will be used in asymmetric
              conjugate addition reactions to enones.  Boron NMR will be used to assess the
              stereoselectivities of these addition reactions.    

With this award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr.
              John A. Soderquist of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Puerto
              Rico.  Dr. Stewart will work on the development of organoboron reagents capable
              of effecting a number of chemical reactions.  This group will explore
              stereoselective addition reactions using molecules containing ketones and
              aldehydes as substrates.  These addition reactions produce molecules which are
              chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make only one of the two
              possible forms (a single enantiomer).  Development of this family of reactions
              is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today.
               Students trained during the course of this work will gain skills needed by the
              pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals industries which now produces a number
              of single enantiomer compounds. 



