Title       : Columnar Cacti; A Critical Resource For Avian Consumers? Quantifying Avian
               Community Responses and Nutrient Fluxes in Natural and Experimental Settings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0213659

Award Number: 0213659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Blair O. Wolf wolf@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1141,1182,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Large columnar cacti, such as the saguaro (Carnegiea gigantea), are prominent
              features of
many ecosystems. Because of their extensive distribution and
              abundant production of large
succulent fruit they play an important role in
              structuring food webs and ecosystems. Up until
now, however, researchers
              studying the ecological and evolutionary aspects of plant-frugivore
mutualisms
              have largely ignored this important group of plants. These succulent fruit may
              be
particularly important in hot deserts where high air temperatures and water
              scarcity may
constrain animal behavior as well as the timing and investment in
              reproduction. The saguaro's
fruit are available during the driest and hottest
              period (June-July) of the summer in the Sonoran
Desert, before the onset of
              monsoon rains.
In this research, I use a two-faceted approach to assessing the
              importance of a unique
resource, the saguaro, to a community of avian
              consumers. The proposed research has several
features that set it apart from
              earlier studies examining plant -animal interactions: 1) it
              combines
observational data of resource use by individual consumers with
              direct measurements nutrient
transfer between the plant resource and a
              community of consumers using stable isotopes as
tracers; 2) it quantifies both
              temporal changes in fruit availability and changes in avian
abundance,
              diversity, and productivity and 3) it directly manipulates resource
              availability,
through fruit removal, while quantifying changes in consumer
              abundance, diversity, and
productivity. Taken in concert, these studies
              provide a unique approach to assessing the
importance of presumed irkeystonely
              or irfoundationlr resources by: 1) directly quantifying the
flux of nutrients
              between a primary producer and individual consumers and 2) through a
              fruit
removal experiment, examining the effects of the fruit resource on
              consumer abundance,
biodiversity, and productivity.
I expect this research to
              produce an extensive array of new insights into: 1) the water and
energy
              balance of desert birds; 2) the role of cacti as consumer resources in arid and
              semi-arid
ecosystems; 3) frugivory and nutrient transfer rates between
              plant-consumer interactions and 4)
community dynamics as it relates to changes
              in resource levels. This work will also quantify how
different consumer groups
              (seed predators versus seed dispersers) interact with the plant to affect
the
              plant's reproductive potential. It will provide the first comparative analysis
              of traditional
methods of studying resource use to the newer techniques using
              stable isotopes.
At the same time, it will be among the first studies to
              quantify the effects of removal of a
presumed irKeystone Plant Resourcele on
              the abundance, diversity and reproductive output of an
entire animal
              community. This research will also be the first to quantify the importance of
              a
single resource to the nutrient and water balance of multiple species of
              different body sizes,
foraging modes and dietary guilds in any ecosystem. This
              work should also provide important
new empirical evidence on how home range
              size and foraging mode affect individual
exploitation of a resource
              system.
Finally, this research will bring all facets of the scientific process
              to a large number of
graduate and undergraduate students. Twenty undergraduate
              students and 1 graduate student will
obtain extensive research experience
              working on this project and it is likely that many more will
be trained
              through the REU program. This research is bound to have a major inpact with
              the
public as well, because of my association with the Arizona-Sonora Desert
              Museum. Research
results from this project will be the basis of a centerpiece
              display at the museum that explores the
scientific process and the
              interactions of saguaros with the other inhabitants of the Sonoran
Desert.
