Title       : Emerging Wildlife Diseases: Threats to Amphibian Biodiversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0213851

Award Number: 0213851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Collins jcollins@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew T. Storfer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce E. Longcore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth W. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1356      INTEGRATED RSCH CHALL IN ENVIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1356,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Frogs and salamanders are key contributors to many ecosystem functions.  It is a
              concern, therefore, that amphibian species are declining worldwide, some to
              extinction.  Among the suspected causes of amphibian declines is the emergence
              of infectious diseases.  The proposed research will answer a series of
              questions designed to test how extinction, disease, and environmental change
              are linked.  Do novel, highly virulent pathogens increase the chance of
              extinction?  Does the health of the host change the risk of infection?  Are
              there environmental conditions that increase the likelihood animals become ill?
               Why do emerging diseases drive some populations or species to extinction but
              not others?  An international team of molecular biologists, immunologists,
              pathologists, population ecologists, and epidemiologists will use experiments
              and observations in the field and laboratory to answer these and related
              questions.  

The number of species on Earth is diminishing, and these losses
              affect the capacity of ecosystems to deliver the goods and services required to
              sustain life.  Infectious diseases are likely responsible for species losses in
              some ecosystems, but relatively little is known about how pathogens increase
              the risk of extinction.  From time to time the decline of a key species, for
              example the American eagle, signals a degrading environment that also threatens
              many other organisms.  It is important to understand how infectious diseases
              and amphibian declines are linked if we are to ensure a high quality
              environment for our generation and those that follow.   


