Title       : MIT Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0213282

Award Number: 0213282
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22222000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Rubner rubner@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,7503,9161,9177,9178,9251,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology supports a broad-based interdisciplinary
              research program.  The research is conducted in five interdisciplinary research
              groups (IRGs).  These include Microphotonic Materials and Structures (IRG 1)
              where new physical phenomena in materials are discovered for which relevant
              length scales are comparable to a photon wavelength.  Such "photonic crystals" 
              can exhibit new phenomena that can be formulated by theory and applied in novel
              optical devices.  IRG 2 on Nanostructured Polymer Assemblies  seeks to gain
              understanding of how polymer nanocomposites organize at the molecular level and
              how to enhance or control the performance of electronic, magnetic, biosensor
              and optical devices based on these materials.  Electronic Transport in
              Mesoscopic Semiconductor and Magnetic Structures  (IRG 3) explores charge and
              spin transport in solid-state electronic structures.  Both chemically produced
              as well as lithographically defined nanostructures are investigated.  IRG 4 on
              the Science and Engineering of Solid-State Portable Power Sources focuses on
              the fundamental science and engineering of materials for solid-state
              electro-chemical power sources.  The ultimate goal of the IRG is to apply this
              fundamental knowledge to develop ultra-high performance batteries.  Quantum
              Magnetism, Correlated Electrons and Superconductivity in Transition Metal
              Oxides (IRG 5) investigates the effects of carrier doping, temperature and
              magnetic fields on materials with strongly correlated electron systems.  Such
              materials exhibit unusual electronic, magnetic and superconducting properties
              which are currently not understood.  Future activities in this IRG are expected
              to be reduced.  The Center has a strong education program directed toward
              graduate students, undergraduates, middle and high school students and K-12
              teachers.  Emphasis is placed on including underrepresented minorities in these
              programs.  The education activities enjoy the broad participation of MIT
              students and faculty and are closely linked to complementary programs in other
              MIT administrative units, such as the MIT museum and MIT's Council on Primary
              and Secondary Education.  The Center operates shared facilities and has an
              effective industrial outreach program.

Participants in the Center currently
              include 35 senior investigators, 2 postdoctoral associates, 28 graduate
              students,  33 undergraduates, and 2 technicians and other support personnel.  
              Professor Michael F. Rubner directs the MRSEC. 

 













