Title       : Novel Carbon Media for Separation Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0213529

Award Number: 0213529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan V. Olesik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,9184,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project of Professor Susan Olesik of Ohio State University, supported by the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry program, is to develop chromatographic media
              capable of separating compounds that differ minimally in their structure. 
              Recent studies on the mechanisms of retention on glassy carbon (GC) have shown
              that glassy carbon is capable of interacting strongly with both polar and
              nonpolar analytes through different retention mechanisms.  Accordingly the
              chromatographic applications of glassy carbon have expanded substantially. 
              Also, solid adsorbents are typically very good candidates for the separation of
              compounds that differ minimally in structure.  Due to the polymer precursor and
              the method of production, there is presently only one commercially-available
              glassy carbon material for the separation of compounds and it is limited to the
              configuration of porous particles.  New precursor polymers, diacetylenic
              polymers, allow the production of glassy carbon at low temperatures with
              minimal weight loss.  These precursor polymers are also readily soluble in
              organic solvents allowing the production of continuous low temperature glassy
              carbon films.  In addition, the microcrystallite size and the extent of
              graphitization can be varied with film processing temperatures.  Furthermore,
              low temperature glassy carbon (LTGC) surfaces can be made that include
              noncarbon atoms covalently bound in its structure.

Fabricated
              chromatographic media such as these have potential applications to the
              separation and purification of a large number of chemicals, including
              pharmaceuticals.  This work will study the surface chemistry of the low
              temperature glassy carbons (LTGC) produced using select diacetylenic polymers
              and will develop new selective chromatographic media based on the surface
              chemistry.  LTGCs are expected to be distinctive and should provide unique
              chromatographic selectivity and extensive applications.  Pure carbon LTGC,
              perfluorinated LTGC, and nitrogen-containing LTGC films will be characterized
              for use in liquid chromatography.  New configurations of GC, specifically
              nonporous LTGC particles, will be compared to the thin film media. 

