Title       : Money, Interest, and the Channels of Monetary Transmission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0213461

Award Number: 0213461
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Ireland irelandp@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              How diverse are the channels through which monetary policy actions impact on the
              economy? Can the overall stance of monetary policy be summarized simply by
              examining the behavior of the short-term nominal interest rate? Or do changes
              in the money stock matter as well? These questions--the ones to be addressed in
              this research project--have implications, not just for the specification of
              popular macroeconomic models, but also for the way in which US macroeconomic
              policy may have to be conducted in the not-too-distant future.  The starting
              point for addressing these questions is a benchmark model of the monetary
              transmission mechanism, variants of which appear throughout the recent
              literature on monetary policy and its effects on the economy. This benchmark
              model assumes that the impact of monetary policy on output comes exclusively
              through the effects that policy has on the short-term nominal interest rate.
              Changes in the money stock can matter for the behavior of output, but only to
              the extent that those changes in money affect the interest rate first. The
              project considers two sets of modifications to this benchmark model, both of
              which imply that changes in the money stock play a more important, direct role
              in the transmission mechanism. The first modifications introduce direct effects
              of money through nonseparabilities in a representative household's utility
              function. The second--and more extensive--modifications permit money to become
              a component of private-sector wealth in a way that the benchmark model does
              not. In this second modified model, a Pigouvian real balance effect arises,
              allowing monetary policy to influence the economy even after the nominal
              interest rate hits its zero lower bound.  A distinguishing feature of this
              research project is that each of the models considered will be estimated with
              formal econometric techniques; statistical hypothesis tests will then be used
              to discriminate between competing views of the monetary transmission mechanism.
              


