Title       : Strong Electronic Correlations in Layered Materials, in Nanoscale Dynamics, and
               in Actinide Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0213818

Award Number: 0213818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $504000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Marston marston@physics.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Sophisticated experimental studies of several classes of layered materials, as
              well as recent advances in the fabrication and characterization of
              nanostructures such as quantum dots and wires, require a deeper theoretical
              understanding of strongly correlated electronic systems.  Realistic
              descriptions of aqueous actinide complexes also require the treatment of strong
              corelations in ways that go beyond the usual methods of quantum
              chemistry.

This theoretical research will employ a combination of systematic
              analytical and numerical methods to establish phase diagrams, to study
              far-from-eqilibrium dynamics, and to study charge-transfer in complex
              materials.  The role of strong electronic correlations will be investigated in
              three different electronic systems: layered materials such as the cuprate high
              temperature and organic superconductors, and quantum antiferromagnets; quantum
              many-body theory far-from-equilibrium as seen recently in the Kondo effect in
              quantum dots and Luttinger liquid behavior in quantum wires; and, aqueous
              plutonium complexes as found in nuclear waste.
%%%
This is a broad-based
              theoretical program with the common thread that all critically involve
              electrons which interact strongly.  This calls for new and powerful techniques.
               The problems chosen are diverse and range from the physics of high temperature
              superconductors to the chemistry of nuclear waste materials.
*** 

