Title       : Comparative Constitutional Design of Parliamentary Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0213755

Award Number: 0213755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio Merlo merloa@ssc.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hulya Eraslan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The study of political institutions has recently experienced a renaissance in
              political economy and comparative politics. An interesting class of political
              institutions are multi-party parliamentary democracies, where the executive
              derives its mandate from and is politically responsible to the legislature.
              Parliamentary democracies differ with respect to the specific rules in their
              constitutions that prescribe how their governments form and terminate.
              Parliamentary democracies also differ systematically with respect to the
              observed duration of their government formation processes, the type (i.e.,
              minority, minimum winning, or surplus) and size of the government coalitions
              that result from these processes, and the relative durability of their
              governments. These observations raise the following important questions: Can
              constitutional features account for these observed differences? And, if so,
              which institutions are quantitatively most important for the type and the
              stability of coalition governments? Providing answers to these questions is
              very important for the design (or redesign) of constitutions in modern
              parliamentary democracies and has significant economic implications.

The
              goal of our research is to develop a unified theoretical and empirical
              framework to investigate the effects of a large class of institutions on the
              behavior of coalition governments in parliamentary democracies. Our approach
              consists of specifying a bargaining model of government formation and
              dissolution, estimating the model's parameters, assessing the ability of the
              model to account for key features of the data, and then using the estimated
              structural model to conduct experiments of comparative constitutional design.
              In particular, our proposed research will focus on the structure of parliament
              and, in particular, bicameralism and on government policy and, in particular,
              the budget process.


