Title       : Development of a Novel Inducible/Reversible Gene Knockout System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0213112

Award Number: 0213112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ya-Ping Tang yptang@delphi.bsd.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1192,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gene targeting is a powerful tool for the studies of in vivo gene functions.
              However, the null mutants produced by currently available targeting techniques
              are frequently accompanied by either developmental deficit from subtle to
              embryonic death or non-phenotypes since the deficits associated with the
              missing gene are functionally or genetically compensated. All these concerns
              have dramatically complicated the interpretation of the results or even misled
              the conclusion in terms of gene functions. Therefore, to develop a novel
              technique that is able to solve these concerns is of most importance in the
              studies of in vivo gene functions, especially for behavioral genomics. Based on
              the principles that both trans-acting and cis-acting are the essential
              mechanisms for gene transcription in eukaryotic cells, we have development a
              novel transposon system that is able to tag any gene of interest and produce
              inducible/reversible mRNA knockout in the mouse. The novelty of Dr. Tang's
              system is to change the strategy of deletion of a crucial part of a targeted
              gene, which is the principle for traditional knockout techniques including
              conventional or the currently available conditional gene knockout techniques,
              such as Cre/loxP recombination system, to the strategy of inactivation of
              (inducible knockout) or reactivation of (reversible to normal) mRNA
              transcription. The most striking promise of this system is to allow one to
              temporally associate mRNA transcription with a given biological or behavioral
              process. Therefore, it will be particularly useful for the studies of gene
              function in relation to complicated biological and behavioral processes. There
              are 20,000-25,000 genes in the mouse genome. With 30% genes expressed in the
              brain, at least 7,500 genes are necessary to tag and further study for a
              comprehensive understanding of behavioral genomics. Based on the feasibility of
              this novel system and the progress in the mouse genome project, it is
              reasonable to establish a small library for gene targeted transposon tagged ES
              cell lines. At the first stage, the PI will produce presenilin-1 (PS-1) and
              BDNF transposon tagged ES cell lines and then the knockout mice to validate
              this system and later on, 20-60 ES lines are expected to be established. Due to
              the fact that to maintain colonies of mutant mouse lines requires extensive
              husbandry space as well as labor, it will be eventually required to establish a
              large or complete tagged ES cell library in our whole research community. Thus,
              the development of this novel technology will significantly contribute to other
              efforts on the functional (behavioral) genomics in this post-genome era.
              




