Title       : Mechanisms of Axon Sorting in the Zebrafish Visual System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0213085

Award Number: 0213085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chi-Bin Chien chi-bin.chien@hsc.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1190,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Chi-Bin Chien

Lay Abstract
-------------------------
To form the correct
              circuitry in the developing nervous system, 
billions of nerve cells must send
              their axons (individual nerve 
fibers) over long distances to find their
              specific target cells. How 
these axons find their targest is one of the
              fundamental questions of 
developmental neuroscience. When many axons take
              similar pathways and 
form a nerve bundle or axon tract, individual axons are
              often highly 
organized within the larger tract. How such sorting within axon
              
tracts is achieved is a basic question of axon guidance that has been
              
studied very little.

In the visual system, retinal axons exit the eye and
              form the optic 
nerve, where they are organized in a very precise array
              according to 
their point of origin. Shortly after passing through the optic
              
chiasm, these retinal axons reorganize in a characteristic way, so 
that
              they are sorted out according to a different order as they grow 
through the
              optic tract on their way to visual centers in the brain. 
This sorting of
              retinal axons in the optic tract allow the proper 
formation of normal visual
              connections, and is therefore critical for 
normal vision.

This project
              will study the mechanisms of axon sorting in the visual 
system of the
              zebrafish, Danio rerio. The zebrafish visual system has 
many fundamental
              similarities (both genetic and anatomical) to humans 
and other vertebrates,
              and so the principles discovered here are 
likely to have wide applicability.
              In a particular zebrafish mutant 
strain, called boxer, a subset of the
              retinal axons fail to 
reorganize normally within the optic tract. Thus,
              normal function of 
the boxer gene is critical for normal development of the
              visual 
system. The proposed experiments will analyze whether boxer function
              
is required in the eye or in the brain, and will clone boxer to 
determine
              which mutated gene is responsible for the visual system 
defect. These
              experiments will shed light on a critical aspect of how 
the brain is properly
              wired during development.

