Title       : Collaborative Research: Holocene Drought Cycles and Impacts on the Northern
               Great Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0213246

Award Number: 0213246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric C. Grimm grimm@museum.state.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ill St Museum Soc
	      502 S. Spring
	      Springfield, IL  62706    /   -

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This study will utilize high-resolution analysis of cores from closed-basin
              lakes in the northern Great Plains to determine the frequency, intensity,
              duration, periodicity, and synchrony of droughts during the Holocene and to
              examine how vegetation and fire responded to drought.  Since vegetation and
              lakes in the Northern Great Plains are highly sensitive to drought, this region
              offers an extraordinary opportunity to document decadal- to-century scale
              climate cycles in the mid-continental United States. 

The working hypothesis
              is that the signal of drought from a single site is regional and that droughts
              were synchronous across the region.  To test this hypothesis, the study will
              utilize lake-sediment mineralogy, fossil pollen, carbon isotopes of charcoal,
              and charcoal abundance to develop detailed reconstruction of drought cycles
              from the Northern Great Plains at a decadal scale.  This will facilitate
              evaluation of the teleconnections between mid-continental climate and the North
              Atlantic region, where recent investigations have linked century to millennial
              scale climate oscillations to variations in solar irradiance. 

This research
              has the potential for broad impact in range of physical and social sciences.
              Assessment of drought impacts forecast by atmospheric models for the Northern
              Great Plains requires understanding of natural drought variability. Evidence
              from paleoscience suggests that 20th century droughts (e.g., the Dust Bowl) do
              not provide perspective on the range of severe droughts that have occurred in
              even the recent past.   Historical evidence is incomplete and paleoscience data
              have not yet been assembled at appropriate temporal and spatial scales to
              assess the intensity, periodicity, and impacts of past droughts.

