Title       : A Computational Capability for Fast and Reliable Characterization of Protein
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0213840

Award Number: 0213840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $888614             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ying Xu xuy1@ornl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dong Xu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Hurst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Uberbacher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Protein-protein interactions are at the heart of biological activities. They
              constitute the basic components of many biological processes such as signal
              transduction, cell-cycle control, metabolism, and general cellular machines.
              Characterization of protein-protein interactions in protein complexes in a
              cell, in a systematic manner, represents a highly challenging and important
              problem to functional genomics and proteomics in the post-genome sequencing
              era. An integrated computational capability for characterization of protein
              complexes in a cell will be developed, through (a) analyzing mass spectrometry
              data and chemical cross-linking information and (b) protein docking prediction
              under geometric constraints derived from these experimental data. Initially
              this capability will be tested and validated on a selected set of protein
              complexes from yeast, as a proof of principle. When fully developed, this
              capability will be used for genome-scale cataloging of protein complexes in
              yeast (and other genomes in general). The specific aims of this proposed
              project are: (i) development of improved computational methods for locating and
              identifying cross-links, particularly inter-molecular ones, from mass
              spectrometry data; (ii) development of new computational methods for
              identification of protein complexes and their component proteins, through
              analysis of cross-linking and other experimental data; (iii) development of new
              computational methods for data-constrained docking of two proteins that will
              significantly improve the existing docking methods in both prediction accuracy
              and application generality; (iv) development of new computational methods for
              data-constrained multi-party protein docking; and (v) applications of the
              developed methods to a selected set of protein complexes for their complex
              structure characterization.  The proposed computational capability will
              significantly improve the ability to interrogate protein-protein interactions
              in a way not possible before, and open new doors for the emerging fields of
              functional genomics and proteomics.
Investigation of these computational
              capabilities for characterization of protein complexes will provide a number of
              opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral trainees who are
              interested in moving into the emerging field of computational
              biology/bioinformatics from other disciplines. A number of postdoctoral
              trainees will be hired to implement some of the key components of this
              research, and Ph.D. students will be recruited to work on this project as part
              of their thesis projects. In addition, a computational biology course will be
              offered to the graduate students of the joint ORNL/UTK Graduate Program in
              Genome Science and Technology, in the Fall semester of 2002. Some well-defined
              but challenging issues encountered in this project will be used as student term
              projects through this course. The challenging scientific problems to be solved
              in this project will expose the graduate students and postdoctoral trainees to
              the core issues of bioinformatics, i.e., intelligent and meaningful
              interpretation of massive amount of biological data and computational modeling
              of biological structures/processes, providing an excellent opportunity for
              hands-on training. 
New scientific findings through the implementation of this
              project will be made publicly accessible through journal publications and
              conference presentations. Computer software to be developed in this project
              will be made freely available to the academic and government organizations
              through the Internet. All the biological data generated in this project will be
              organized as databases, and also be made freely and publicly available through
              the Internet.

