Title       : Globalization, Liberalization, and Urban Restructuring in the Less-Developed
               World: A Comparative Study of Social and Spatial Polarization in Accra and
               Mumbai
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0213648

Award Number: 0213648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153438             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Grant rgrant@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Nijman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project is concerned with social and spatial change in large
              cities in developing nations. The research will examine trends of social and
              spatial polarization in residential areas of Accra (Ghana) and Mumbai (India).
              This will involve extensive fieldwork in both cities, with support from local
              universities, and employ site reconnaissance, interviews, census data analysis
              and residential mapping, residential surveys and focus groups. The main
              hypothesis in this study is that policies of economic liberalization in both
              cities have encouraged fundamental changes in urban land use and in urban labor
              markets. We expect to find increasing spatial differentiation of residential
              areas with greater contrasts in terms of types of residential developments and
              in terms of the socio-economic status of their residents. The choice of Accra
              and Mumbai as case studies is based on a number of critical elements that they
              have in common: their location in poor regions; their role as gateway cities;
              their colonial histories; their post-colonial experiences in terms of national
              and global phases in their countries political economy. This project builds on
              a previous NSF-funded study of the changing corporate geographies of Accra and
              Mumbai.

This study is important theoretically because it helps to correct a
              bias in urban studies toward cities in the West and in more developed regions
              of the world economy. It will promote understanding of the social and spatial
              effects of liberalization and of corresponding trends of globalization in major
              urban centers in the developing world. As such, the study will contribute to
              more general theories of economic globalization. From a practical point of
              view, the research is significant because it will provide information about the
              changing geography of inequality in these cities. While rapid urban growth in
              the less developed world is a well-known phenomenon, little is known about the
              emerging human geographies of these cities. Trends of social and spatial
              polarization affect community development and local politics and also have
              ramifications for urban sustainable development and for urban planning and
              management. The results of the research will help illuminate the possible
              social and political risks of current trends and will make recommendations
              regarding sustainable social and spatial development of cities in developing
              nations.

