Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Ethylene Insensitive Loci in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0213154

Award Number: 0213154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Ecker ecker@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

How plants perceive and transduce hormone signals is a fundamental question
              in biology that also has important practical applications. The response to
              ethylene gas serves as a paradigm for understanding of plant hormone signal
              transduction.  Ethylene plays critical roles in development (such as in the
              ripening of fruits) and in responses to a variety of physical and biological
              stresses (such as pathogen attack). Understanding of these various roles of
              ethylene are being addressed using genetic, molecular and biochemical
              approaches in Arabidopsis. In particular, the goal of this project is to
              characterize the functions of the EIN3/EIL family of plant specific DNA-binding
              proteins in ethylene-mediated transcriptional regulation.  EIN3 encodes a
              DNA-binding transcriptional activator protein and is a member of a small gene
              family of EIN3-LIKE (EIL1, EIL2, EIL3, EIL4, EIL5) proteins. Along with another
              transcription activator called ERF1, the EIN3/EIL proteins participate in a
              little understood transcriptional regulatory cascade. This project will
              investigate how the activities of the EIN3/EIL proteins are modulated by
              ethylene and also explore the roles of these proteins in mediating ethylene
              signaling to the various downstream responses. In particular, the possibility
              of posttranslational modification(s), changes in protein stability or
              alterations in the subcellular localization of EIN3/EIL proteins in response to
              ethylene will be examined. In addition, biochemical and genetic approaches will
              be employed to identify EIN3/EIL interacting proteins. Analysis of individual
              EIL1,EIL2, EIL3, EIL4, and EIL5  loss-of-function mutants, various multiple 
              mutant combinations and ectopic expression of these genes will provide
              significant new insight into the possible functions of these genes in
              downstream responses to ethylene. In addition, genome-wide studies of EIN3/EIL
              gene expression and in vivo target identification will be conducted using
              custom gene expression and whole genome tiling arrays, respectively. 
              Identification and characterization of the EIN3/EIL ethylene signaling pathway
              genes and analysis of their interactions with other signaling pathway
              components will provide new insights into tremendous diversity of biological
              affects of the simple hydrocarbon, ethylene. Moreover, understanding of the
              functions of these proteins will allow the ability to modify the beneficial
              and/or detrimental effects of ethylene in any plant, in particular, crops with
              important economic or social value.

