Title       : Coordination and Bioinorganic Chemistry with Sulfur Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0213260

Award Number: 0213260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles G. Riordan riordan@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Charles G. Riordan, Chemistry Department, University of Delaware is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program to develop
              develop homogeneous, coordination complexes of nickel that activate dioxygen
              under mild conditions. A series of monovalent nickel complexes supported by
              poly(thioether)borato ligands will be allowed to react with O2 to generate
              thermally-sensitive, reduced oxygen intermediates. The molecular and electronic
              structure of these intermediates will be studied using low temperature
              spectroscopic techniques including UV-visible, resonance Raman, X-ray
              absorption and X-ray diffraction analyses. These results will be interpreted
              using density functional theory to define the reaction landscape of the
              nickel-oxygen species to establish geometric- and electronic-structure function
              correlations. Concomitant experiments will explore nickel-based activation of
              relatedsubstrates, e.g. elemental sulfur, phosphorous and diazenes,
              RN=NR.

Selective oxidation of organic substrates generally increases their
              utility in the chemical and pharmaceutical arenas. Oxidations employing O2
              represent attractive and environmentally responsible approaches. The approach
              is inspired by an appreciation of the activity and chemical selectivity with
              which metalloproteins utilize dioxygen to synthesize new molecules. Outcomes
              from the studies will have broad implications to industrial and biological
              oxidation processes. The breadth of the research experience will provide
              excellent intellectual and technical training for students in organic and
              inorganic synthesis, physical measurements and kinetic and mechanistic aspects
              of inorganic chemistry. The experience will prepare students for careers in
              either industry or academia. 


