Title       : The Nature and Determinants of Regime Preference and Political Values in Jordan,
               Kuwait, and Palestine: Implications for Arab Politics and for the Study of
               Governance and Democracy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0213944

Award Number: 0213944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222898             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Tessler tessler@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Two interrelated trends in comparative political research address issues that
              are pertinent to the Arab world but very much under-studied in that region. 
              One is the resurgence of interest in culture in general and political culture
              in particular.  The other concerns the attitudes and values of ordinary
              citizens in countries undergoing or seeking to initiate democratic
              transitions.

Against this background, the proposed research will carry out
              public opinion research in three Arab countries in order to examine the nature
              and determinants of attitudes and values pertaining to governance, including
              democratic governance.  The first goal of the investigation is to shed light on
              what has often been called the "missing dimension" in the study of Arab
              politics: how, why, and with what implications do ordinary citizens think about
              the way their societies are and should be governed.  The second goal is to
              connect findings from the study of these Arab societies to efforts in Political
              Science to construct generalizable insights about governance, democratization,
              and political culture in developing countries.

Information about political
              attitudes and values will be collected through public opinion research in
              Jordan, Palestine (West Bank and Gaza), and Kuwait.  These countries have been
              selected for both practical and analytical reasons.  Practical reasons include
              the availability of local scholars and institutions that will participate in
              the project, and also a political climate that permits the conduct of opinion
              research.   Analytical considerations include system-level similarities and
              differences that make cross-national comparison instructive, and also the
              availability of data from prior research in each country, thereby permitting
              longitudinal as well as cross-sectional comparison.

The project's
              explanatory contribution will be enhanced through the incorporation of both a
              cross-national and a longitudinal comparative dimension.  The three countries
              will be examined at two different points in time.  Similar findings across
              space and/or time will suggest relationships that are likely to be
              generalizable, at least to the Arab world and perhaps to non-democratic
              polities in other developing areas.  Alternatively, different findings will
              permit informed speculation about the conditionalities associated with
              particular patterns and variable relationships.

In addition, further
              extending the project's comparative dimension, findings from the Arab Middle
              East will be compared to findings from political attitude research in other
              developing countries.  The goal in this connection is to reduce exclusion of
              the Arab experience from efforts in comparative politics to develop theoretical
              insights of broad applicability.


