Title       : Correlational selection on physiology and alternative male strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0213179

Award Number: 0213179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry R. Sinervo sinervo@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa C. Hazard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel P. Costa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Miles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Both reproduction and whole-organism performance are influenced by  the
              endocrine system, and all of these traits have heritable, genetic components. 
              Elucidating links among genetics, reproductive function, performance, and the
              endocrine and immune systems is essential to understanding how evolution has
              shaped reproductive strategies and physiology.  Systems with discrete
              polymorphisms provide good models for examining the relationships among these
              traits since variation both within and among morphs can be examined.  Male
              side-blotched  lizards (Uta stansburiana) have three different color morphs
              (orange,  blue, or yellow throat), which arise from a gene of major effect. 
              Each of the types exhibits a different physiological and mating strategy
              (defense of a large territory with multiple females, defense  of an individual
              female, or "sneaking" into another male's  territory). In particular,
              territorial orange-throated males have high stamina and high levels of plasma
              testosterone, relative to the other two types.  However, these males also have
              higher mortality rates than the other morphs.  Testosterone may decrease the 
              capability of the immune system to cope with infectious agents.  In  laboratory
              breeding studies, sprint speed, endurance, and standard metabolic rate of
              parents and progeny with known throat color genotypes will be measured. In the
              field, variation in plasma hormones  (testosterone and corticosterone) and
              their effects on sprint speed,  endurance, and field metabolic rate will be
              studied.  DNA paternity analysis will provide field pedigrees to complement
              genetic studies in the  laboratory. These experiments will allow the
              investigators to evaluate the links among hormones, physiology, and
              reproduction.  Currently no data are available to address relations between
              genetics, physiology,  performance, and reproduction; this research
              accomplishes this major goal and establishes a database for future work.  Our
              work addresses  the fundamental forces that shape the joint evolution of
              endocrine function, physiology and immune function.
