Title       : QEIB: Gas Exchange Across Insect Eggshells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0213087

Award Number: 0213087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53106              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Arthur Woods art.woods@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1155,1649,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Despite a large literature on insect eggshell morphology, little is known about
              the relationship between eggshell morphology and gas transport.  This award
              will support the development of a mathematical model that explicitly connects
              gas flux to eggshell morphology.  The equations will incorporate 6 - 8 of what
              appear a priori to be important eggshell morphological parameters.  The model
              will then be solved numerically and used in two primary ways. (i) Sensitivity
              analyses will identify which morphological parameters have the strongest
              influence on gas flux.  Subsequent morphological work on a common North
              American moth, Manduca sexta, will concentrate on getting the best measures of
              the most important parameters.  (ii)  Once the morphological parameters have
              been obtained, they will be used in conjunction with the model to predict total
              eggshell permeability to each of the three gases.  These predictions will then
              be compared with direct measures of the permeability from other experimental
              work currently in progress.  A good match will indicate that all significant
              factors affecting eggshell permeability have been accounted for and understood.
               A poor match will lead to additional mathematical and experimental work to
              identify the source of error (and in the process an important component of
              eggshell function).  Thus, by design the mathematical and experimental progress
              will be iterative and co-dependent.  The outcome will be a robust model that
              captures the essential elements of eggshell function.  

Such a model will be
              useful in a number of ways. (i) Many species, including Manduca sexta, have
              geographic ranges that span a variety of temperature and humidity conditions. 
              The model will provide a tool for predicting how eggshell structure may vary
              intra-specifically across abiotic environmental gradients.  (ii) Insects as a
              group exhibit spectacular diversity in eggshell form.  The model will provide a
              way to predict how this morphological diversity affects permeability
              characteristics.  (iii) An important methodology for controlling some crop
              pests, especially pests of stored-grains, is atmosphere manipulation.  In
              conjunction with morphological data on eggs of pests species, the model will
              provide a way of evaluating atmosphere-based control strategies.  (iv) Student
              training in mathematics and modeling is increasingly important in biology.  The
              project provides an ideal vehicle for training students to think about the
              relationship between models and experimental work.  The award will support a
              graduate student to participate in model development and parameterization, and
              it is highly likely that additional undergraduates will also participate.


