Title       : Collaborative Research: The Role of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) in
               Modulating Major Hurricane Activity in the U.S. on Interannual to Millennial
               Timescales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0213884

Award Number: 0213884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kam-biu Liu kliu1@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Records from the 20th century indicate considerable variations in coastal
              hurricane activity along the Gulf and Atlantic coastlines of North America.  A
              decade of strong hurricanes on the Gulf coast is followed by a decade of severe
              hurricanes on the East coast.  Preliminary research suggests that these cycles
              are related to the location and strength of the subtropical Atlantic
              high-pressure cell (Bermuda High), perhaps controlled by the strength of the
              North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO).  To explore the dynamics of these
              relationships, it is necessary to consider records of past hurricane activity
              that predate the 20th century.  This research project will examine the role of
              the Bermuda High and the North Atlantic Oscillation in modulating major U.S.
              coastal hurricane activity on time scales ranging from the inter-annual to the
              millennial.  Lakes and marshes along the Atlantic coast and Gulf of Mexico
              coast will be cored, and the overwash sand deposits preserved in these coastal
              sediments will be studied to produce proxy records of past hurricane activity. 
              These geological records and evidence from historical documents will be
              collated with the modern instrumental records using geographic information
              systems (GIS) and statistics.  Past climate patterns will be inferred from
              measured and proxy indices.  The objectives of this project are to better
              understand climate patterns associated with variations in coastal hurricane
              activity and to improve return-period estimates of catastrophic events.  GIS
              will be used to collate the disparate historical archives into an electronic
              document.  Statistical models will be used to distinguish periods of activity
              from inactivity locally and regionally.  A probabilistic framework will be
              adopted to capture the varying levels of uncertainty in the data.

Strong
              hurricanes have enormous societal impact.  High winds, heavy rain, and storm
              surge combine to create a catastrophic threat to life and property.  Coastal
              populations are growing faster than the population at large, thereby
              continually accentuating problem associated with strong hurricanes.  Careful
              examination of historical documents and fresh geological evidence gathered from
              Cape Cod and the Gulf coast through this project will provide valuable clues
              about the regularity of hurricanes in the distant past.  A careful study of
              these records will result in new knowledge about the relationship between
              climate variability and hurricane frequency, which will lead to a better
              understanding of the future threat of a hurricane disaster in the United States
              and nearby nations.

