Title       : Photophysics of Exchange-Coupled Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0213505

Award Number: 0213505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. McCusker mccusker@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 0000,1968,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              James McCusker of Michigan State University is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for research on the
              chemistry of excited states of transition metal complexes, particularly on
              ultra fast reactions of Cr(III) species that contain paramagnetic ligands. 
              Interest in this research is centered on characterizing and explaining effects
              that arise from coupling between two or more unpaired electrons in the
              photochemically important excited states of transition metal complexes.
              Ultrafast process will be studied by spectroscopic techniques, accompanied by
              extensive computations.

Although the energies involved in coupling between
              several unpaired electrons in transition-metal complexes are often small on an
              absolute scale, such effects often determine the chemical and photophysical
              properties of such compounds. There has been relatively little prior study of
              the influence of electronic and magnetic coupling on photochemical and
              photophysical properties of transition metal complexes. The research proposed
              under this proposal has the potential greatly to expand scientific
              understanding of profound effects that electron-electron coupling exerts on
              phochemical reactivity of transition metal species. There are many potential
              applications of such understanding in important technological areas, such as
              the design and fabrication of electronic devices using novel molecular based
              magneto-optical materials.

