Title       : MOBY:A World-Wide Distributed Bioinformatics Analysis System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0213512

Award Number: 0213512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $596028             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lincoln D. Stein lstein@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Damian D. Gessler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A long-term problem in bioinformatics is the need to access, analyze, and
              publish information.  Since both central and distributed solutions have been
              tried, the problem is now how to integrate the information across different
              platforms.  This proposal will provide a general architecture for achieving the
              integration, using a combined client/server, peer-to-peer implementation of the
              web service broker model.  This centralizes information about where data and
              services are located while allowing distributed data acquisition and service
              invocation.  A core of model organism database developers already supports the
              architecture.  The project will deliver a graphical implementation and
              annotation source as well as an application programming interface and proof of
              principle for four model organisms.  This integration of data can change the
              way research and education occur using the Internet and the distributed
              expertise of the community.
