Title       : SGER: Ethnic Diversity, Social Capital, and Public Goods in East Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a0213652

Award Number: 0213652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75624              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Miguel emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This exploratory research attempts to make at least three contributions to the
              literature on the political economy of development, using original data
              collection, microeconometric analysis, and formal theory.  
First, the
              research estimates the impact of ethnic diversity on local public goods
              provision in two countries, Kenya and Tanzania.  Data is being collected on
              local public goods, including school funding, maintenance of wells, and
              community participation in village meetings.  The resulting dataset provides
              information on the impact of ethnic divisions on public good provision across a
              variety of settings and outcomes.  Preliminary empirical results indicate that
              higher local ethnic diversity is associated with sharply lower local funding
              and worse facilities across ninety rural Kenyan primary schools.  The drop in
              funding associated with the change from complete ethnic homogeneity to median
              school ethnic diversity is approximately 25 percent of average local school
              funding, and this relationship is robust to the inclusion of geographic,
              socioeconomic, demographic and teacher quality controls.  Ethnically diverse
              areas also have lower community participation in school committee meetings, as
              well as substantially worse water well maintenance in rural western
              Kenya.
Second, the research  examines how central government policies toward
              ethnicity affect inter-ethnic relations and public goods provision, by
              comparing outcomes across two nearby rural districts: one in western Kenya and
              one in western Tanzania.  Despite their shared geography, history, and colonial
              legacy, central governments in Kenya and Tanzania have followed radically
              different ethnic policies since independence.
Finally,  the research  explores
              the impact of a recent local government decentralization reform in Tanzania -
              which was gradually phased-in across villages - on local public good outcomes. 
              The unique dataset collected in this project allows the author to test the
              hypothesis that decentralization reforms improve public good outcomes, and to
              explore whether such reforms are less effective in ethnically diverse areas due
              to local collective action failures.  Understanding the impacts of
              decentralization in diverse communities has important policy implications given
              the current movement toward decentralization in many African and other less
              developed countries.
The field data collection in Tanzania is being conducted
              in collaboration with a capable local non-governmental organization that has a
              well-trained research field staff and data entry group.  The author has been
              involved in field data collection projects in East Africa since 1995.

