Title       : Collaborative Research: Speaking the Truth in Maritime Risk Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0213700

Award Number: 0213700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139305             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johan R. VanDorp dorpjr@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the past 6 years the principal investigators have developed a 
methodology
              for assessing the risk associated with maritime
transportation. The
              methodology utilizes dynamic simulation of the
maritime transportation system,
              expert judgment elicitation models and
probabilistic risk assessment (PRA)
              techniques. The approach has proven
useful in three major maritime ports in
              the United States i.e. Port of
New Orleans (Mississippi River in Louisiana),
              Port Valdez (Prince
William Sound in Alaska) and Port Seattle (Puget Sound in
              Washington
State). Two of these studies focused on passenger safety, while
              the
other focused on oil transportation risk. The National Research Council
              in
1998 assessed  the methodology and  concluded that representation of
              uncertainty 
in the maritime risk assessment method is lacking. "The Prince
              William Sound 
Risk Assessment is an important step forward in using
              probabilistic risk 
assessment methods to assess the safety of transporting
              oil in large tankers
in PWS. Because the data were very limited, the analysis
              results and the resulting
conclusions are not robust and are necessarily
              uncertain [National Research
Council, 1998]."

This NSF project will allow
              the maritime risk assessment method to live
up to its promise by developing a
              coherent theoretical framework to
address uncertainty. The truth is that we
              are uncertain. Therefore,
speaking the truth implies that we express our
              analysis results in terms
of probability curves rather than fixed points
              estimates. [See, e.g.,
Kaplan, 1997]. The intellectual merit of the research
              stems from the
development of an overarching Bayesian framework for
              addressing
uncertainty when simulation of systems states is combined with
              available
data and expert judgment to assess risk and risk
              intervention
effectiveness. The broader impact of the proposed work is
              primarily
drawn from its applicability to areas other than maritime accident
              risk
such as e.g. maritime security risk (intentional events as opposed
              to
accidents). The framework and methodologies to be developed will
              be
applicable to other transportation modes, such as aviation or road
safety.
              Aside from aviation security and accident risk, the technique
will be directly
              transferable to the ever-increasing problem of runway
incursions as a result
              of increased traffic congestion at our national
airports.
