Title       : Plumage Color Polymorphism in Red-Backed Fairy-Wrens: Mechanism and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0213075

Award Number: 0213075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Webster mwebster@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hubert Schwabl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jordan Karubian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Title:	Plumage color polymorphism in red-backed fairy-wrens: Mechanism and
              function
PI:	Michael S. Webster
Co-PI:	Hubert Schwabl and Jordan
              Karubian

One primary goal of evolutionary biology is to explain biological
              diversity, both within and among species.  Many species show pronounced
              phenotypic variation in both behavior and morphology, with individuals of one
              phenotype looking and behaving very differently from individuals of another
              phenotype.  For example, males of the Australian red-backed fairy-wren (Malurus
              melanocephalus) are of two different types:  some males breed in bright
              plumage, provide relatively little parental care, and seek extrapair
              copulations, whereas other males are cryptically colored, provide much parental
              care, and do not appear to seek extrapair copulations. 
An understanding of
              this sort of phenotypic polymorphism requires an understanding of both the
              mechanisms that produce it and the evolutionary forces that create and maintain
              it.  In this project, Webster et al. will examine the hormonal/physiological
              mechanisms and also the evolutionary forces responsible for polymorphism in the
              red-backed fairy-wren. Correlational analyses of changes in hormone levels will
              be combined with a hormone manipulation experiment to determine the mechanisms
              that cause a male to adopt one plumage type or the other.  In addition,
              experiments with wild and captive birds will be used to thoroughly test whether
              males change plumage type in response to social cues.  At a functional level,
              observations of wild birds, combined with field experiments and genetic
              analyses of parentage, will be used to determine the total reproductive success
              of males with different phenotypes.
This project will be among the first to
              examine a complex intraspecific polymorphism in an endothermic vertebrate from
              both mechanistic and functional perspectives. As such, the study will serve as
              a model for understanding polymorphism in other endothermic organisms, and also
              as a model for a pluralistic approach to the study of natural phenomena. In
              doing so, this project will directly address several current controversies in
              behavioral and evolutionary biology.  Specifically, this study will:  (1) lead
              to a better understanding of the function of conspicuous and polymorphic
              traits;  (2) help clarify the role of hormones in the development of plumage
              color; and (3) elucidate the mechanistic connections between social behavior
              and morphology.



