Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Out of Sight, Out of Mind:
               Legislators' Perceptions and Representation in Congress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0213959

Award Number: 0213959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Hall rlhall@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over twenty years ago, Fenno (1978) called attention to what he called the "key
              problem facing students of the representative-constituency relationship.. .the
              problem of perception." More specifically, Fenno noted the importance of
              viewing the constituency as the legislator does. In other words, "what does an
              elected representative see when he or she sees a constituency." (Fenno 1978).
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research project  addresses this question and
              employs theories from cognitive and social psychology to develop a more
              complete theory of congressional representation. The  project centers on the
              ways in which legislators' conceptions of their constituents are constrained by
              the availability heuristic (Tversky and Kahneman 1974). While political
              scientists have frequently invoked psychological theories in the study of
              public opinion, such theories have rarely been examined in the context of
              political elites. Part of the task of representation requires legislators to
              decide who in the district is interested in a given issue.  The student argues
              that the availability heuristic offers important insight into legislators'
              perceptions of their districts. When making judgments about the interests of
              their district, legislators do not use all the relevant information, but rather
              rely on a subset of relevant information. Those interests (whether organized or
              unorganized) that are more easily accessible are more likely to be included in
              the legislator's perception of the district's interests on a given issue.
              

In this dissertation the student examines selective perception and argues
              that the answer to this question requires the consideration of the availability
              heuristic. The central question  investigated is what explains perceptual
              variations across legislators? The student offers that any answer to this
              question must take into account numerous hypotheses from the political science
              literature in combination with theories from cognitive psychology. It is this
              latter question that constitutes the majority of the empirical focus of this
              project.

The student  approaches the question of who legislators perceive as
              being part of the interested constituency on a given issue by focusing on
              current members of the U.S. House of Representatives and their legislative
              staff. Since the research is issue-specific, he focuses on two policies within
              each of two issue areas: the Patients' Bill of Rights and Medicare reform
              (health policy), and bankruptcy reform and the Internet tax moratorium
              (financial services policy). She uses in-person interviews with legislative
              staff and legislators to answer the question of how legislators see their
              constituents. The dependent variable of legislators' perceptions of who in
              their district is interested in a given issue is measured by two instruments
              included in the interviews with legislative staff and legislators. The
              combination of interviews and a dataset comprised of economic, political, and
              demographic variables allows both descriptive and qualitative analysis as well
              as a more conventional statistical analysis. 



