Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Incremental Development of Primate Enamel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0213994

Award Number: 0213994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence B. Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dental remains are the most common, well-preserved type of fossil evidence for
              extinct species of primates. Many researchers have studied aspects of tooth
              shape, wear, and developmental timing in an attempt to understand the evolution
              of humans and their closest relatives. Teeth are made up of several hard
              tissues: enamel, dentine, and cementum. One recent area of research is based on
              enamel microstructure, which is the internal microscopic structure of a tooth
              crown. Enamel forms in an incremental manner similar to the growth pattern of
              tree rings, regular lines that record the number of years a tree has been
              growing. During tooth growth, a series of near-weekly and daily lines are
              formed that record the position of the developing front and the daily growth of
              the enamel-forming cells. Counts and measurements of these features provide
              information on the rate, pattern, and total time required to form the tooth
              crown. The first aim of this study is to refine our current understanding of
              enamel development by establishing the periodicity, or frequency, of
              incremental features in a large sample of newborn and juvenile pigtailed
              macaques. This will be accomplished by relating these incremental features to
              known interval fluorescent labels, which were injected during a previous study
              of bone growth. The growth lines will be counted between specific labels, which
              will allow us to determine how much time it takes to form each type of feature.
              The second aim of this study is to document the degree of variation of these
              features in orangutan and chimpanzee dentitions. Comparisons of incremental
              features will be made among individuals, between subspecies of orangutans, and
              between chimpanzees and orangutans. This project will provide additional
              support for studies of tooth growth by allowing standard methods to be tested,
              and will allow better assessment of results based on small sample sizes.
              Information collected on tooth growth in chimpanzees and orangutans will also
              serve as the largest comparative sample for the interpretation of fossil
              material. Ultimately, these results may allow researchers to better understand
              the relationships between humans and our closest relatives, including living
              and fossil apes.
