Title       : Climate Shocks and Economic Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0213754

Award Number: 0213754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen O'Connell steve_oconnell@swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Jefferson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Droughts are widely cited in both contemporary and historical accounts of
              African growth. The now massive empirical literature on economic growth has
              grappled with the puzzle of low and volatile African growth, but has had very
              little to say about the impact of climate shocks. This study develops empirical
              bounds on the impact of rainfall fluctuations on African growth and on the main
              channels of this impact. The project brings a widely useful rainfall dataset to
              the attention of researchers focusing on economic growth in developing
              countries, on African development in particular, and on macroeconomic
              performance in  individual African countries. 

The project uses an
              historical dataset on national African precipitation patterns constructed for
              the purposes of the project by the principal investigators. The underlying data
              are historical monthly weather-station observations that have been
              geographically gridded by climatologists for use in large-scale climatology
              models. The data are rich enough to allow the construction of climate norms
              predating the period of analysis, which coincides with the availability of
              economic growth data beginning in the 1960s. The investigators use estimated
              rainfall norms to calculate annual country-level rainfall shocks, which they
              then use in country-by-country time-series regressions that relate economic
              growth, investment, and agricultural output to these shocks. Alternative
              transformations of the rainfall variable allow a sequence of
              readily-interpreted specifications to be implemented, including nonlinear
              specifications that allow for threshold effects, wet and dry outliers, and
              cumulative effects. 

