Title       : First US-Italy Workshop on Frontiers in Materials Research, Nanoscience and
               Nanotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0213576

Award Number: 0213576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56345              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aron Pinczuk aron@phys.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5914,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The First U.S.-Italy Workshop on Frontiers in Materials Research, Nanoscience
              and Nanotechnology will be held on March 14-15, 2002 at the National Science
              Foundation, Arlington, Virginia. In addition to key note talks that will
              address the core topics of the workshop, six breakout groups will meet in
              parallel sessions to hold discussions and write a report that outlines issues
              and identifies opportunities for collaborative research in each of the
              respective fields. Three major areas will be explored, each having two
              sub-areas. (1) Frontiers in Characterization of Nanoscale Systems: Low
              dimensional systems, nanostructures and devices; Studies of single-molecule and
              few electron systems and devices. (2) Advances in Self-assembly and Novel
              Materials: self-assembled systems and devices; synthesis of novel organic and
              inorganic systems and their devices. (3) Interfaces between Materials Research
              and Biology: self-assembly of biomolecular materials; novel biomolecular
              devices. A goal of the workshop is to foster bilateral collaborations between
              leading groups in materials research, nanoscience, and nanotechnology in the
              U.S. and Italy. The research initiated through these direct bilateral
              collaborations will complement research that is presently sponsored under the
              U.S. National Science Foundation - European Commission implementation
              agreements.  

Materials research is a huge driving force for innovations
              that serve to educate and train future scientists and engineers, while
              advancing economic growth and social progress. Frontier areas of nanoscience
              and technology are generating scientific breakthroughs that revolutionize
              existing technologies as well a create new ones in areas that include health
              and medical services, transportation, environmental protection, energy
              efficiency, civil infrastructure, information technology, and homeland
              security. 


