Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Why do people support
               Islamist Parties?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0213790

Award Number: 0213790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald F. Inglehart rfi@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

This Doctoral Dissertation addresses the following question: What factors
              explain the popularity of political parties that promise an Islamic solution to
              social ills? Since the 1970s, the importance of Islam in social and political
              life visibly increased not only in authoritarian Middle Eastern states but also
              in the secular state of Turkey and in immigrant Muslim communities in the
              Western World. At a time when liberal-democracy has achieved victory over
              socialism, Islam stands as an alternative to liberal-democratic values. 

The
              project relies on three different data sets. First, it uses the information
              obtained from World Values Surveys conducted in eight predominantly Muslim
              countries. These countries are Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Jordan,
              Morocco, Pakistan, and Turkey. These surveys contain valuable information about
              the value-systems, political behavior, and attitudes towards public issues of
              the respondents.  The Principal Investigator will also conduct a comparative
              analysis of two districts of Istanbul to see how they differ in their popular
              bases for political Islam. Although, these regions have very similar
              socioeconomic and demographic conditions, Islamist parties managed to establish
              a popular base in only one of the districts. These natural settings provide an
              excellent opportunity to discern the factors that explain the popularity and
              the limits of political Islam. Finally, it uses data generated from open-ended
              interviews from Islamist politicians in Turkey. This third data set serves two
              goals. On the one hand, it helps the Principal Investigator to identify what
              political Islam offers to the people. On the other hand, it illuminates how the
              elites of the Islamist movements think about politics along with spotting their
              perceptions of liberal-democracy and West. 

In summary, this project aims to
              contribute to the scholarly knowledge in the following realms: the relationship
              between secularization and liberal-democracy; the prospects of democracy in the
              Muslim world; the implications of Islamic revival for liberalism; and the
              reasons for the rise of Islam as a major political force. 


