Title       : New Technologies Based on Organocopper Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0213522

Award Number: 0213522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $443000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce H. Lipshutz lipshutz@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main theme of this work is the use of copper (I) complexes to catalyze a
              variety of asymmetric organic reactions.  Most of the proposed chemistry
              involves the catalytic use of asymmetrically ligated copper hydride or alkyl
              complexes.  The copper hydrides will be used for asymmetric hydrosilylation of
              ketones and a 1,4-reducation-transmetallation protocol for converting alpha,
              beta unsaturated ketones into Z-boron enolates.  The copper alkyl complexes
              will be used primarily for asymmetric 1,2 additions to aldehydes and to effect
              alkylative kinetic resolution of racemic epoxides.

With this award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr.
              Bruce H. Lipshutz of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              California at Santa Barbara.  Dr. Lipshutz will work on the development of
              copper complexes capable of catalyzing a number of chemical reactions.  Most of
              these copper catalyzed carbon-hydrogen and carbon-carbon bond forming reactions
              produce molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images)
              and make only one of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer).  Development
              of this family of reactions is one of the most important problems facing the
              pharmaceutical industry today.  These transformations which are catalytic in
              copper may be amenable to large scale production of fine chemicals and
              pharmaceuticals.  Students trained during the course of this work will gain
              skills needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals industries which
              now produce a number of single enantiomer compounds. 




