Title       : Molecular Biology and Biosynthesis of Lolines by Grass Endophytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0213217

Award Number: 0213217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Schardl schardl@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lowell P. Bush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Grossman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Neotyphodium and Epichloe species, known as fungal endophytes of grasses, are
              systemic, maternally transmitted symbionts that protect their host plants from
              herbivory, and can enhance drought tolerance, disease resistance, nutrient
              acquisition, biomass production, and competitiveness. The endophytes produce
              bioprotective alkaloids of four distinct chemical classes. This project
              concerns one such class, the saturated 1-aminopyrrolizidine alkaloids (loline
              and related compounds), which are highly insecticidal, complex heterocyclic
              molecules, and can reach levels of 2% total biomass in plant-endophyte
              symbioses. It is conceivable that these abundant alkaloids are also involved in
              drought tolerance or any of several other host fitness enhancements, but
              genetic and molecular genetic investigations are needed to address their true
              ecological and physiological roles. Thus, the goals of this project are to
              elucidate the genetics and biosynthetic pathways of the loline alkaloids, and
              to develop background information and tools to study the roles of these
              alkaloids in plant fitness. Two gene clusters (lol) have been identified that
              are associated with loline alkaloid production by the endophyte species,
              Neotyphodium uncinatum. In addition metabolic precursors of loline alkaloids
              have been determined. The first objective in this project is to complete DNA
              sequence determinations for the two lol gene clusters. The next objective is to
              utilize molecular genetic techniques to seek confirmation that the lol cluster
              genes are involved in loline alkaloid biosynthesis. The third objective is to
              test possible biosynthetic pathways for lolines by synthesizing putative
              intermediates labeled with stable isotopes, feeding these to loline
              alkaloid-producing cultures, and employing mass spectrometry and nuclear
              magnetic resonance to detect and identify the labeled atoms incorporated in the
              lolines. The information and mutants developed in this project will be a
              resource for future studies detailing the natural roles of lolines in
              grass-endophyte symbioses.

Symbioses of grasses with fungal endophytes are
              protective mutualisms,
whereby the endophytes ward off a variety plant pests
              and parasites. Among the fungal products involved in protecting host plants are
              the loline alkaloids, which are highly insecticidal, abundant in the symbiotic
              plant, and chemically complex. The pathway of loline production is unknown, and
              elucidating this pathway will provide new insights into enzyme mechanisms and
              evolution of symbiotic microorganisms. This project will employ a combination
              of modern techniques in molecular biology and chemistry to identify the steps
              in the loline production. Fungal mutants that are produced in the study will be
              a resource for future research to determine the specific roles and activities
              of lolines in endophyte-grass symbioses. The research topic is relevant to the
              ecological interactions of plants, fungi and herbivores, and also to the
              potential use of natural products for environmentally friendly biological
              protection of plants.


