Title       : QEIB: Using Phase Dynamics and a Model Experimental System to Understand the
               Effects of Extrinsic Variability on Predator and Prey Metapopulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0213026

Award Number: 0213026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcel Holyoak maholyoak@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Hastings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1182,1649,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Population density cycles that appear synchronous, or irin-phasel, over large
              geographic areas
are some of the most striking phenomena in population
              biology. In theory, such synchrony is
caused either by widespread
              meteorological factors, or by movement of individuals between
populations.
              Theory for predator-prey 'metapopulationsl' that extend over groups of
              patches
also links synchrony to regional persistence. The study of these
              phenomena in nature has been
hampered by difficulty in identifying both the
              cause of population cycles and the roles of
environmental factors and
              interpatch movement in modifying population fluctuations and
synchrony. The
              environmental forcing of metapopulations which is explored here is relevant
              to
biological control of pest species and conservation. Additionally, extreme
              weather events
caused by global warming have the potential to synchronize
              regional populations, which might
cut short regional persistence. The proposed
              work uses mathematical techniques focused on
phase dynamics to analyze
              synchrony and build precise links among environmental variability,
population
              dynamics and extinction. Phase dynamics have been widely used in
              neurobiology,
but their potential in ecology is only just beginning to be
              realized. This project develops new
analytic tools for an ecological audience
              and uses a model experimental system, bacteria and
protozoa in laboratory
              microcosms, to bridge the gap between populations and metapopulation
theory.
              The work starts with a classic model and then develops more precise and
              biologically
realistic models, which in turn will fuel further, more precise,
              experimental tests.
Two-patch predator-prey systems coupled by random
              dispersal will provide a link with
analytical solutions, which numerical
              simulations and experiments can build on to consider more
complex and
              realistic situations. Two patch models will be used to derive equations which
              relate
phase, the point in a predator-prey cycle, to population dynamic
              processes. The dynamics of
phase difference between two patches will be
              derived and used as a measure of synchrony,
which can be related to regional
              persistence and within-patch predator-prey dynamics. Phase
dynamics can also
              distinguish whether persistence is controlled not by deterministic
              equilibrium
dynamics (the focus of most theoretical studies), but instead by
              long-lived transient dynamics
which may dominate during ecologically relevant
              time scales; specifically regression of phase
difference through time will be
              used to calculate the duration of transient dynamics, when phase
difference
              becomes zero. Experimentally, the initial phase difference of
              predator-prey
oscillations in two linked patches will be manipulated by
              starting microcosms with different
predator and prey densities in each patch.
              Statistics will then quantify the phase difference
between patches and test
              its correlation with regional persistence time. Repeating this
procedure in
              microcosms with different movement rates between patches (lengths of
              corridors)
will test the prediction that increased movement rate between
              patches will reduce phase
differences and regional persistence time.
              Experiments with 1-8 patches will manipulate
environmental variability through
              temperature fluctuations and control whether this operates
uniformly across a
              region or just in a single patch. Quantification of regional persistence
              time
and phase differences between patches will then test the predictions that
              local variability
enhances regional persistence, but regional variability and
              increased movement reduce regional
variability.
This project will demonstrate
              how and why environmental variability influences dynamics
and extinction in
              regionally-distributed predator and prey systems. The techniques of
              phase
dynamics will be brought to a broader ecological audience, and two
              graduate students will be
trained with the necessary mathematical, modeling,
              statistical and experimental techniques that
are required to understand the
              links between the environment and populations. This work will
provide a
              paradigm on which future combined experimental and theoretical studies of
              population
synchrony and persistence can
              build.








































