Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a0213745

Award Number: 0213745
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinrich Jaeger h-jaeger@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,9178,9251,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
              of 
Chicago focuses on two overarching, intertwined issues: the manipulation
              of structural properties connected through hierarchies of length scales, and
              the feedback between structural properties and dynamical response. The
              understanding and control of these issues provides a foundation for the design
              of the next generation of functional materials, from cooperative spin systems,
              self-assembled nanostructures, or microfluidic systems, to bio-inorganic hybrid
              materials.  The Center's research is organized into four interdisciplinary
              groups (IRGs).  IRG1 investigates the Dynamical Formation of Structures in
              Liquids and Elastic Solids that emerge as one follows coarse, macroscopic
              features to finer and finer length scales, including phenomena such as droplet
              break-up, crumpling and mesoscale flows. IRG2 aims to design and implement
              Hierarchically Assembled Molecular Materials composed of molecular assemblies
              on surfaces that express novel function. IRG3, Jamming and Slow Relaxation in
              Materials Far from Equilibrium, develops a unifying framework to understand the
              complex behavior of large classes of materials, from spin systems to
              supercooled liquids to granular matter, that become stuck in states far from
              equilibrium and defy description by conventional statistical mechanics. IRG4,
              Bio-Interfacial Science, develops new routes for designing and controlling the
              interface between biological entities and man-made materials, including
              development of biochips for quantitative characterization of biological
              activities and the assembly of protein units for novel nanostructured
              materials.


The Center's research benefits from extensive shared
              experimental facilities that provide research support and training of students.
               The MRSEC operates a comprehensive program that integrates research with
              education that includes a seminar and workshop series, a shared student and
              postdoctoral associates program, a long-term visitors program, as well as
              outreach programs such as summer research experiences for undergraduates and
              links with the K-12 level that emphasize attracting and keeping women and
              minorities in science. The Center also has an industrial partnership program
              that includes research collaborations, joint workshops, and joint student
              training activities, as well as a close collaboration with researchers at
              Argonne National Laboratory.

Participants in the Center currently include 27
              senior investigators, 9 postdoctoral associates, 29 graduate students, and 9
              technicians and other support personnel.   Professor Heinrich Jaeger directs
              the MRSEC. 










