Title       : Scalable Homology Search Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0213903

Award Number: 0213903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming Li mli@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ambuj Singh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Biologists are interested in having the ability to deal with large amounts of
              sequence data.  One of the common questions asked is to detect regions of high
              similarity, under the assumption that similarity in sequence will reflect not
              only similar function and structure but also a level of relatedness.  When
              comparing very large sequences, it is necessary to have wide bandwidth for data
              that is distributed or access the data many times, if the data can be managed
              locally.  An index structure of the data rather than the data itself can be
              stored in much less space and accessed much more rapidly.  

The new
              structure uses a measure that corresponds to the differences or number of
              changes necessary to change one sequence into another.  It is called a
              Multi-Resolution String Index Structure.  It has been implemented in a
              prototype.  The expanded effort will result in scalable searching tools that
              will bring in a number of students for the proposed effort  in the basic data
              structure research.  A number of biological scientists are involved in using
              the software.  The results of the work will be made available on the
              Internet.

