Title       : "Pyrroles, Indoles, and beta-Lactams: Novel Approaches to Their Formation Using
               Classic Organometallic Reagents"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0213384

Award Number: 0213384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman L. Holt hholt@bulldog.unca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Asheville
	      One University Heights
	      Asheville, NC  288048503    828/251-6470

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this work are two fold.   Professor Holt first proposes to
              investigate the transition metal catalyzed rearrangement of 2H-azirines into
              pyrroles and indoles.  This initial work will produce vinyl pyrroles which will
              be used in the synthesis of beta- lactams containing pyrrole ring substituents.
               Vinyl and aryl-2H-azirines will be prepared initially and a nickel mediated
              rearrangement of these substrates into vinyl pyrroles and indoles will be
              effected.  The vinyl pyrrole products of this first work will be aziridinated
              and the aziridine products will be carbonylated to produce the
              beta-lactams.

With this Minority Research Planning Grant award, the Organic
              and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Herman
              L. Holt, Jr. of the Department of Chemistry at the University of North Carolina
              at Asheville.  Dr. Holt will work on the preparation of a class of chemical
              compounds known as vinyl pyrroles and indoles and then work on the conversion
              of these compounds into beta lactams.  New methods for the production of beta
              lactams could have future practical applications since this functional group is
              found in some antibiotics and antitumor agents. Students trained during the
              course of this work will gain skills needed by the speciality chemicals and
              pharmaceutical industries. 
