Title       : Bank Relationships and the Misallocation of Credit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0213967

Award Number: 0213967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joe Peek jpeek0@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The severe economic crisis in Japan, associated with the collapse of the
              Japanese stock and real estate markets and the dramatic deterioration in the
              health of the Japanese banking sector, represents one of the major economic
              events of the late twentieth century.  It is even more striking because the
              second largest economy in the world remained stagnant for more than a decade,
              and even today shows no evidence of returning to the robust health that
              characterized most of its postwar history.  Why this economic weakness has
              persisted for so long is an important public policy issue and has been the
              source of substantial speculation and debate, with problems in the financial
              sector likely being a key contributor.  In particular, the misallocation of
              credit by troubled Japanese banks associated with pressures emanating from
              their historical ties to troubled firms may be a key contributor to the
              continuing stagnation of the Japanese economy.  Two forms of corporate
              affiliations are the focus of this study:  bank-centered financial (horizontal)
              keiretsus and the main bank system.  A concern is that these corporate
              affiliations have subverted corporate governance, insulating firms from the
              discipline that otherwise would come from outside directors, shareholders, and
              creditors, resulting in suboptimal business and financial decisions.  While
              previous studies have examined how these corporate affiliations affect
              investment decisions, stock returns, and corporate governance decisions, they
              have not directly examined how such affiliations impact the availability of
              credit.  This study will utilize a unique firm-level database that enables an
              examination of loans to firms to determine the extent to which such finance is
              affected by corporate affiliations, as well as the implications for
              macroeconomic activity and the effectiveness of monetary policy of any such
              misallocation of credit.  The study has three main objectives.  The first, and
              primary, objective is to investigate the impact of main bank and keiretsu
              affiliations on credit allocation during periods of firm and/or bank distress. 
              Preliminary evidence suggests that credit has been misallocated due to
              pressures from keiretsu and main bank ties, and that this misallocation has
              been allowed, and even encouraged, by government policies.  The second
              objective is to investigate the macroeconomic implications of this credit
              misallocation, in particular focusing on its contribution to the continuing
              stagnation of economic activity in Japan.  The third objective is to
              investigate the contribution of the troubled banking sector to the breakdown of
              the monetary policy transmission mechanism, and thus to the inability of
              monetary policy to restart the Japanese economy. 
 
 This study has important
              implications for appropriate policies to deal with banking crises, as well as
              the costs of inappropriate policies.  If scarce credit is allocated to
              uncompetitive and troubled firms, Japan will not experience the natural
              cleansing which results from the major restructuring that typically occurs in
              an economic downturn, with the consequence that longer-run economic growth may
              be reduced.  In that instance, it may not be that economic growth is stifled
              from too little overall credit, but rather from scarce credit being allocated
              to firms with the least productive investment opportunities.  When this
              misallocation of credit is combined with declining total domestic bank loans
              due to pressures on banks having difficulties achieving their capital
              requirements, the transmission of monetary policy can be short-circuited. 
              Furthermore, given that the Japanese economy remains the second largest in the
              world, resolving the crisis is important for the economic prospects for other
              countries, especially those in East Asia.  

