Title       : Conference on Econometrics and Mathematical Economics; Cambridge, Massachusetts,
               2002-2004
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0213913

Award Number: 0213913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Ruud   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose A. Scheinkman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since its inception in 1970, the Conference on Econometrics and Mathematical
              Economics (CEME) has sponsored a number of annual meetings on a variety of
              topics in economic theory and econometric methodology.  There are currently six
              seminars, in Bayesian Inference, Time Series, Forecasting, Microeconometrics,
              Decentralization, and General Equilibrium, which meet annually.  The purpose of
              this ongoing conference series is to stimulate discussion and research on the
              frontiers of econometric and economic theory, and to investigate the
              application of mathematical, statistical, and computational techniques to
              empirical economic studies.  It is intended to both encourage research on new
              topics and speed the dissemination of the latest findings by leading scholars. 
              To this end, these meetings have been exceptionally successful, providing
              forums for the exchange of ideas in economic theory and methods that are not
              constrained by more formal frameworks of journal publications.  The channels of
              communication are informal and regular, allowing specialists in selected topic
              areas to meet regularly, at widely dispersed institutions and for longer
              periods than is generally possible at meetings of professional societies.  CEME
              has been especially fruitful, particularly for young scholars at the beginning
              of their professional careers.  Recently, a number of structural changes to the
              CEME organization were made to ensure continuing diversity in the participants
              and research topics.  These changes include regular appointments of new
              co-organizers and seminar leaders.  New appointments have been made in most
              positions since the last funding period.  
