Title       : New Ordered Perovskite Dielectrics For Microwave Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0213489

Award Number: 0213489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Davies davies@sol1.lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With their ability to sustain an outstanding dielectric response in the
              microwave region and accommodate extensive chemical substitution, oxide
              perovskites (ABO3) are the most widely studied and technologically
important
              family of microwave dielectrics.  For mixed-metal perovskites, where the A or B
              (or both) positions in the structure contain mixtures of different cations, a
              correlation between a high quality factor (low dielectric loss) and improved
              cation order has been clearly established.  However, only a limited sub-set of
              ordered perovskite-forming stoichiometries has been examined, and many new
              systems are still to be explored.  This proposal uses new approaches based on
              "non-integer" valence A-site chemistries to stabilize several completely new
              families of B-site ordered perovskites suitable for application as low-loss
              dielectrics in microwave communications.  Many of the new materials lie in
              systems known to exhibit low melting points and high reactivity at low
              temperature, which also make them potentially useful for  applications in low
              temperature co-fired ceramic (LTCC) technology.

The unique electrical
              properties of ceramic microwave dielectric oxides have revolutionized
              microwave-based communications by reducing the size and cost of resonators,
              filters, and oscillators in systems ranging from cellular telephones to global
              positioning technologies.  Although the existing materials are adequate for
              current applications the next generation of systems requires new materials with
              an enhanced dielectric response.  The research in this proposal is aimed toward
              identifying these materials by using a novel design strategy to prepare new
              families of ceramic microwave dielectrics based on the perovskite structure.

