Title       : Dynamics of Spin Polarized Free Radicals in Polymeric and Photobiological
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0213516

Award Number: 0213516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm D. E. Forbes mdef@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5939,9146,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project deals with fundamental studies in radical pair dynamics
              with applications in photobiology and polymer chemistry. Professor Forbes will
              develop methodology for the observation and analysis of spin polarization
              phenomena in single amino acids, short peptides and proteins. Using a new dye
              sensitization reaction, he will characterize several amino acid radical cations
              and neutral radicals and investigate their conformational and chemical
              dynamics. In the polymer area, a major issue will be to determine the degree of
              influence of long range macromolecular motion on the locally measured dynamic
              effects in the time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance (TREPR) spectra.
              New molecular dynamic simulations of interesting micelles will be carried at
              the North Carolina Supercomputing Center and new photochemically active
              surfactants will be synthesized to learn if control can be exerted over the
              starting point for diffusion of the ensuing free radicals. Further work will be
              done on the photochemical degradation of beer using sensitizers and visible
              light. This work has the potential to impact the entire multi-million dollar
              per year beverage industry.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program and the Central and Eastern Europe Program in the Office of
              International Science and Engineering continues support for the research of
              Professor Malcolm D. E. Forbes of the University of North Carolina at Chapel
              Hill.  Professor Forbes work is at the forefront of photochemical research. He
              is developing sophisticated magnetic resonance methods along with computer
              modeling to obtain valuable information on several important chemical systems.
