Title       : Understanding the Decline in U.S. Output Volatility: An Analysis of the
               Automobile Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0213089

Award Number: 0213089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72054              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie A. Ramey vramey@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Why has output volatility in the post-1984 period been so much lower than in
              earlier periods? Is it just good luck, better monetary policy, or structural
              change in the economy? Understanding the source the decline in output
              volatility not only helps forecast future volatility patterns, but also sheds
              light on potential improvements in monetary policy and firm behavior. The
              proposed research seeks to shed light on the source of the decline in
              volatility by conducting a case study of changes in output and sales volatility
              in the U.S. automobile industry. The U.S. automobile industry represents an
              ideal case study of the decline in volatility because it exhibits patterns
              similar to, but more dramatic than, the aggregate data. Previous work by Kahn,
              McConnell and Perez-Quiros presents evidence that changes in production and
              inventory behavior are a key source of the decline in volatility. In the
              post-1984 period, the variance of production fell much more than the variance
              of sales. Furthermore, the covariance of inventory investment and sales has
              changed from being positive (which adds to volatility) to being negative. These
              facts represent circumstantial evidence that the key to the decline in
              volatility is structural change in production and inventory management.
              

More specificially, this research explores the alternative hypothesis that
              these observed changes stem mostly from changes in the sales process rather
              than structural changes in firms' production and inventory scheduling. The U.S.
              automobile industry, as well as many other industries, face nonconvex costs and
              lumpy production margins that can lead to a very nonlinear relationship between
              the variance of production and the variance of sales. Thus, a change in the
              dynamics of the sales process can lead to radical changes in the way production
              is scheduled.   The first part of the project demonstrates the complex
              relationship between sales dynamics and output dynamics using simulations.
              Employing a cost function similar to the one faced by automobile assembly
              plants, optimal production schedules in response to various sales processes
              will be derived.   The second part of the project gathers and analyzes detailed
              weekly automobile assembly plant data to investigate how much of the change in
              production behavior is due to structural changes at the plant level versus
              changes in the nature of the sales process. Since the sales process can be
              affected by changes in monetary policy rules or by firms' pricing behavior,
              identifying how much of the change in production behavior is simply a response
              to changes in the dynamics of sales is key to tracking the source of the
              decline in volatility. 

