Title       : Computer-Guided Design for Molecular Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0213457

Award Number: 0213457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale G. Drueckhammer dale.drueckhammer@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Professor Drueckhammer proposes to develop a general computer-based design
              method for molecular recognition using the software CAVEAT.  CAVEAT will first
              be used to identify structures on which to position functional groups in a
              precise relative orientation for the desired molecular recognition.  Sialic
              acid receptors, PNA mimics for DNA recognition, and zinc and copper ion
              receptors will be designed and prepared during the course of this work.  A
              collaboration with the CAVEAT developer will also enable the design of new
              CAVEAT databases which have host scaffoldings which are more easily
              synthesized. 

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program is supporting the research of Dr. Dale G. Drueckhammer of the
              Department of Chemistry at the State University of New York in Stony Brook. 
              Dr. Drueckhammer and his students will work on the development of computer
              based methods to design and synthesize small molecule receptors.  They will be
              designing and preparing molecules capable of carbohydrate recognition, DNA
              recognition and metal ion binding.  The work also has potential broader
              implications in being able to rationally design and synthesize a variety of
              sensing devices.  Students trained during the course of this interdisciplinary
              work will be learning both computational and synthetic organic chemistry and,
              as such, gaining skills needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals
              industries. 


