Title       : Banking and Liquidity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0213916

Award Number: 0213916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392549             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raghuram Rajan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas W. Diamond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Despite a growing interest among academics in both the microeconomics of banking
              and the micro-macro links, there has been very little work on why the
              institutional form of the bank - the financing of illiquid loans with
              demandable demand deposits -makes sense. But this issue is at the center of
              almost all questions about banking: It is central to recent work on the
              transmission of monetary policy. If the lending channel shuts down because
              demandable deposits become prohibitively costly, we have to understand why it
              is critical that loans be financed with demand deposits. It is central to
              issues of crisis management. What kinds of interventions will help revive a
              failing banking system? It is central to the design of a financial system. Do
              we really need banks -can other institutions substitute?  In a sense, many of
              the recent models addressing these issues are incomplete because they address
              important issues without a fully specified rationale for the form of the
              banking firm.  In a project funded by the NSF that is about to end, the
              investigators develop a model of the bank that rationalizes its institutional
              form. They argue that through demand deposits, banks provide more value to
              depositors than the market value of the illiquid loans they hold. Moreover,
              banks' ability to issue demand deposits helps them shield borrowers from sudden
              demands for liquidity from investors. Taken together, the bank's institutional
              structure enables it to create liquidity on both sides of the balance sheet. 
              In the proposed project, the investigators want to embed the rich, albeit
              partial equilibrium, 
analysis of optimal bank and borrower contracting that
              they developed over the course of the previous project in a general equilibrium
              setting to understand the consequences of various shocks, regulations, and
              government interventions on the state of the banking system in particular, and
              the economy in general. The objective is to obtain a better understanding of
              the relationship between the various tools of regulatory or macroeconomic
              policy, banking, and aggregate economic activity. 

