Title       : Princeton Center for Complex Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0213706

Award Number: 0213706
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17400000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravindra N. Bhatt ravin@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Princeton
              University supports a broad based interdisciplinary research program in the
              area of complex materials, including polymers and soft materials, electronic
              materials, and biomaterials.  The Center also supports a wide range of
              education activities, including science curriculum support for middle and high
              school teachers, a summer outreach program for high school students, and an
              African outreach program.  The Center supports well-maintained and accessible
              shared experimental facilities and interacts with industry and other sectors at
              local, regional, national and international levels.  

The Center's research
              is organized into three interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs).  IRG 1,
              Interplay of Magnetism and Transport in Correlated Electronic Materials,
              focuses on charge and spin transport in complex, correlated electronic
              materials.  IRG 2 on Guided Self-Assembly investigates new methods for
              fabricating large-scale assemblies of patterned structures with features on the
              nano and micrometer scale.   Potential applications are in the areas of
              nanomagnetics, manipulating biomolecules on a nanoscale, as well as photonics. 
              Adhesion, Deformation, and Transport at Contacts in Small Structures (IRG 3) is
              an entirely new effort with focus on small scale contacts that are of
              importance in microelectronic, photonic, and micro-electromechanical devices. 
              Two large seed projects are devoted to patterned assemblies of functional
              cell-based biomaterials, which propose to combine protein design with the
              design of novel interfaces between synthetic materials and living cells, and to
              heteroepitaxy and electronic structure of high dielectric constant oxides.   
              

Participants in the Center currently include 38 senior investigators, 7
              postdoctoral associates, 24 graduate students, and support for undergraduates
              and K-12 teachers.    Professor Ravindra N. Bhatt directs the MRSEC.
              










