Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0213805

Award Number: 0213805
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9555000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Weitz weitz@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Westervelt  (Principal Investigator former)
              Cynthia M. Friend  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Harvard
              University supports an interdisciplinary research program that includes faculty
              participants from the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, the
              Departments of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Physics, Earth and Planetary
              Sciences, and the Medical School.  The MRSEC research is organized into four
              interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs). IRG1, Multiscale Mechanics of Films
              and Interfaces, investigates the mechanical properties of thin films at scales
              intermediate between atomistic and continuum.  IRG2, Engineering Materials and
              Techniques for Biological Studies at Cellular Scales, focuses on understanding
              the mechanical properties of the cell and its structural components. IRG3,
              Interface-Mediated Assembly of Soft Materials, explores innovative ways to make
              self-assembly of soft materials by using interfaces as template for growth. 
              The Center also supports seed research projects in potentially high-risk areas.
              

The Center's research benefits from extensive shared experimental
              facilities that provide research support and training of students.  The MRSEC
              operates a broad education and outreach research program that includes summer
              research experiences for undergraduates and teachers, activities for K-12
              students, and a new program to enhance the participation of members of
              underrepresented groups in science and engineering at the graduate and
              postgraduate level. The Center also has research collaborations with industrial
              and national laboratories, and runs research workshops that include
              participants from industry and teaching colleges in the New England
              area.

Participants in the Center currently include 30 senior investigators,
              7 postdoctoral associates, 14 graduate students, 2 undergraduate students and 6
              support personnel.   Professor David Weitz directs the MRSEC.
              










