Title       : ITR: High Performance Implementation of Approximate Algorithms for Large-Scale
               Routing and Network Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0213848

Award Number: 0213848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233759             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Bienstock dano@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will address theoretical and computational methodology for
              massively large, approximate optimization problems in network design and
              routing, encompassing both static and online problems. A central component of
              the work will be the implementation of the PI's algorithms on architectures
              such as IBM's forthcoming BG/L.

The work will be directed at problem
              instances arising in networking and telecommunications, that are far larger
              than those currently studied by the mathematical programming community. While
              metropolitan area networks, at an appropriate level of aggregation, involve a
              few hundred nodes, computer networks can be far larger. Looking toward
              next-generation networking, especially wireless and adhoc networking, the need
              for optimization tools that can handle much larger networks becomes
              pressing.

The PI's previous work built upon methodologies on potential
              function methods for linear programming, developed during the last decade
              primarily by the theoretical computer science community. His work further
              developed the methodology and produced an effective implementation. This
              implementation is fast (more efficient than competing special-purpose
              algorithms and much faster than commercial software), it is quite accurate for
              engineering purposes, and it is general: it handles network design problems,
              static throughput routing problems, multicommodity flow problems, and in fact,
              a much more general class of linear programming problems, all with a common
              interface and no user-selected parameters. It successfully handles problems
              involving networks with hundreds and up to a few thousand nodes. The resulting
              linear programs, with tens of millions of variables and constraints, are at the
              limit of what can be considered approachable with state-of-the-art linear
              programming software.

When considering larger networks, however, the
              dimensions of the optimization problems increase by several orders of
              magnitude, placing them well beyond the capabilities of current methods and
              implementations - these problems are large enough that the idea of optimization
              becomes rather daunting. At the same time, the complexity, economics, and
              fast-changing nature of networking applications provides a stringent need for
              cost-effective, survivable designs and high throughput routing schemes. This
              work will seek to build on new, concrete methodological ideas so as to develop
              algorithms with provably stronger convergence properties; further, it will also
              develop high-performance implementations that can tackle massively large
              problems.

A parallel effort will concern online routing problems. Many
              online routing methods (for example, dynamic routing schemes that seek to
              minimize congestion, or to achieve fair routings) can be viewed as single
              iterations of potential function methods for corresponding static problems.
              This project will use this idea, together with the PI's work on static
              problems, with the aim of developing effective routing algorithms; again, a
              significant part of this work will be computational.

In both cases, this
              project will use previously established industrial research partnerships  to
              validate methodologies and to obtain realistic data.

