Title       : Functional Analyses of the Narrow Sheath and Ragged Seedling2 Mutations During
               Development of Maize Lateral Organs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0213023

Award Number: 0213023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Scanlon mjscanlo@dogwood.botany.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1118,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0213023
Scanlon

Leaves are the fundamental organ of plant shoots, and
              develop via the morphogenetic activity of shoot apical meristems.  Previous
              studies suggest that the precisely regulated balance of hormone concentration
              and hormone transport are key components in leaf organogenesis.  Three
              mutations disrupting early events in maize leaf pattern formation will be
              exploited in biochemical and molecular genetic investigations probing the role
              of the plant hormone auxin during early stages in leaf development.  The
              mutations narrow sheath1, narrow sheath2 (ns1, ns2) and ragged seedling2 (rgd2)
              all disrupt development of maize lateral organs, leading to narrow leaf and
              shortened stem phenotypes.  Maize leaves contain at least two lateral
              compartments, the central and marginal domains.  NS function is essential for
              recruitment of the marginal compartment, but is not required for the
              development of the central leaf domain. The ns mutant
phenotype, which mimics
              IAA-overexpressing mutants, is controlled by the non-homologous, duplicate
              factor mutations ns1 and ns2.  Narrow sheath 2 has been cloned, and encodes a
              NITRILASE that has been shown to function in the production of auxin. 
              Transcripts of ns2 accumulate in an alternating pattern subtending the marginal
              compartment of maize leaf primordia.   Mutations in the ragged seedling2 gene
              condition more extreme narrow leaf phenotypes, and may disturb development of
              both the central and the marginal domains.  Four specific aims are
              proposed.

1) The NS2 RNA and protein accumulation patterns will be analyzed
              in all developing maize tissues by in situ hybridization and
              immunolocalization.  NS2-specific polyclonal antibodies will be prepared.  Of
              particular interest is the NS2 accumulation patterns in developing embryos and
              in
tissues unaffected by the ns mutations.

2) The expression patterns of
              the auxin responsive Aux/IAA genes of maize will be analyzed by in situ
              hybridization in ns and nonmutant samples.  Non-mutant apices will be treated
              with xogenous auxin transport inhibitors, and ns apices will be treated with
              auxin.  These assays will test the hypothesis that the ns mutant phenotype is
              the result of defective auxin-mediated signalling in the ns margin
              domain.

3) The ns1-R mutation is linked to a genomic polymorphism at the
              aldehyde oxidase (ao) locus, which encodes an enzyme involved in IAA
              biosynthesis, and ns mutants aberrantly express AO transcripts.    Reverse
              genetic mutagenesis of ao loci, transposon mutagenesis of new ns1 alleles, and
              cloning of ao genes from ns mutant plants will determine whether ns1 encodes an
              AO in maize.

4) Genetic and molecular analyses will test the hypothesis that
              RGD2 functions during early stages of maize leaf development.  Double mutant
              analyses of rgd2 with ns and leafbladeless1, and the expression profiles of
              genes involved in early leaf development (ns2, terminal ear1) will be analyzed
              by in situ hybridization.  Additional alleles of rgd2 will be obtained by
              transposon tagging, for use in attempts to clone the rgd2 gene.


