Title       : Patterns of Community Assembly in Serpentine Grasslands: The Roles of Initial
               Plant Composition and Functional Complementarity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0213187

Award Number: 0213187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David U. Hooper hooper@biol.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0213187
Hooper
The search for patterns of community assembly has occupied the
              last 25 years in
community ecology and remains controversial today. A commonly
              sought assembly rule is that
species coexistence in communities will be
              enhanced by differences in traits related to
competition for limiting
              resources (i.e., that niche overlap is minimized). Put another way, do
species
              from complementary guilds or functional groups have a better chance of
              persisting than
those with strong overlap in resource use characteristics?
              Evidence for the role of
complementarity among plant groups in structuring
              communities is sporadic. The balance
between rates of external stochastic
              processes (such as disturbance or priority effects of
colonization) compared
              to internal community dynamics (such as competition or facilitation)
may be
              critical in determining the degree to which internal assembly dynamics are
              manifested.
Gaining further insight into this question is critical for
              understanding how communities might be
structured, and for the implications of
              that structure for ecosystem dynamics.
We propose a five-year experiment to
              assess the roles of initial plant composition and
functional complementarity
              in structuring communities of serpentine annual grasslands. We
seek to test
              several hypotheses centered on the following questions, generally grouped into
              two
themes: 1) Does the initial composition of a community shape its
              subsequent development? If so,
for how long? Are there different stable
              endpoints? 2) To what extent does complementary
resource use (i.e., niche
              differentiation) versus dominance among plant species govern patterns
of
              community development? Are other factors, such as seed input or climatic
              conditions more
important in determining community composition? Our goal is
              not to prove or disprove the
predominance of assembly rules, but rather to
              better understand the conditions under which they
might strongly influence
              community composition versus be overwhelmed by other factors.
We will use as
              our experimental system a series of California serpentine
              grassland
communities that vary in functional group composition and richness.
              Functional composition
has been maintained since the plots were established in
              1992. In fall 1999 and 2000, seeds of six
additional species (3 species each
              from two groups) were added to test the effects of functional
characteristics
              and diversity on invasibility of ecosystems. Thus we now have a system
              with
treatments that differ in initial functional composition, that have had
              common seed sources for a
number of additional species, and that will be
              subject to continuing seed rain from surrounding
grasslands. Our plan is to
              track changes in community composition over the next five years as
the
              communities develop from their initially different starting points.  Monitoring
              of vegetation changes in these experimental communities through the next
              several years provides a unique opportunity to gain insight into interactions
              among a variety of processes that help shape ecological communities.
