Title       : SGER: Annual Income, Hourly Wages, and Identity Formation Among Latinos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0213300

Award Number: 0213300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick L. Mason pmason@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This exploratory research examines economic incentives for alternative racial
              identity norms among Hispanic Americans, with a special focus on persons of
              Mexican descent. The theoretical model has two pure norms: an acculturationist
              norm and a racial identity norm. If an acculturationist norm prevails Hispanics
              will acculturate into American society as Non-Hispanic whites and will not face
              persistent racial discrimination in the labor market. If a racial identity norm
              prevails Hispanic will develop a unique race identity, i.e., neither black nor
              white, and face persistent racial discrimination in the labor market. Empirical
              evaluation suggests that an acculturationist norm will likely prevail among
              Mexican and Cuban Americans. Accordingly, Hispanic Americans, especially
              persons of Mexican and Cuban descent but less so Puerto Ricans, are able to
              increase income annual income and hourly wages by abandoning a unique Hispanic
              racial identity and acculturating into a Non-Hispanic white racial identity.
              However, neither the abandonment of Spanish nor the abandonment of a
              specifically Hispanic racial self-identity is sufficient to overcome the
              penalties associated with having a dark complexion and Non-European phenotype.
              This is a unique study. Many economic studies have examined the impact on race
              on economic outcomes but no previous study has examined the formation of racial
              identity as an economic variable, i.e., to explore the thesis that racial
              identity is endogenous.		
