Title       : Understanding Microstructures of Mixed Group III-Nitride Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0213834

Award Number: 0213834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subhash Mahajan smahajan@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan Newman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims for a comprehensive understanding of microstructures of mixed
              group III-nitride layers, intending to advance understanding of the occurrence
              of phase separation and atomic ordering in these materials. Experiments to
              discern whether or not phase separation oc-curs in the bulk or on the surface
              will be conducted. The approach is to examine the effects of growth rates and
              growth temperatures on phase-separated microstructures. In-diffusion
              experi-ments to evaluate whether or not these microstructures represent the
              equilibrium state in the bulk will be carried out. The origins of atomic
              ordering will be studied through growth of mixed lay-ers on [ 1 1 10 ]
              microfaceted GaN layers to ascertain the role of these facets in atomic
              ordering. Interfaces between differently ordered regions and distribution of
              ordered domains in layers that have been grown at different growth rates will
              be examined. Additionally, the influence of phase separation and atomic
              ordering on carrier mobility by Hall measurements will be evaluated. These
              studies will utilize InGaN and AlGaN layers, and may also include AlInN and
              AlInGaN films. Film growth will be done using metalorganic chemical vapor
              deposition and molecular beam epitaxy. Microstructures will be studied by X-ray
              diffraction and transmission electron mi-croscopy, both conventional and high
              resolution. Energy loss spectroscopy, coupled with energy filtered imaging,
              will be utilized to study the distribution of atomic species in layers. 
%%%
              
The project addresses fundamental research issues in areas of electronic
              materials science having technological relevance. It is envisaged that this
              research could have a significant impact on sci-ence and technology of group
              III-nitride materials and devices. An important feature of the proj-ect is the
              strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and education.
              The avail-able resources provide special opportunities for education and
              training of graduate students in-volved in interdisciplinary forefront
              research.
***  

