Title       : Development and Application of Improved Methods for Coupling NMR and Capillary
               Isotachophoresis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0213407

Award Number: 0213407
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia K. Larive clarive@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Cynthia Larive of the University of Kansas is supported by the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry program for development of capillary
              isotachophoresis (cITP) in combination with microcoil NMR spectroscopy. The
              development of solenoidal microcoils with nanoliter to microliter detection
              volumes has greatly enhanced the mass limits of detection of nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR).  Recently, this technology has been advanced further through
              the coupling of capillary isotachophoresis (cITP) for sample concentration and
              analyte separation with nanoliter microcoil NMR probes for on-line detection.
              This new methodology shows considerable promise as a versatile tool for the
              analysis of mass limited samples. The proposed research will advance the
              instrumentation for online cITP-NMR and explore the application of this
              methodology to chemical analysis. A capacitively coupled conductivity detector
              for use in conjunction with NMR detection will be developed and evaluated. The
              implementation of dual conductivity and NMR detection for cITP will advance
              this technology by facilitating the use of signal averaging to detect dilute
              analytes with NMR and monitor NMR transparent cITP bands. This technology will
              be critically evaluated as a tool for the analysis and structure elucidation of
              mass limited samples through the examination of several antibiotic compounds
              both as simple mixtures and in the presence of more complex sample matrices.
              Finally, this approach will be used to characterize the structure, chemical and
              physical properties of humic substances through cITP fractionation as a
              function of pH and borate complexation as well as with one and two-dimensional
              NMR experiments. These experiments will examine functional group composition of
              the fractionated materials allowing interpretation of both common and unique
              structural elements of the bands separated by cITP.  

The development of new
              measurement techniques has facilitated understanding of many complex chemical
              phenomena. This has been particularly true in the field of environmental
              chemistry, where scientists face the problem of analyzing very complex samples
              containing species at low concentrations. The proposed experiments will develop
              new analytical methods that will allow NMR characterization of molecules at low
              concentrations in complex samples. NMR is one of the most informative methods
              of chemical analysis, capable of revealing minute details of molecular
              structure. Initial experiments will focus on relatively simple samples of
              antibiotics, compounds of environmental interest due to their wide spread use
              in large scale agriculture and problems related to the development of
              antibiotic resistance.  In addition, cITP-NMR technology will be used to study
              a class of environmentally important compounds, humic substances (humic and
              fulvic acids). Humic substances are environmentally important because they
              affect the bioavailability and transport of organic pollutants and toxic metal
              ions. These naturally occurring organic acids are formed in the environment by
              the breakdown of animal and plant material to form very complex mixtures, which
              makes the determination of molecular level structure information very
              difficult. These experiments will advance the knowledge of the chemistry of
              humic substances and in turn increase the understanding of their behavior in
              the environment.  

