Title       : Sensory Processing of Environmental -CO2 Information in the Insect Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0213032

Award Number: 0213032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93665              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Hildebrand jgh@neurobio.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pablo G. Guerenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The carbon dioxide (CO2) produced by the respiration of most organisms is a
              fundamental constituent of their odor. Many insects can sense the concentration
              of CO2 in the air around them, and they are thought to use that information in
              vital tasks such as locating food sources (e.g., appropriate plants) and
              possibly identifying desirable sites for oviposition (egg laying). Whereas
              considerable research has focused on how the sensory information about CO2 is
              acquired, little is known about how that information is processed in the
              central nervous system (CNS). In order to address this issue, this project will
              take advantage of an experimentally favorable and extensively studied model
              plant-eating insect, the moth Manduca sexta, using methods already developed
              and in practice in this laboratory. Pilot studies that led to this project
              suggested that a particular group of sensory receptor cells, situated in a
              sensory organ (the labial-palp pit organ, LPO) recessed in a deep invagination
              on each labial palp (a mouthpart) of the adult moth, are specialized to detect
              and quantitatively assess CO2 in the air around that organ. Anatomical evidence
              shows that although the LPO receptor cells are located in that mouthpart, they
              send their axons to the antennal lobe (AL), the primary-olfactory center
              resembling the vertebrate olfactory bulb, in the insect's brain. Furthermore,
              our pilot work clearly shows that some of the central neurons in the AL receive
              and process synaptic inputs, and thus information about CO2, from the LPO
              receptor cells. Thus, the project centers on recording of the electrical
              signals (coded sensory information about CO2) generated by LPO receptor cells
              and the responding neurons in the AL that receive inputs from the LPO sensory
              cells. In addition, the morphology of those AL neurons is studied by means of
              intracellular staining in order to reveal the types and patterns of branching
              of neurons contributing to processing of CO2 information. This research is the
              first study of central processing of environmental-CO2 information, and it
              promises to add significantly to our understanding of CNS olfactory mechanisms
              in insects. CO2, temperature, and humidity are environmental variables of
              importance to insects, and the sensory systems for those three kinds of stimuli
              share certain physiological properties. Therefore it may be that the processing
              of CO2 information has aspects in common with the processing of information
              about temperature and/or humidity, such that general principles of information
              processing in the brain could emerge from the proposed project. These studies
              are expected to lead to understanding of how information about environmental
              CO2 is first processed in the AL of the insect brain. Manduca sexta is an
              excellent experimental animal for this research because it: (a) possesses a
              highly developed CO2-detecting organ; (b) is large and hence ideal for
              neurophysiological studies, easily reared in the laboratory, and favorable for
              experimentation at the molecular, physiological, and organismal levels; (c) has
              yielded a wealth of information about the neurobiology of insect olfaction and
              the neuroethology of odor-guided behavior, much of it through previous research
              done in this laboratory; and (d) is an agricultural pest which, although not
              very important economically, exhibits behavior and sensory mechanisms that are
              similar to those of important, herbivorous pest insects. Thus, the findings
              from this project, complementing other research under way in this laboratory,
              will benefit ongoing basic research aimed at understanding how nervous systems
              analyze, recognize, and respond to odors, and should also yield insights that
              will be useful in the agricultural arena for designing new strategies for
              protection of crop plants from insect predation. Finally, in addition to its
              scientific impact and potential benefit to agriculture, this project will
              contribute to the research training of a postdoctoral associate (the key
              investigator) and also involve one or more undergraduate students in aspects of
              the studies.


