Title       : Center on Polymer Interfaces and Macromolecular Assemblies (CPIMA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0213618

Award Number: 0213618
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Frank curt@chemeng.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Stanford
              University supports an interdisciplinary program in the area of polymeric
              materials.  The Center is entitled  "Center on Polymer Interfaces and
              Macromolecular Assemblies".   The MRSEC is a partnership between Stanford
              University, UC Davis, UC Berkeley and the IBM Almaden Research
              Laboratory.

The research is organized into three interdisciplinary research
              groups (IRGs).   Synthesis and Application of Nanostructured Materials (IRG 1)
              has as its mission to develop new methods to prepare functional macromolecules
              followed by self- and directed assembly of these molecules into nanoscopic
              structures.  Potential applications are in nanotemplating, photovoltaic devices
              and novel catalytic systems.  The techniques and materials developed in IRG1
              have direct applications for single molecule studies in IRG 2 and polymer
              bilayer assemblies in IRG 3. Structure and Dynamics of Confined Systems (IRG 2)
              is concerned with the effect of confinement due to interfaces, entanglements,
              branching etc, on the structure and dynamics of molecules and macromolecular
              assemblies.     IRG 3 on Functional Biomolecular Membranes investigates the
              fabrication of the interfaces between lipid membrane-countering surfaces and
              biological systems and the study of the dynamical properties of these
              interfaces.  The ultimate goal of the IRG is to develop interfaces between hard
              and soft (functional) surfaces.

The Center support undergraduate summer
              research activities in academic and industrial settings as well as in science
              museum projects.   Plans are to increase the participation of physically
              disabled students.  The REU activities will be extended to UC Berkeley and to
              the Institute of Polymers in Dresden, Germany.  The K-12 programs for teachers
              and students includes partnerships with area schools in collaboration with the
              East Palo Alto Unified School District.  New activities are planned together
              with the San Francisco Exploratorium and its Teacher Institute.  

The Center
              operates shared facilities at Stanford and UC Davis.  These are accessible by
              CPIMA members as well as non-members.  In addition, CPIMA members have access
              to a wide range of facilities at the IMB Almaden Research Center.

The
              Center's participants include 26 faculty, 8 postdoctoral associates, 7 graduate
              students, and support for undergraduates and K-12 teachers.  Professor Curtis
              W. Frank directs the MRSEC. 

