Title       : GOALI: Retention Processes in Chromatography: A Molecular Simulation Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0213387

Award Number: 0213387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joern Ilja Siepmann siepmann@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Schure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9148,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
              Professor Joern Ilja Siepmann and at the University of Minnesota and Dr. Mark
              Schure at Rohm & Haas Corporation will use molecular simulations to predict
              chromatographic retention times and to elucidate the molecular-level process,
              i.e., bulk partitioning or interfacial adsorption, that contribute to retention
              in gas-liquid, reversed-phase liquid, and micellar chromatography.  These
              simulations will employ Monte Carlo methods and transferable force fields that
              allow for calculations with the precision and accuracy required for
              chromatographic applications.  In addition, the dynamics of chromatographic
              retention processes will be investigated using mesoscopic-scale lattice-fluid
              Boltzmann simulations.

Chromatographic separation and the analysis of
              complex samples play a pivotal role for research and development in the
              chemical and pharmaceutical sciences and industries.  This project combines
              research groups from university and industry for the task of predicting
              chromatography retention times; it is the difference in retention times that
              allows chromatography to separate one compound or protein from another.  The
              predictions will be made with computer simulations of the compounds and
              proteins absorption into the chromatographic media.  In addition, the flow of
              the compounds and proteins in the mobile phase will be computed.  The
              particle-based computer simulations will provide a molecular-level
              understanding of the factors contributing to chromatrographic separations, a
              knowledge that is required for the next-generation of industrial-scale
              separations and for microfluidic separations.  The close university-industry
              collaboration affords unique training for the undergraduate and graduate
              students participating in this project.

