Title       : Supramolecular Chemistry of beta-Sheets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0213533

Award Number: 0213533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Nowick jsnowick@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 0000,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal aims to elucidate factors involved in edge-to-edge interactions
              between beta- sheets and to learn how to control this important mode of protein
              interaction, which is involved in protein dimerization, protein-protein
              recognition, and protein aggregation. The proposal builds upon an exciting
              discovery by the Principal Investigator under NSF award CHE-9813105 ("Molecular
              Templates for Creating Artificial Protein Structures") of a molecular template
              that induces beta-sheet folding and interactions when incorporated into
              peptides. This molecular template is constructed as a composite of two amino
              acids. One of these, Orn, is natural although not routinely found in proteins;
              the other, Hao, was invented by the Principal Investigator and his students
              under the prior NSF support. The Orn-Hao composite is easily incorporated into
              peptides using standard peptide synthesis techniques. Peptides containing the
              Orn-Hao composite dimerize in a fashion similar to that of certain beta-sheet
              proteins. The current proposal will study the dimerization of peptides
              containing the Orn-Hao composite and learn how to control the dimerization
              process through a series of experiments. The earlier experiments will focus
              upon optimizing the structure and folding of peptides containing the Orn-Hao
              composite, while the later experiments will focus upon learning how to use
              specific interactions to control the dimerization. All of these studies will
              rely heavily upon organic synthesis, peptide synthesis, NMR titration, and NMR
              NOE methods. The intellectual merit of this work is that interactions between
              beta-sheets are widespread and important, yet the molecular basis for these
              interactions is not well understood. The proposed work explores creative and
              original concepts, by using small chemical model systems to address this
              fundamental and important biological problem. One special merit of using these
              small chemical model systems, instead of larger proteins, is that these systems
              can be prepared easily and used to evaluate hypotheses very rapidly. Another
              special merit of these model systems is that they will be able to be prepared
              in other laboratories, thus enabling other researchers to use them to test
              their own ideas about protein folding and interactions.

With this Award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program (OMC) will support the research of
              Professor James Nowick of the University of California- Irvine.  Professor
              Nowick's work is expected to generate valuable basic scientific knowledge with
              important biomedical implications. In addition, this proposal will have broader
              impacts through the training of students and the development of human
              resources. Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students working on this
              project will be trained to perform cutting-edge research in the laboratory and
              will also learn to effectively communicate their results to others by
              presenting their work in seminars, at meetings, and through publications. Many
              of these well-trained students will contribute to the US scientific endeavor
              and the economy as researchers in the pharmaceutical industry.

