Title       : Auditory Source Event Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0213666

Award Number: 0213666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Pastore pastore@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The child's cry that wakes you in night is not hard to identify.  The footfalls
              and hoof beats in a western movie supply crucial realism to the moviegoer. 
              Things that make noise are tightly woven into the fabric of human experience. 
              Nevertheless, we know very little about the actual perception of auditory
              events.  This is true despite our extensive knowledge of how ears work, for
              example, and our extensive knowledge about the basic auditory capabilities of
              ourselves and other animals.  The specialized area of speech perception has
              made some advances, but the perception of our environment involves sounds other
              than speech, and the study of human speech has provided few insights into how
              we perceive complex acoustic events.
The impact of a shoe on a wooden floor
              will sound differently than the same shoe on a metal floor.  Acoustic
              properties of auditory events reflect physical and biomechanical properties of
              their sources.  To understand auditory event perception, the funded project
              will identify the physical and biomechanical properties of source events and
              then identify relations between these source properties and the acoustic
              properties of the resulting sound.  With this database in hand, Dr. Pastore and
              his colleagues will next conduct experiments to identify the sound attributes
              that listeners correctly (or incorrectly) associate with source properties. 
              Specifically, the funded project employs this source-sound-perception approach
              to investigate human gait as a class of auditory events.  Although the proposed
              research focuses on human gait as a source of sounds, the overarching goal is
              to develop research procedures to study perception of almost any auditory
              event.
This basic research has broad implications.  For example,
              virtual-reality technology has fostered interests in the development of
              auditory virtual-reality capabilities.  The funded basic research will
              accomplish the crucial first step to make such applications possible.  This
              research could also contribute to the development of effective surveillance
              systems for research, commercial, and military use.  Moreover, it will identify
              how listening skills may be improved with training and which attributes of
              sounds are most important to aid the hearing impaired. 

