Title       : Do Internal N Signals Regulate Interspecific Variability in N Uptake Response to
               Elevated CO?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0213066

Award Number: 0213066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hormoz BassiriRad hormoz@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              While there is a general consensus among scientists that the projected rise in
              the concentration of atmospheric CO2 will have a profound impact on
              productivity and composition of terrestrial ecosystems, our capacity to
              reliably predict the exact nature of these changes remain tenuous. The unknown
              effects of other environmental factors such as nitrogen (N) and water are major
              sources of this uncertainty. N is an essential mineral nutrient whose
              availability and utilization regulates plant responses to high CO2. This high
              leverage by N is fortuitous when one considers the intricate connection between
              carbon (C) and N in plant biology. It is well recognized that in the short
              term, plants exposed to high CO2 will enhance their C uptake. Theoretically,
              however, only those species that can maintain a balance between N and C demand
              will sustain a long-term positive effect. The few available data indicate that
              plant species vary widely in their N uptake responses to high CO2. However,
              observations from a few empirical studies can not be extrapolated to cover a
              wide range of species around the globe and we currently lack a mechanistic
              understanding to develop such a roadmap. Here we propose to elucidate the major
              mechanism(s) that control plant N uptake when CO2 concentration is elevated
              using species from contrasting ecosystems. We propose to develop physiological
              and biochemical markers that could be used to gauge the extent to which a
              target species can maintain its N and C balance. The physiological and
              biochemical markers targeted here are known to control plant N uptake under
              natural conditions and therefore are likely to control N uptake responses under
              high CO2 as well. The findings are equally important for basic research and
              management/policy issues that must deal with increasing pressure to cope with
              the future climate. The proposed research will be conducted at six nationally
              funded Free Air Carbon dioxide Enrichment (FACE) experiments, two CO2 natural
              springs in Italy and New Zealand, and a number of open-top chambers at the
              University of Illinois at Chicago. The results generated here will be critical
              for the development of predictive models designed to forecast the fate of
              terrestrial ecosystems in a future climate.  
