Title       : Function of the Small Hsps in Stress Tolerance, Growth and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0213128

Award Number: 0213128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Vierling vierling@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,1166,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The long term goal of the proposed research is to define plant small heat
              shock protein (sHsp) function at both physiological and mechanistic levels.
              sHsps are a ubiquitous group of stress proteins that are believed to act as
              molecular chaperones to prevent irreversible denaturation/aggregation of other
              proteins. sHsp chaperone function is potentially critical to plant survival of
              many different kinds of stress and to specific stages of plant growth and
              development. Plants are characterized by an unusual complexity of proteins
              belonging to the sHsp family; plants express both multiple cytosolic sHsps and
              specific sHsp isoforms targeted to intracellular organelles. The evolutionary
              expansion of the sHsp family in plants indicates that sHsps have provided a
              selective advantage over time in many contexts. The complete definition of the
              sHsp family from Arabidopsis, along with the biochemical framework from our
              studies of sHsp structure and chaperone action in vitro, provide a new starting
              point for investigations of sHsp function. Using a combination of molecular
              genetic and biochemical approaches in Arabidopsis thaliana we will define the
              physiological role of specific sHsps in stress tolerance, growth and
              development, and identify specific sHsp substrates. The proposed research has
              three specific aims. Aim 1: To determine the growth and stress tolerance
              phenotypes of sHsp loss- and gain-of-function plants. RNA interference
              transgenics and/or T-DNA insertional mutants for genes representing the class I
              & II cytosolic sHsps, as well as plants constitutively expressing class I
              and/or II sHsps, will be characterized for growth and stress tolerance. Aim 2:
              To identify potential sHsp substrates. We will test the hypothesis that sHsps
              bind a wide range of protein substrates and that each sHsp class interacts with
              unique substrates. Aim 3: To define other biochemical phenotypes of sHsp
              loss-of-function mutants. With these experiments it will finally be possible to
              test long-standing hypotheses about the importance of sHsps to plant stress
              tolerance and development and to uncover new functions for these unique
              chaperones.

