Title       : Lithiated Nitriles: Solution Structures and Reaction Stereochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0213525

Award Number: 0213525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Carlier pcarlier@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor Carlier and his students will first study the structures of lithiated
              nitriles in solution.  They will use a variety of NMR spectroscopic techniques
              in these studies.  Computational studies will be used to compliment and direct
              experimental work and have led the PI to propose the study of these lithiation
              reactions in noncoordinating hydrocarbon solvents.  Carbon metallated nitriles
              discovered in these studies will then be used in an enantioselective
              deprotonation/alkylation reaction sequence which will be applied to
              enantioselective syntheses of alpha, alpha-disubstituted-alpha-amino
              acids.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
              supporting the research of Dr. Paul R. Carlier of the Department of Chemistry
              at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.  Professor Carlier and
              his students will study the structures and reaction chemistry of a class of
              molecules known as lithiated nitriles.  The structures will be predicted using
              computational chemistry and modelling techniques then studied spectroscopically
              using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.  Nitriles which can be lithiated
              on the carbon next to the nitrile functional group will then be used in
              enantioselective carbon-carbon bond forming reactions called alkylation
              reactions.  These alkylation reactions produce molecules which are chiral (have
              two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make only one of the two possible
              forms (a single enantiomer).  Development of this family of reactions is one of
              the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today.  Students
              trained during the course of this work will gain skills in computational
              chemistry, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and organic synthesis. 
              These skills are needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals
              industries. 


