Title       : SGER- Estimation of Binary Choice and Nonparametric Censored Regression Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0213621

Award Number: 0213621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shakeeb Khan skhan@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This  exploratory research  is comprised of two distinct parts. The first and
              main part considers estimation of a binary choice model. This is a statistical
              model where the dependent variable (the one researchers are trying to explain
              or predict using observed explanatory variables) can take only two values. For
              this model, there are three values applied researchers are interested in
              estimating. One is the set of the parameters of the prediction function, which
              can be used to predict outcomes. The other values of interest are choice
              probabilities and marginal effects. The former provides researchers with the
              probability of observing a value of the dependent variable as a function of
              observed explanatory variables, and the latter determines the effect of a
              change in the value of the explanatory variable on this probability. Existing
              estimation either cannot simultaneously estimate all values of interest, or
              they require very strict assumptions on the relationship between the dependent
              and explanatory variables. In contrast, the procedures developed in this
              research project do not impose strict assumptions, yet enable joint estimation
              of the three values of interest. The second part of this research involves the
              estimation of a censored regression model, which is a statistical model where
              the dependent variable is never observed to take a value exceeding a fixed
              constant, referred to here as the censoring point. Many data sets encountered
              in applied work exhibit this model's features. This research project develops a
              new procedure which enables estimation of the prediction function in the region
              beyond the censoring point. This cannot be done using existing methods without
              stronger assumptions. 
