Title       : Discriminating Methods: Nonnested Tests for Strategic Choice Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0213771

Award Number: 0213771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis S. Signorino sign@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Clarke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


Consider a researcher who must choose between two rival models, based on
              how well those models explain the behavior in a given set of data. Suppose one
              is a strategic choice model and the other is a nonstrategic model -that is, the
              models have different functional forms. How would the researcher discriminate
              between these models? In other words, how would she determine which of the
              models is "better?" In this project, Principal Investigators answer this
              question by merging two promising areas of methodological research, and then
              use those methods to analyze international conflict. 

The first line of
              research, by Signorino and various coauthors, has demonstrated that traditional
              specifications of statistical models are generally inconsistent with strategic
              theories of political behavior. The main message of this research has been that
              the functional form of one's statistical model must be consistent with the
              relationships implied by the behavior under analysis, or the statistical
              inferences will be invalid. However, aside from comparisons of likelihood
              values and percent correctly predicted, Signorino has not provided a more
              rigorous framework for comparing (nonnested) strategic models against one
              another, or against nonstrategic models. 

Clarke, on the other hand, has
              engaged in a second line of research, addressing comparative model testing for
              nonnested models. The main message of his research has been that nonnested
              model testing requires special techniques that are unknown to most political
              scientists. New and existing nonnested testing methods have been developed and
              adapted in prior research to deal with competing limited dependent variable
              models. The competing models in this literature, however, have only been
              nonnested in terms of their covanates. Testing strategic choice models against
              each other or against nonstrategic models requires discriminating between
              models that are nonnested in terms of their functional forms.
 
The research
              conducted by Signorino and by Clarke is clearly complimentary. By developing
              nonnested tests for strategic choice models, Signorino and Clarke will provide
              the necessary tools for assessing whether strategic models outperform their
              nonstrategic rivals, or whether certain strategic specifications outperform
              other strategic specifications. By addressing strategic choice models,
              Signorino and Clarke will expand the set of functional forms beyond that
              currently available in the nonnested testing literature. 

As in previous
              work on nonnested model testing, the proposed research will make use of
              classical, Bayesian, and nonparametric statistical techniques. The project
              goals include: 

* Adapting absolute discrimination tests (such as the Cox
              test) for strategic models 

* Adapting and developing relative
              discrimination tests (such as the Vuong test, Clarke's non- parametric test,
              and Bayes factors) for strategic models. 
* Refining current Bayesian
              techniques for use with strategic models, and conducting Bayesian estimation of
              strategic models (to conduct tests based on Bayes factors). 
* Applying these
              methods to models of deterrence, alliance politics, and the effect of domestic
              politics on militarized interstate disputes. 
 Incorporating these techniques
              into currently available software (e.g. STRAT and WinBUGS). 
By combining
              these lines of research, future scholars will be able not only to develop
              statistical models that are truly consistent with their theories, but also to
              test those theories against each other. The attainment of these goals will
              allow the scientific study of international relations to move significantly
              beyond its current state. 

