Title       : Factors Influencing Microstructure of Aiming Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2002   
File        : a0213653

Award Number: 0213653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81849              (Estimated)
Investigator: Natalia Dounskaia natalia.dounskaia@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Movements of daily living, such as reaching for a glass of water or pushing an
              elevator button, are motor acts that most of us perform easily and without
              conscious consideration of how they are executed.  However, it takes
              considerable time for children to learn to reach and aim accurately for
              objects.  Also, these movements, which seem to be so easy for young and healthy
              individuals, can become difficult for older adults and patients with motor
              disorders.  This suggests that the organization of aiming movements is not a
              simple task for the central nervous system.  One of the observations that
              supports this assumption is that the final stage of aiming movements when
              performed by elderly individuals and Parkinson's patients usually includes
              "submovements" represented by a number of small inflections in movement profile
              that are hardly noticeable in movements of young adults.  These submovements
              have always been interpreted as corrections performed to achieve required
              accuracy at the target.  This research is based on the hypothesis that another
              factor, which emerges from mechanical properties of the arm, might also
              contribute to the submovement phenomenon.  In this view, to terminate hand
              motion at the target, energy developed for movement production has to be
              dissipated, and this might require a specific control strategy that causes
              submovements.  To investigate the role of this factor, the structure of aiming
              movements that require termination at the target will be compared to the
              structure of continuous point-to-point movements.  The continuous movements
              will be from the initial point to the target and back to the initial point, and
              therefore they will not require termination of motion at the target.  The
              effect of the motion termination factor will be enhanced by using a solid
              target that helps to terminate motion passively and a flexible target that
              requires active termination of motion.  The study will be useful both for
              understanding basic principles of human movement control and for investigation
              of factors underlying dysfunction caused by age and motor disorders.
