Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ground Truthing Approach to Risk Assessment and Communication
               Under Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9661182

Award Number: 9661182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Knowlton info@decisionfx.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DecisionFX
	      310 Country Lane
	      Bosque Farms, NM  87068    505/869-4111

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9661182  Knowlton       This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              to be carried out by Decision TX focuses on the development of improved methods
              and a related software system for assessing and communicating environmental
              health risks, as well as estimating potential financial burdens associated with
              such risks.  The suggested methods will allow risk assessors and risk managers
              to efficiently evaluate the accumulated risks at contaminated industrial and
              waste management sites affected by parameter uncertainty and variability, while
              making the best objective use of site contaminant data.  The software system
              will facilitate objective analysis of costs associated with remedial actions
              that might be undertaken to remove contamination, and the associated financial
              risks d liabilities imposed by the environmental contamination.  A particularly
              timely application of the proposed approach is to the numerous Brownfield sites
              located throughout the United States.  Many of the graphical constructs
              suggested for the software system will greatly simplify the communication of
              risk issues to site stakeholders.  The methods proposed incorporate both
              established concepts and recently-researched technologies; however, the
              Decision TX approach represents a novel attempt to combine all of these
              complementary concepts into an easy-to-use package.  The technologies developed
              under this research can be applied to streamline waste site investigations and
              remediation projects in both government and private sectors.  Entities standing
              to benefit from the tools include commercial and industrial businesses whose
              sites fall under the purview of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
              Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), the Resource Conservation and Recovery
              Act (RCRA), and other environmental regulations and drivers.  In addition,
              these software tools would greatly aid the legal, financial, industrial,
              insurance, and real estate communities, in determining liabilities and
              financial risks associated wit h the purchase or redevelopment of contaminated
              properties.
