Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Web-Based Automatic Database for An Electrical Power System Open
               Access Same-Time Information Systems (OASIS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1996  
File        : a9661109

Award Number: 9661109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. McConnell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Web Foundry
	      PO Box 450
	      Dryden, NY  13053    607/844-3447

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 1452,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  ABSTRACT      9661109  McConnell     This Small Business Innovation
              Research Phase I project is designed to prove the feasibility of real-time
              World Wide Web displays based on Internet transfer of polled data, automated
              data sanitizing and database loading, and dynamic creation of web displays. The
              specific commercial opportunity has been created by a recent Federal Energy
              Regulatory Commission (FERC) order requiring all U.S. electric power
              transmission network providers to make transmission line availability and
              pricing data publicly available as Open Access Same-Time Information Systems
              (OASIS). Research objectives include the development of an inexpensive database
              that can be queried via a web browser and that can be integrated with a network
              provider's existing resources; a standard data format for shipping OASIS input
              data via the Internet; an automated sanitizing and loading process for
              transferred data. Research will involve determining a feasible database
              solution; defining a standard format for data transfer and loading;
              investigating sanitizing processes and transfer/loading mechanisms; developing
              a prototype database/web display interface. Anticipated benefits include the
              ability to use the Internet and standard web browsers for display of real-time
              data. Limited research has been accomplished in this area, particularly with
              regard to use in commercial applications using diverse hosting platforms.   The
              proposed technology is designed to be compatible with the growing
              specifications of information to be provided by transmission system owners as a
              result of the restructuring of the electric power industry. Research results
              will enable development of a commercial OASIS. ***
