Title       : SBIR Phase I: Microfabrication of Planar Accelerating Structures for
               High-Frequency Electron Linear Accelerators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1996   
File        : a9661539

Award Number: 9661539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74962              (Estimated)
Investigator: David U. L. Yu davidyu@pacbell.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DULY Research Inc
	      1912 MacArthur Street
	      Rancho Palos Verdes, CA  902751111    310/548-7123

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9134,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9661539  Yu  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
              develop a planar structure for acceleration of a flat electron beam in a
              high-frequency, linear electron accelerator.  The  structure, different from
              the conventional cylindrically symmetric disk loaded structure, can be mass
              produced with modern microfabrication techniques using deep etch x-ray
              lithography.  Phase I research will focus on the physics issues and fabrication
              techniques of the planar accelerating structure (PAS), and the feasibility of
              their application to future linear colliders and compact commercial linear
              accelerators operating at high frequencies.  The PAS can be designed with a
              nearly constant axial electric field in the central region of the cavity
              through which the beam passes.  Such a structure would reduce wakefields, and
              accommodate a high-current beam while maintaining a low current density.  The
              PAS can also be used to accelerate electrons emitted by an asymmetric
              photoinjection gun, possibly eliminating the need of an expensive damping ring
              to control emittances.  Asymmetric RF quadrupole beam focusing in a PAS-based
              linac is also possible.  Precision microfabrication techniques are especially
              suitable for repeatable production of small, high-aspect ratio structures with
              tight tolerances.  These techniques would replace tedious machining and brazing
              manufacturing processes for very small and intricate structures, and
              substantially reduce the manufacturing cost.  If the research is successful,
              the resulting asymmetric planar accelerating structure (PAS) would be a
              revolutionary design applicable to a new generation of commercial linear
              accelerators and linear colliders.  Microfabrication of PAS using lithography
              techniques will save production cost and increase precision in manufacturing
              tolerances.  Microfabricated, PAS-based linacs can be used as compact medical
              and industrial accelerators.  They can also be used as compact injectors to
              microfabricate free electron lasers to produce coherent,  tunable radiations.
