Title       : SBIR Phase I: Innovative Artificial Life Lab for Life Science Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9661112

Award Number: 9661112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Carter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ADA Technologies, Inc
	      304 Inverness Way South, Ste 365
	      Englewood, CO  80112    303/792-5615

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661112  Carter   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              to be carried out by ADA Technologies, Inc. addresses the need for innovative
              methods for instruction of life science topics on biological evolution,
              interdependence of organisms, and behavior of organisms.  The objective of the
              research program is to develop an innovative artificial life simulation for
              implementation on personal computers and the Internet.  Artificial life is a
              field of study devoted to understanding life by attempting to abstract the
              fundamental dynamic principles underlying biological phenomena and recreating
              these dynamics in other physical media--such as computers--making them
              accessible to new kinds of experimental manipulation and testing.  The
              simulation is innovative since it employs concepts from the relatively new
              field of artificial life as used for synthetic biology, and uses the concepts
              as a complement to traditional analytic biology.  The objective of the Phase I
              program is to quantify technological limits for the simulation imposed by the
              limits of personal computers and the Internet and to perform preliminary
              classroom testing of the simulation using instructional support materials
              conforming to national science education standards for content and teaching. 
              Lessons learned in Phase I will provide the foundation for full-scale
              development of the software in the next phase of the project and
              commercialization and dissemination in the third phase.  The team assembled for
              the program consists of persons with skills and experience in innovative
              technology and sound education principles.   The outcome of an artificial life
              simulation will contribute to fulfilling the great need for innovative
              instructional resources.  The commercial applications of the artificial life
              lab include classroom instruction, home-schooling, Internet implementation,
              science and technology centers and sale as a general entertainment product. 
              ***
