Title       : SBIR Phase I: A New Approach to Low Cost Enzyme Expression in Bacillus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1996  
File        : a9661474

Award Number: 9661474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Deits Deits@mbi.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Enzyme Design, Inc
	      PO Box 27008
	      Lansing, MI  48909    517/336-4622

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1491,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661474  Deits   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to
              be carried out by Enzyme Design, Inc. will generate proof-of-principle data for
              a new enabling technology in enzyme expression, termed EnzyMatrixTM expression.
              EnzyMatrixTM expression adapts the major host microorganism in use in the
              enzyme industry, Bacillus subtilis, to create a new platform for enzyme
              expression.  The product of EnzyMatrixTM expression is a particulate form of
              the target heterologous enzyme.  The particulate nature of the product
              facilitates enzyme recovery, affording the potential to greatly simplify
              downstream processing.  Since downstream processing costs dominate bioproduct
              selling prices, these savings can substantially expand the market for enzyme
              applications in the pharmaceutical and fine chemical industries.  The particles
              themselves are heat, shear and organic chemical resistant, offering a platform
              for catalysts for use in a variety of industrial processes.  The research
              objectives of this project are to express two enzymes with significantly
              different structures and functions using EnzyMatrixTM expression and to
              evaluate the properties of the resulting expressed enzymes; increase the level
              of expression on a per-cell and a per-liter fermenter basis, using one of the
              expressed enzymes as a model; carry out strain improvement to improve yield and
              speed EnzyMatrixTM expression; and evaluate chemical and genetic methods for
              stabilizing EnzyMatrixTM enzymes.   The proposed enabling technology, the
              EnzyMatrixTM expression, will make it possible for Enzyme Design to offer a
              biocatalyst with the key advantages of rapid development and scaleup, uniform
              product properties and economical production.  Through this technology the
              nation will realize improved efficiencies of production including reduced
              energy costs during processing and high production specificity, leading to
              reduction of the waste stream burden.  ***
