Title       : SBIR Phase I: Phytoremediation of Surface and Ground WatersUsing Sequential
               Rhizosphere - Thin Film and Periphyton Filters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1996  
File        : a9661361

Award Number: 9661361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74603              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. DeBusk azureainc@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Azurea, Inc.
	      PO Box 561178
	      Rockledge, FL  329561178    407/631-0610

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 1182,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661361  DeBusk     This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I Project
              describes a study plan to develop sequential rhizosphere thin-film systems
              (RTF) and periphyton filters (PF) for removal of excess nutrients and trace
              elements from surface waters. It is hypothesized that the combination of high
              loading capacity and high contaminant tolerance of a wetland macrophyte
              (Hydrocotyle umbellata) with the higher affinity of periphyton for nutrients
              and trace elements will provide key components of a sequential process train
              that will effectively and economically treat large and variable volumes of
              water.  The goal is to design and test a phytoremediation technology to remove
              trace elements from water to levels typical of natural ambient surface waters. 
              Such treated waters would meet all permit stipulations for release to surface
              waters. It is proposed to optimize system design to take advantage of suspended
              particulate retention and pH mediated precipitation to enhance performance
              above that expected on the basis of bioaccumulation-binding mechanisms alone.  
              The Phase I study will determine the highest water concentrations of P, Cu, Pb
              and As tolerated by the plants, the lowest routinely achievable contaminant
              concentrations in effluent water under reasonable contaminant inputs, and
              contaminant concentrations in biomass and associated solids.  This effort will
              both characterize performance of the RTF and PF processes, and define
              acceptable strategies for handling harvested biomass. It is expected that
              successful development of this phytoremediation technology will provide a cost
              effective, rugged and broadly useful capability to remove trace element
              contaminants from moderately contaminated surface waters and stormwater from
              various sources, e.g. agricultural or urban runoff.     Successful completion
              of Phase I and II research efforts will result in, for the first time, an
              operationally simple, reliable and relatively low maintenance technology to
              remove specific element contaminants fr om surface and ground waters. The
              sequential RTF-PF is a useful technology for government agencies (DOD, DOE,
              EPA).  Private sector customers could employ them to treat effluent streams
              characterized by high or variable volumes and moderate metal contamination
              (~500 - 1000 microgram/L).  This system may also be useful for
              reclamation/recycling efforts for metals.   ***
