Title       : SBIR Phase I: Exhaustive Oxidation of Indoor Air Contaminants via an Ozonated,
               Ultra-Violet Irradiated Flurocarbon/TiO2 Dispersion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9661583

Award Number: 9661583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christy L. Crowe newman@mailhost.ecn.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Surfactant Assoc Inc
	      PO Box 2705
	      Norman, OK  730702705    405/366-7767

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1440,5371,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661583  Crowe     The loss of productivity and the associated worker
              illness and discomfort due to poor indoor air quality caused by VOCs, dust, and
              biologicals such as microorganisms and dander have now been recognized.  This
              Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be carried out by
              Surfactant Associates, Inc. proffers an enhanced process for a solution to this
              problem by means of the exhaustive oxidation of air contaminants.  The process
              involves ozonation of a fluorocarbon fluid possessing extremely high solubility
              for ozone.  The fluorocarbon is completely oxidation resistant and biologically
              inert and its high solubility for gases has allowed its use as an artificial
              blood substitute in thousands of surgical operations.  The fluorocarbon has
              demonstrated the preferential ability to extract a variety of both gaseous and
              liquid hydrocarbon and chlorocarbon contaminants from air streams.  It has a
              low viscosity and an even lower volatility while being a superior solvent for
              gaseous contaminants relative to all hydrocarbon solvents.  The fluid is an
              excellent medium for oxidation reactions and poses no contamination risk
              itself.  For such reasons its has been previously used with dispersions of TiO
              2  particles for the ultraviolet (UV) catalyzed photooxidation of air
              contaminants.  Exhaustive oxidation was achieved in such UV irradiated
              dispersions due to the air contaminants collecting at the solid/liquid
              interface of the TiO 2 particles and their intermediate oxidation products
              being unable to escape.  The intermediate oxidation products themselves
              physically adsorbed at the solid/liquid interface until completely oxidized to
              C02. It is proposed that this effect would also be seen for ozone catalyzed
              oxidation in such fluorocarbon/TiO 2 dispersions.  It is also proposed that, by
              using a high surface area TiO 2 aerogel dispersion, the physical adsorption
              capacity for air contaminants would be enhanced by an order of magnitude.   The
              proposed process offers to significantly  improve indoor air quality.  The
              initial target markets for the proposed process are small confinement areas
              such as passenger aircraft and nuclear submarines where indoor air quality is
              particularly poor.  Other markets are hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, office
              buildings, shopping malls and restaurants to mention a few. The superior
              oxidation potential of the proposed system could be utilized for the treatment
              of indoor air of any structure occupied by humans.  ***
