Title       : SBIR Phase I: Frequency-Quadrupled Diode Laser Atomic Absorption-Based Flux
               Controller
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1996   
File        : a9661283

Award Number: 9661283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74997              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Kessler kessler@psicorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Physical Sciences Inc
	      20 New England Business Center
	      Andover, MA  018101077    508/689-0003

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1502,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                ***  ABSTRACT      9661283  Kessler     This Small Business Innovation
              Research Phase I project will combine ultra-sensitive optical absorption
              spectroscopy and frequency-quadrupled diode laser light sources for the
              development of an atomic mass flux sensor for semiconductor fabrication.
              Increasingly complex nanoscale electronic devices require that production
              facilities maintain fine control of the atomic and molecular fluxes during the
              fabrication process (e.g., MBE, CVD). This requires the development of a new
              class of flux monitors which are species specific and capable of the precision
              and accuracy needed for depositing single atomic layers. Physical Sciences Inc.
              (PSI) has recently demonstrated sensitive mass flux measurements by recording
              velocity and number density measurements of molecular oxygen molecules in an
              aeropropulsion field demonstration. PSI proposes to apply the same technique to
              atomic species by developing and demonstrating a frequency-quadrupled diode
              laser source in a compact and tunable configuration suitable for various atomic
              flux measurements. During the Phase I program, ultra-sensitive dopant atomic
              concentration measurements will be demonstrated using a heat pipe atom source.
              Mass flux measurements and control will be demonstrated in Phase II in atomic
              flows produced by an MBE oven source. The flux sensor/controller prototype
              demonstration will be applicable to a wide variety of both atomic and molecular
              species flux measurements.    The proposed sensor will advance the
              state-of-the-art for the control of atomic mass flux during fabrication of
              electronic devices. The sensor will also be applicable to molecular species by
              changing the laser source wavelength and thus will be applicable to MBE
              variants and manufacturing via MOCVD. Additional markets may be found in
              industrial process controls, aeropropulsion applications, and environmental
              monitoring. ***
