Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Enhanced, High Density, High Surface Area, Monolithic Composite
               Storage Media for Natural Gas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9661537

Award Number: 9661537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bita Young gknewman@mailhost.ecn.uoknor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NewMan Technology
	      P.O. Box 721195
	      Norman, OK  73070    405/325-2833

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1417,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  ABSTRACT      9661537  Young     This Small Business Innovation Phase I
              proposal addresses the essential problem facing commercialization of natura1
              gas as a transportation fuel. The goal of commercializing natural gas as an
              alternative vehicular fuel has engendered intense research and development
              activities in the various areas of alternative fuel components and systems,
              component and vehicular dynamics, control systems, vehicular energy systems,
              and most importantly in the adsorptive storage media itself. Despite this
              activity, attempts to discover, fabricate and/or re-engineer existing natural
              gas absorbents have not led to a successful commercial storage media for
              natural gas. This proposal examines this problem and proposes a new and novel
              strategy, supported by actual data, for forming an enhanced, high density, high
              surface area, monolithic composite storage media for natural gas. The proposed
              storage media is higher in density than absorbents previously evaluated for
              storing natural gas as well as having a well define pore size that researchers
              have predicted as optimum for natural gas storage.   Natural gas is a precious
              resource of major economic significance world-wide. The environmentally
              friendly aspects of natural gas as a fuel make it likely to become even more
              important in the world. This composite adsorbent approach is the first major
              step in natural gas adsorbent technology in several decades and offers a real
              potential for enhancing natural gas storage. If successful, this Phase I effort
              would have direct application in automotive transportation as well as in its
              supporting industries. The process is also potentially important across the
              spectrum of commercial storage and separation and purification techniques for
              natural gas. ***
