Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of an Accurate and Efficient Radiative Transfer Model
               in a Body-Fitted Coordinate System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1996  
File        : a9661586

Award Number: 9661586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiwen Liu liu@esi-al.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Engineering Sciences Inc
	      1900 Golf Road, Suite D
	      Huntsville, AL  35802    205/883-6233

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1059,1266,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661586  Liu     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will develop an accurate and efficient radiative transfer model suitable for
              any complicated geometry in a body-fitted coordinate (BFC) system.  Radiative
              heat transfer is the dominant heat transfer mode in boilers, furnaces, rocket
              engines, and other high-temperature combustion systems.  Due to different
              mathematical characteristics, entirely coupled and simultaneous solution of the
              radiative transfer equation (RTE) and the governing equations for fluid
              transport has been very difficult for complicated problems.  In this proposal,
              radiative heat transfer will be simulated by the even parity formulation (EPF)
              of RTE in combination with the discrete ordinates method (DOM). Unlike the
              conventional RTE, the EPF of the DOM is a second-order differential equation. 
              A central difference scheme and a upwind scheme will be utilized to discretize
              the discrete ordinates equations spatially and performance from these two
              schemes will be studied.  To investigate the accuracy of the present radiation
              model in a BFC system, several benchmark problems with irregular geometries
              will be considered and the solutions from the present model will be compared
              with other available solutions.  Due to the same mathematical structure between
              the EPF and the governing equations for describing the fluid dynamics, the
              present radiation model is expected to be very accurate and efficient for
              problems with complicated geometries.     The radiative transfer model to be
              developed will have the same mathematical structure as the fluid transport
              equations and they are entirely compatible with each other numerically.  This
              will facilitate simultaneous solution of the RTE and other governing equations
              in a combustion system.  If the present model is successfully proven in Phase
              I, it will be extended to a 3D in Phase II.  Furthermore, it will be
              implemented into a commercial computational fluid dynamics (CFD) code due to
              its tremendous advantages  .***
