Title       : SBIR Phase I: Impedance Based Remote Non-Destructive Inspection of Critical
               Structural Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1996   
File        : a9661381

Award Number: 9661381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Paine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Garman Systems Inc
	      2909 12th Avenue South
	      Nashville, TN  372042544    615/292-7022

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1473,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              non-destructive inspection (NDI) method for remote diagnostics of critical
              structural components such as mechanical fasteners (bolts, welds, rivets, etc.)
              or advanced materials (composites).  Utilizing an impedance based approach,
              damage in critical structural components or advanced materials can be detected
              by periodic remote inspection without removing the structural component or
              making costly visual inspection.  By attaching small piezoceramic transducer
              materials (such as PZT wafers) to the components of interest, damage can be
              detected by changes in the structural impedance.  Impedance monitoring is
              especially facilitated by the use of the PZT wafers which can simultaneously
              activate and sense structural response.  PZT wafers respond mechanically to
              electric signals, producing a small deformation in themselves and the structure
              to which they are attached (host structure).  The electrical impedance
              (voltage/current) of the PZT wafer therefore has a direct correlation to the
              mechanical impedance of the component.  Should the components mechanical
              impedance change from damage or variations of the properties, the periodic
              remote inspection of the PZT electrical impedance will manifest the variation. 
               The impedance method for remote NDI of critical structural components will
              have value as an inexpensive and labor-saving inspection method for critical
              bolts and other fasteners in aerospace and civil infrastructure applications. 
              A family of fasteners for off-the-shelf application in such structures will
              also be developed with the NDI sensors in-place to provide a means for
              designers to include readily inspectable parts into structural designs.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
