Title       : SBIR Phase I: The Use of Doppler Radar for Estimating the Areal Extent of Strong
               Winds in Thunderstorms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9661447

Award Number: 9661447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Vickery   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Applied Research Assocs
	      4300 San Mateo Boulevard
	      Albuquerque, NM  87110    919/876-0018

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0304020   Extreme Wind                            
              0511602   Inadvertent Weather Effect              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is directed at
              developing a new technique to model the area affected by strong thunderstorm
              winds using the newly available NEXt generation weather RADar (NEXRAD) Doppler
              data.  Other than hurricanes and tornadoes, thunderstorms are the largest
              producer of direct wind damage in the United States and dominate the extreme
              wind climate over much of the country.  These locally intense storms have
              complicated structures with significant changes in the surface wind speeds and
              directions within the storms.  As the storms move across the country they can
              cause wide spread damage.  The current state of the art in the climatological
              modeling of the storms involves the use of the relatively sparse network of
              surface anemometer records of wind speeds produced by thunderstorms.  This
              sparse network of wind speed measurements does not allow modeling of the total
              area affected by the damaging winds.  The research will seek to model the
              thunderstorm gust fronts and regions of intense local winds using separate and
              distinct methods.  The approach will couple surface level anemometer
              measurements and NEXRAD data to develop a technique to estimate surface level
              wind speeds given NEXRAD data. The approach described in the proposal is
              unique, and if successful will yield the only model able to estimate the total
              wind induced damage produced by these storms.       The potential areas of
              commercialization for the technology are primarily in the insurance and power
              utility industries.  Both of these industries are interested in risk management
              and improved ways for estimating and reducing potential damages.  The
              integration of the thunderstorm model with wind damage models already developed
              by the firm could lead to unique products of interest to these industries as
              well as others.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
