Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of a Cell Controller for Epitaxial Silicon Fabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1996  
File        : a9661592

Award Number: 9661592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74939              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Rosenthal prosenth@online-ftir.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : On-Line Technologies Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  061083720    860/291-0719

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1502,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  ABSTRACT    Rosenthal  9661592     This Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase I project will develop the technology for closed loop process control in
              semiconductor device fabrication. In current practice, fixed set point control
              is used for process steps. Here, reactor recipes are set so that a parameter
              value (as determined by measurements on 1 in 25 or 1 in 50 wafers) matches a
              target specification, and the process is run until the parameter value is
              outside preset limits. Then the process is stopped and the reactor is retuned.
              This practice results in down time for process retuning, scrapped material
              which is produced before the process is stopped (often the measurements are not
              made immediately), and wider variations in the product specifications than
              necessary. Higher quality products, with tighter specifications produced at
              lower cost, with reduced scrap can be achieved by the application of closed
              loop process control in which measurements are made on every wafer, and recipe
              changes are continuously made to keep the wafer state parameters on target. The
              objective of this project is to develop the technology for wafer-by-wafer
              control in the fabrication of epitaxial silicon. On-Line technologies, Inc.
              (On-Line) has developed a thin film metrology (TFM) tool which integrates with
              the fabrication tool for epitaxial silicon (epi), allowing the measurement of
              the quality of every epi film produced without any delay in the process. Work
              at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) has developed the data
              analysis and control algorithms which can be employed in a cell controller.
              Phase I will develop a cell controller which integrates an Applied Materials,
              Inc. Centura epi fabrication tool, an On-Line epi TFM tool, and MlT's analysis
              and control algorithms. This system will be used to demonstrate improvements in
              the epi thickness specifications using wafer-by-wafer control of the deposition
              time. Phase I will provide the foundation for a cell controller to be
              constructed and tested  in Phase II which will control the complete fabrication
              recipe to ensure both epi thickness precision and uniformity.   The
              implementation of closed loop control can provide parameter specification
              improvements of factors of 2 to 10 without requiring any improvements in the
              fabrication tool. This improvement in product quality can be achieved with
              increased tool availability, reduced scrap, and lower personnel costs. The
              proposed technology will be applicable to fabrication tools with a total value
              of $9.6 billion/yr. in the year 2000. The cost for metrology is predicted to be
              10% of the fabrication tool costs, or $960 million/yr. A market of similar size
              is expected for the cell controllers which will compliment and add
              significantly to the value of the metrology tools. ***
