Title       : SBIR Phase I: Instrumentation for Controlled Fabrication & Characterization of
               Nanostructures: Assembly of 2-D Membrane Protein Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1997       
File        : a9661765

Award Number: 9661765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fatemeh Mojtabai mojtabai@sprintmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ultrathin Film Tech Ltd
	      955 Massachusetts Avenue, #219
	      Cambridge, MA      617/776-0900

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661765  Mojtabai     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will develop a technology that will allow the growth of crystals and
              other ordered micro- and nano-structures on a liquid in a fast and controlled
              fashion.  The technology will be integrated with real-time digital imaging
              laser fluorescence microscopy to allow for in-situ characterization of
              structure formation, throughout the fabrication process. The use of a robotics
              film transfer system facilitates preparation of specimens for use in atomic
              resolution measurements such as electron and scanning probe microscopies. These
              modifications will substantially improve the existing state-of-the-art of the
              technology.  The experimental program in Phase I addresses a new, simple and
              fast process for fabrication of ordered two-dimensional crystals of membrane
              spanning proteins. Unlike conventional techniques, this new process allow for
              variation of the experimental parameters to facilitate fabrication of crystals
              with both long- as well as short-range orientation order, suitable for
              high-resolution crystallographic analysis.  In addition, the process is orders
              of magnitude faster than conventional techniques, and maintains the native
              asymmetry of the membrane protein.  The success of the program will provide,
              for the first time, a general approach for crystallizing membrane proteins. 
              This may lead to new discoveries of significant biotechnological importance,
              since structural information at atomic resolution is indispensable for
              elucidation of the mechanism of action of key membrane proteins, and thereby
              understanding the nature of disease and for developing more effective drugs.   
               The unique performance characteristics of the technology provide many present
              and potential applications which range from fields such as microelectronics to
              biotechnology.  In biotechnology the technology has potential for developing
              more effective drugs, or screening drugs.  Other applications include
              fabrication of technologically useful tub ular microstructures that can be used
              as micro-vials for controlled delivery of drugs, and for immobilization of
              DNA/RNA on new materials for use in genetic screening.  ***
