Title       : SBIR Phase I: High Pressure Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of GaN
               and InGaN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1997     
File        : a9661323

Award Number: 9661323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74899              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley M. Vernon svernon@spirecorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spire Corporation
	      One Patriots Park
	      Bedford, MA  017302396    617/275-6000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1502,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                    ***  ABSTRACT      9661323  Vernon     This Small Business Innovative
              Research Phase I project will develop an innovative, high-pressure metalorganic
              chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) reaction chamber for improved growth of
              Group-III nitrides. Growth at pressures above one atmosphere will increase
              cracking efficiency of ammonia, limit material desorption, lower the density of
              nitrogen vacancies, and lead to better crystal quality by permitting higher
              temperature growth. Phase I will demonstrate growth of GaN using a
              high-pressure MOCVD reaction chamber, operating up to ten-atmospheres pressure.
              The chamber will be a vertical, inverted-flow design to minimize convection.
              MOCVD growth of the first GaN laser diode at Nichia used a configuration which
              simulates high pressure with a "push" flow orthogonal to the growth stream. At
              Spire, high-pressure MOCVD has been successfully employed for InP growth using
              substantially less phosphine than normally required. In fact, InP with specular
              surfaces and good crystal quality has been deposited at three atmospheres with
              a V:III ratio of 1:1, the lowest ratio ever reported for the successful growth
              of InP. Phase II will develop growth parameters for GaN, InGaN, and AlGaN
              device structures. Process optimization will include use of nitrogen in the
              carrier gas to better confine heat to the wafer surface by reducing thermal
              conductivity.   The market potential for GaN is tremendous, especially in
              optical storage (blue lasers and LEDs) and high-temperature electronics.
              Products made from this material system are already in large demand. If
              successful, high-pressure MOCVD may be the process of choice for GaN growth.
              Spire will offer high-pressure reactors to device manufacturers, while we use
              this technology to expand our optoelectronics epitaxial service business to
              include structures for shorter-wavelength devices. ***
