Title       : SBIR Phase I: Evaluation of Ternary Carbide Compounds that Exhibit Unique
               Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9661025

Award Number: 9661025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Mroz tmroz@art-inc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adv Refractory Tech, Inc.
	      699 Hertel Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142072341    716/875-4091

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1774,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  96-61025  Mroz     This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project
              will investigate a new family of ternary carbide compounds which have initially
              shown an interesting combination of ceramic and metallic characteristics. These
              materials exhibit a set of characteristics that blends the ductility, shock
              resistance and  machinability of metals with the refractoriness, oxidation
              resistance and strength of ceramics. These new compositions have been initially
              evaluated, however they have not been reproduced elsewhere. In order to learn
              more about these materials, and at the same time, further evaluate
              structure/properties relationships, a research program based on compositional
              variations is suggested. The project will evaluate the specific lattice sites
              within the structure as they relate to the material characteristics by
              exchanging specific elements with related elements. This will provide changes
              in atomic size and or valence potential. The formation of extensive solid
              solutions in this composition range, which will allow for determination of
              characteristics as they relate to changes made in atomic composition is
              anticipated. These materials will be characterized and compared to earlier work
              from the original  researchers responsible for discovering these materials. In
              addition, the project will  begin to evaluate and prioritize commercial
              opportunities for this material as they relate to the properties and
              characteristics obtained from sample materials.   Applications for this family
              of materials are expected to be wide ranging.  Early analysis suggests that
              replacement for graphite parts will be a large market that can be satisfied by
              the improved electrical and wear performance of these materials.  Other
              applications might include electrodes, heaters, seals and wear parts, and
              engine components.  The total value of the markets that may be serviced by this
              material is quite large due to the pervasive nature of the technology.  ***
