Title       : SBIR Phase I: A New Course of Experiments Based on an Inexpensive, Nanometer
               Resolution Interferometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9661412

Award Number: 9661412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74937              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shrenik Deliwala deliwala@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Research Lab Inc
	      15 Ward Street
	      Somerville, MA  02143    617/547-1122

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9145,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661412  Deliwala     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project to be carried out by Science Research Laboratory (SRL) proposes to
              develop a rugged, inexpensive, alignment-free, optical interferometer that will
              be integrated with a course of experiments illustrating both the basic concepts
              of wave interference and the application of high-precision measurements in many
              disciplines.  The instrument will be capable of optical path resolutions of
              better than 1 nm, which is one to two orders of magnitude more sensitive than
              typical instruments used for instruction. The scope of possible experiments is
              vast, ranging from measurement of position to nanometer precision to the
              photoacoustic detection of trace constituents for environmental monitoring. 
              The interferometer may be used by high schools or science and engineering
              departments at the under graduate level.  The inherent flexibility and rich
              history of the device will make it an ideal tool for bringing excitement of
              modern science and engineering to students.  Phase I will develop the design of
              a laboratory interferometric instrument as well as a coherent strategy for
              experiments, curricula and pedagogic methods.  In the next phase of the
              research, SRL will construct a prototype instrument and produce a large
              database of experiments together with guidelines to integrate them into
              curricula.   The instrument is primarily targeted at the educational market
              proffering to students what is not now available; namely, an affordable
              research-grade instrument.  Variations on the instrument will be developed for
              dedicated commercial applications such as high-frequency measurements of gas
              density fluctuations, electron density of plasmas, detection of trace chemical
              species, and femtosecond spectroscopy.  ***
