Title       : SBIR Phase I: All-Digital Time-To-Digital Converter Integrated with Visible
               Light Photon Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1996  
File        : a9661166

Award Number: 9661166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Oleg Mukhanov mukhanov@hypres.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : HYPRES, Inc.
	      175 Clearbrook Road
	      Elmsford, NY  10523    914/592-1190

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 4720,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                ***  9661166  Mukhanov     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will be to Dunlop the first semiconductor-superconductor hybrid
              technology time-resolved photon detection system by integrating silicon Visable
              Light Photon counters (VLPCs) and superconducting high-performance timing
              digitizers in one cryopackage.  This integration will allow one to take full
              advantage of the VLPCs extremely fast response and superb single photon
              detection capability.  In addition as the density of the arrays increase, the
              complexity, size power dissipation, and cost of traditional room-temperature
              time digitizing electronics may become prohibitively high.  This system will
              offer unparalleled performance in many applications that require time-resolved
              single photon detection. The VLPC package will be integrated with a novel time
              digitizer circuit based on a 200 ps time resolution superconducting
              time-to-digital converter (TDC).  to provide the required sensitivity for the
              VLPC output signal, the TDC will use a special low-noise SQUID amplifier
              integrated on the small chip.  Locating the amplifier with digitizer inside the
              crystostat of the VLPC (the VLPCs operate at 6-10K) eliminates the bandwidth
              limitations of low heat loss cables that would otherwise be required to bring
              the VLPC's analog signal to room temperature electronics.     The development
              of a compact low-cost all digital TDC integrated with Visible Light Photon
              Counters is expected to benefit particle detectors that require a
              Time-of-Flight detector subsystem The proposed device will significantly extend
              the performance capabilities of particle detector systems. The developed
              technology will also improve the performance of fluorescence/phosphorescence
              lifetime measurement systems, military emitter direction finding and commercial
              modulation domain instrumentation.  ***
