Title       : SBIR Phase I: Unique Biomaterial for Long-Term Culturing of Hematopoietic Stem
               Cells in Vitro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1996   
File        : a9661006

Award Number: 9661006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Pykett mpykett@cytomatrix.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cytomatrix, LLC
	      100 Inman Street, Suite 104
	      Cambridge, MA  02139    617/642-6848

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1491,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661006  Pykett   In this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project, Cytomatrix proposes to examine the ability of a unique
              three-dimensional biomaterial, Cellfoam TM, to support the long-term culturing
              of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in vitro.  The ability to culture stem cells
              in vitro over prolonged periods is paramount to many areas of basic research
              and clinical medicine,  yet current culture systems have proven ineffective in
              sustaining HSCs for extended periods, perhaps because traditional monolayer
              cultures lack the natural three-dimensional topography found in vivo.  Thus,
              there is urgent need for the development of novel culture systems capable of
              sustaining HSCs.  Preliminary results have shown that Cellfoam is capable of
              enhancing short- term stem cell survival in vitro compared to conventional
              systems without compromising HSC survival or pluripotency.  This project will
              evaluate the ability of Cellfoam to sustain HSCs in vitro over extended periods
              and will assess the impact of long-term culture on stem cell biology. 
              Specifically, the survival, phenotype, and multipotency of HSCs cultured for
              six weeks in Cellfoam will be measured and compared to conventional systems. 
              Based on previous successes  with short-term Cellfoam cultures, it is
              anticipated that Cellfoam will improve the long-term maintenance of stem cell
              viability.  The Phase I research results will be instrumental in developing
              advanced culture systems for the maintenance and manipulation of HSCs.  
              Cellfoam TM systems will enable, for the first time, the maintenance, analysis,
              and manipulation of hematopoietic stem cells over extended periods.  Commercial
              applications of Cellfoam devices will take advantage of existing markets in
              basic science and clinical medicine in which such systems are required but
              unavailable.  Applications foster fundamental advances in research and clinical
              fields, including gene therapy, bone marrow transplantation, and transfusion
              medicine, and thus have the potential for sign ificant impact on basic as well
              as clinical disciplines.  ***
