Title       : SBIR Phase I: Novel Functionalized Polymer-Trivalent Lanthanide Metal Ion
               Complexes for Advanced Electroluminescent Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1996  
File        : a9661470

Award Number: 9661470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73857              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. G. Chittibabu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Molecular Tech Inc
	      270 Littleton Rd, Suite 29
	      Westford, MA  01886    978/392-1304

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ****  9661470  Chittibabu    This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research
              project will synthesize and develop novel polymeric materials and their
              trivalent lanthanide complexes and process them as thin films employing layer
              by layer deposition technique for advanced electroluminescent devices.  Organic
              material based electroluminescent devices have recently attracted much
              interest, due to their potential applications as flat panel displays. 
              Significant achievements have been made, including low driving voltages,
              excellent brightness, and full color displays.  The crystallization of the
              small electroluminescent/charge transporting molecules, degradation of the
              charge injecting contacts due to the production of heat and oxidative
              degradation are the key problems associated with such devices.  Employing high
              mobility electron and hole transporting polymers, cross-linking them by
              complexation with highly florescent, lanthanide metal ions during the device
              fabrication is expected to minimize the crystallization and degradation, and
              will make the electroluminescent devices quite stable.  The synthesis and
              characterization of the ligand functionalized polymers, and the complexation of
              the lanthanide ions with these polymers employing layer by layer deposition
              technique will be addressed.  Experiments to evaluate the performance, on the
              novel polymer/lanthanide complex based electroluminescent devices will be
              carried out.  Stable and high performance electroluminescent devices are
              expected. The approach of utilizing novel layer by layer cross-linking of the
              luminescent electron and hole transporting polymers using highly flourescent
              lanthanide metal ions will minimize the degradation of the electroluminescent
              devices and will enhance the electroluminescence efficiency of such devices. 
              White light can be achieved by using the proper choice of electron and hole
              transporting polymers.     The successful development of the functionalized
              polymer-metal complexes will result in more practical organic mat erials for
              electroluminescence based flat panel display applications.
