Title       : SBIR Phase I: Scanning Wire Magnetometer for Nondestructive Evaluation for
               High-Temperature Superconducting Wire
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1996   
File        : a9661170

Award Number: 9661170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74764              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sankaran Kumar Kumar@QM.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Quantum Magnetics, Inc.
	      7740 Kenamar Court
	      San Diego, CA  921212425    858/566-9200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              new instrument for the nondestructive evaluation (NDE) of high-temperature
              superconducting (HTS) wires.  A major obstacle to commercial development of HTS
              applications is the inability to manufacture long lengths of wire reliably. 
              One conventional method to test long lengths of wire is to cut pieces from
              their ends and perform critical current measurements.  This leaves most of the
              wire untested.  The four-point resistivity method requires the attachment and
              subsequent removal of contacts, which risks damaging the wire and provides poor
              spatial resolution of defects.  This project will develop the Scanning WIre
              Magnetometer (SWIM) to scan the entire wire length's ac magnetic susceptibility
              continuously, measuring critical current density noninvasively and with high
              spatial resolution.  Operated as an eddy current instrument above the
              superconducting transition temperature, SWIM also evaluates the physical
              integrity of the wire's silver cladding. In Phase I, the project will
              demonstrate feasibility of scanning wire magnetometry using HTS wire samples
              provided by two project collaborators, Intermagnetics General Corp. and the
              State University of New York at Buffalo.  In Phase II,  an automated prototype
              will be fabricated for testing at an HTS wire fabrication facility.       This
              specific NDE market aims primarily to facilitate the cost-effective production
              of HTS wire, tape and thin film materials, with a secondary application to
              low-temperature superconducting wire production.  A direct commercial market
              for the SWIM of the order of several million dollars per year is expected, but
              has the potential to greatly accelerate the commercial development of HTS
              devices and thus indirectly to generate much larger markets.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
