Title       : SBIR Phase I: Decision Support for Managing Performance Risk (DSMPR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1996  
File        : a9661631

Award Number: 9661631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Heimberger jheimberger@sps.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Software Product Solutions
	      122 4th Ave
	      Indialantic, FL  32903    407/984-3370

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 1321,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661631  Heimberger   Software development and maintenance are a
              consequential part of current business activity in many sectors of the economy
              activity.  Unfortunately, the current state of statistical practice in software
              engineering is immature because researchers and practitioners have a limited
              knowledge of statistics.  Compounding this problem is that the applicability of
              methods is not always systematically demonstrated and that methods are not
              usually presented in a context that is familiar to engineers and managers. 
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be carried out by
              Software Productivity Solutions addresses these problems by developing an
              innovative quantitative methodology and supporting tool for Decision Support
              for Managing Performance Risk (DSMPR) in software projects.  DSMPR will
              demonstrate the value of applying statistical and decision analysis techniques
              to a well-defined software management problem and provide a methodology that
              describes how they should be applied in the software management process.  DSMPR
              will accomplish its tasks by integrating selected techniques from Forecasting
              and Multi-Attribute Utility Theory into a methodology and tool for software
              project management.  The result will be a significant improvement in the
              quality of insight provided to software managers for decisionmaking.   DSMPR
              has a strong commercial potential for satisfying the needs of a broad and
              largely untapped market.  DSMPR will help software project managers to assess
              the significance of differences between plans and actual performance; quantify
              the performance risk represented by the deviations; and assist in making
              tradeoffs in planning corrective actions.  By providing such project management
              and decision-support capabilities, DSMPR will have a broad applicability to
              both commercial and Government industry sectors where large software projects
              are common.  These sectors include telecommunications, transportation, and
              distribution.  ***  .
