Title       : SBIR Phase I: Commercially Viable Deposition of Catalytic Films Onto Proton
               Conducting Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9661724

Award Number: 9661724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew T. Hunt mct.exec@ccvd.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Helmut G. Hornis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : CCVD dba MicroCoating Tech
	      5315 Peachtree Industrial Blvd.
	      Chamblee, GA  303412107    678/287-2400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 1417,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  ABSTRACT      9661724  Hornis    This Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase I project will further develop a technique to coat proton conduction
              membranes with catalysts via an open atmosphere Combustion Chemical Vapor
              Deposition (CCVD) technology. Low temperature, high efficiency H2/02 and H2/Air
              based fuel cells are constructed using a variety of commercially available
              polymeric proton conduction membranes that are coated with a catalyst to
              activate the anodic/cathodic ionization reactions. Currently, platinum
              catalytic films are deposited by thick film technology or dip-coating resulting
              in high material expenses and/or yielding a mechanically fragile coating with
              low bonding strength. As an initial proof-of-concept for this proposal and for
              DuPont, MicroCoatings Technologies (MCT) deposited an adherent platinum thin
              film onto NAFION( in the open atmosphere. Platinum thin films deposited by the
              open atmosphere CCVD technology generally show properties similar or superior
              to those obtained by vacuum based CVD processes. Desirable adherent nanophase
              grains with radii of 10A to 100A can be deposited. XRD and SEM analysis
              indicated that the resulting film was amorphous with good adhesion to the
              substrate. The polymer foil is simply moved through the chamberless deposition
              zone, which allows large sheets or roll stock to be coated quickly. Since the
              CCVD technique uses solution based precursors, vapor pressures do not play a
              crucial role in selecting the precursor, and thus precursors generally are 30%
              to 95% less expensive than those needed for traditional CVD. During Phase I,
              platinum is going to be evaluated for adhesion strength with the membrane and
              their microstructure with deposition variation.  Lowering the manufacturing
              cost of proton conducting membranes is a critical factor in furthering the
              commercialization of proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells for
              transportation and stationary applications. In addition to fuel cell
              applications, the market for the membrane coating tech nique developed under
              this research includes chemical production and fluid processing. ***
