Title       : SBIR Phase I: Algebraic Multigrid (AMG) Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1996  
File        : a9661198

Award Number: 9661198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72733              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Ruge jruge@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Front Range Sci Computatio
	      1005 Gillaspie Drive
	      Boulder, CO  803036544    303/494-6232

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                ***  9661198  Ruge     This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project
              is testing and development of robust algebraic multigrid software for solving
              unstructured-mesh problems, designed to run in both serial and parallel
              environments, and which efficiently incorporates local refinement strategies in
              the solution process. Many commercial and government codes, including those in
              hydrodynamics, heat conduction and multigroup thermal radiation transport,
              require solution of second-order elliptic partial differential equations, and
              often employ unstructured discretizations in order to resolve complex
              geometries and to facilitate adaptive refinement. A common solution strategy is
              to set up an outer iteration (e.g., Newton's or Newton-like methods,
              preconditioned conjugate gradient, implicit time-stepping) in which each step
              requires the solution of discretized second-order elliptic partial differential
              equations. Current solution methods are limited, with convergence degrading
              with problem size, time steps, and highly resolved local refinement levels, so
              that solution of realistic problems is prohibitively expensive. To counter
              these difficulties, algebraic multigrid (AMG) uses the principles of standard
              multigrid methods, but with an automated preprocessing phase in which the
              various multigrid components are constructed. This leads to a very efficient
              and robust solution method for such problems which is ideally suited for
              unstructured grids since all of the processing is based on the matrices, thus
              eliminating the usual multigrid requirement that the user supply coarser
              discretization levels, which would be prohibitive or impossible for most
              unstructured mesh applications. In Phase I, the emphasis will be on testing
              existing AMG codes on problems of interest, determining efficient ways to
              incorporate local refinement strategies in the solution proven, and extending
              multigrid parallel implementation strategies to AMG.   Robust algebraic
              multigrid software that is easily combined with existi ng codes has the
              potential to greatly enhance the range of problems (in size and complexity)
              that can be efficiently solved. Unstructured meshed at used widely in codes for
              bow the public and private sectors in many applications. and these codes would
              benefit greatly by the availability of robust AMG solvers  ***
