Title       : SBIR Phase I: Photocatalytically Active Filters for Volatile Organic Compound
               Removal from Gas Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1997       
File        : a9661290

Award Number: 9661290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir M. Zamansky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Energy & Envir Resrch Corp
	      18 Mason
	      Irvine, CA  92618    714/859-8851

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661290  Zamansky     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project to be carried out by Energy and Environmental Research Corporation is a
              feasibility study of utilizing photocatalytic filters for effective volatile
              organic compound (VOC) removal from gas streams before discharging them to the
              atmosphere.  The US EPA list of 17 high-volume and high-release toxic
              industrial chemicals includes 6 chlorinated organics.  These compounds are more
              resistant to oxidation than most other organic species.  Advanced technologies
              should be developed for destruction of VOCs which include chlorinated organic
              compounds.  The proposed photocatalytic filters will use a specially prepared
              surface to oxidize toxic contaminants at ambient temperature and pressure and
              simultaneously will separate the solid particles present in the gas stream. 
              The objectives of the research are to: (1) synthesize and characterize the
              novel catalytic filter with exceptional properties for decontamination of air
              and industrial exhaust gases and (2) measure the photocatalytic oxidation
              activity of this filter in the mineralization of selected VOCs .  Phase I study
              will deliver the reaction rate expression that enables prediction of the
              oxidation rate of the contaminants as a function of humidity and contaminants
              concentrations.  Also, this project will obtain data to develop the most
              effective and economic size of the system for exhaust gas stream cleaning
              processes.   This project proffers a technology of utility to the industries of
              air pollution control and waste destruction.  The proposed photo-oxidation
              filers can remove toxic VOCs and particulate matter at ambient temperature and
              pressure.  The process is simple, inexpensive, and has the potential to be
              widely used in the industry for VOC removal from air and industrial gases.  The
              process combined with advanced air conditioning systems can also be used for
              indoor air cleaning.  The photocatalytic filer will oxidize chlorinated toxic
              compounds to form H20, CO2, as  well as HCl which can be easily removed by
              passing the exhaust gas through a water bubbler.  ***
