Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Geographic Information System (GIS) Based Community Transit
               Information System (CTIS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9661397

Award Number: 9661397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74587              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sutton jsutton@ca.gistrans.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GIS/Trans, Ltd
	      675 Massachusetts Ave, 14th Fl
	      Cambridge, MA  02139    714/222-0701

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9661397  Sutton   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I proposal
              to be carried out by GIS/Trans, Ltd. will research and develop the user
              requirements for a modular design for a Community Transit Information System
              (CTIS) using off-the-shelf geographic information system (GIS) technology.  The
              innovation in this project stems from the proposed modular design of the system
              components and the integration of these with off-the-shelf GIS.  While existing
              transit information system products are designed for single modes, such as mass
              transit, they generally have poor graphics and spatial intelligence for routing
              or trip planning.  None are presently GIS based, a major weakness given the
              emergence of use and power of this technology.  The project will research the
              necessary GIS spatial intelligence for a comprehensive CTIS and analyze the
              network integration and multimodal network representation problems that have
              constrained product development to date in this field.  The project will review
              current user needs by conducting an information systems analysis of a range of
              community transit services (e.g., rideshare, shuttle bus, dial-a-ride,
              paratransit).  Following the identification of the system components, these
              will be modeled to produce a concept design and functional specification.  The
              data modeling will employ established software engineering methodologies and
              techniques.  It is anticipated that the design will include recommendations on
              how to tie the transit related attributes to multiple network representations
              and display these on maps for travel information or trip planning purposes. 
              The research will investigate the feasibility of designing a system that can
              work with real-time data and provide the needed routing and scheduling
              information on-line.  Linkage to technologies such as Global Positioning by
              Satellite (GPS) and Automated Vehicle Location (AVL), and the potential for
              access to the CTIS on the Internet will also be researched.  The proposed
              design for a Community T ransit Information System is a timely response to the
              Transportation Demand Management program supported by the US Department of
              Transportation to combat traffic congestion and environmental pollution.  The
              technology will assist planners and users to meet transportation mobility needs
              in a more efficient and environmentally conscious manner.   The proposed
              product will be useful to all public transportation providers, including
              transit agencies, metropolitan planning organizations, local governments,
              cities and towns.  It will be compatible with leading GIS vendor products in
              order to take advantage of the spatial analysis tools and network analysis
              programs that these provide.  It will also be compatible with industry standard
              database technology.  Another feature of the approach taken by GIS/Trans, Ltd.
              is the integration with the firm's existing GIS and transportation products, so
              that users will be able to select their specific requirements from a suite of
              programs.  ***
