Title       : SBIR Phase I: Elastomer Bed Technology for Arctic Heat Recovery Ventilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9661459

Award Number: 9661459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74791              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony DeGregoria   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ElasTek, Incorporated
	      842 Woodrow Street
	      Madison, WI  53711    608/238-2039

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  96-61459  DeGregoria    This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR)
              Phase I project will investigate the use of elastomer bed heat exchangers to
              improve indoor air quality and occupant comfort for arctic structures.  It will
              investigate the use of a heat recovery ventilator based on a novel, patented,
              regenerative heat exchanger, the elastomer bed, which is compact, efficient,
              and robust in icing conditions.  The regenerative approach provides fresh air
              ventilation while controlling the loss of moisture, leading to a more
              comfortable interior humidity level.  A novel, proprietary ventilator design
              overcomes the seal icing problem of existing regenerative wheel designs.  The
              regenerative heat exchanger is constructed out of thin elastomer sheets,
              stacked and stretched into the theoretically optimum, parallel-channel,
              laminar-flow heat exchanger geometry.  Combining accessible, open channels with
              flexible elastomer sheets makes it possible to de-ice the heat exchanger
              mechanically, leading to an energy efficient, continuously available, compact
              ventilator for arctic regions.  Its compact size allows the unit to be
              installed practically anywhere, providing local heat recovery ventilation at
              the point where it is needed.  It would be well suited for both fixed site and
              modular, transportable structure ventilation, enhancing arctic worker's health
              and comfort.   Commercial applications are thought to be found across a wide
              range of building ventilation systems and personal comfort products. 
              Applications include home and commercial heat recovery ventilators and personal
              cold weather protective masks.  ***
