Title       : Japan Long-Term Research Visit: A Comparative Study of Triassic Reefs and Reef
               Organisms Between North America and Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1992 
File        : a9207232

Award Number: 9207232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31529              (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Stanley fossil@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve month long-term visit by                      
              Professor George D. Stanley, Department of Geology, University of              
              Montana to Japan for a cooperative research project with                       
              Professor Minoru Tamura, Faculty of Education, Kumamoto                        
              University.  The research will include a comparative study of                  
              triassic reefs and reef organisms between North America and                    
              Japan.  The project will investigate fossiliferous outcrops of                 
              reeflike Triassic limestone on the Japanese islands of Kyushu and              
              Honshu.  It will also involve a detailed taxonomic and                         
              paleoecologic study of corals, sponges and other reef-building                 
              biotas as well as a microfacies analysis of the enclosing                      
              carbonate rocks.  Study of the Japanese fossils and rock types                 
              will form the basis for a comparison with similar-age deposits                 
              and fossils in the European Alps and in western North America.                 
                                                                                             
              Results of the research will be integrated with previous research              
              to produce a synthesis of reef-building and the distribution of                
              the reef organisms during the early Mesozoic.  This project will               
              constitute an important step in an ongoing attempt toward a                    
              global synthesis of early Mesozoic reef biotas in the Tethyan and              
              circum-Pacific regions.  Professor Tamura is an established                    
              researcher with long-time interests and publications on Triassic               
              fossils from southern Japan.  Kumamoto University contains many                
              fossils of interest.  In addition, the best curated collections                
              of Triassic corals reside in Kyushu University at nearby Fukuoka.              
              Professor Stanley is one of the leading world authorities on                   
              Triassic reefs and their constituent faunas.  It is believed that              
              this will be a very productive collaboration and that their                    
              research efforts will continue after the formal agreement has                  
              terminated.
