Title       : The Genetic Basis of Sex Ratio Distortion in Silene Alba
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9207893

Award Number: 9207893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janis Antonovics   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              While traditional sex ratio theory predicts organisms will produce             
              roughly equal proportions of the sexes, many species exhibit                   
              persistent sex ratio biases.  Consequently, there now exists a rich            
              diversity of theory pertaining to biased sex ratios.  Meiotic                  
              drive, cytoplasmic inheritance and other non-Mendelian mechanisms              
              of sex ratio distortion may play a major role in the evolution of              
              biased sex ratios.  Meiotic drive systems, including sex ratio                 
              distorters, may be central to our understanding of evolutionary                
              processes such as sex chromosome evolution, the evolution and                  
              diversity of sex determining mechanisms, and the origin of                     
              sterility barriers between species (including Haldane's Rule).                 
              Initial research has shown that certain families of Silene alva, a             
              dioecious plant, exhibit severely female biased sex ratios.                    
              Studies involving molecular markers of the Y chromosome show that              
              the vias is present in the seed and is therefore, not due to a                 
              higher mortality of male progeny.  Sex ratio bias is inherited                 
              through or expressed in the male parent. This pattern of                       
              inheritance and other circumstantial evidence lead one suspect and             
              X-linked meiotic drive system may be responsible for the evolution             
              of the female bias.  The proposed research will determine the                  
              genetic basis of sex ratio distortion in Silene alba                           
              by using reciprocal crosses and backcrosses.  RAPD markers,                    
              will be used to investigate specifically how and when the female               
              bias develops.  Crosses among geographically separated populations             
              and among closely related species will be used to detect                       
              sex ratio distortion which is normally suppressed by restorers.                
              Finally, whether the structure of natural populations                          
              of Silene alba is consistent with other mechanisms of selection for            
              biased sex ratios will be determined.  These results will provide              
              information the nature and diversity of genetic mechanisms                     
              influencing sex ratio in natural populations.  Moreover, because               
              sex chromosome markers and wide crosses represent unique approaches            
              to studying sex ratio genetics,it is expected that methods will                
              stimulate research into mechanisms of sex ratio bias in other                  
              species.
