Title       : Collaborative Research: Calcium in the Early Development of Hydrozoans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9207470

Award Number: 9207470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellis B. Ridgway ridgway@gems.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The eggs and embryos of several species of hydrozoans contain                  
              endogenous calcium indicators similar to aequorin. These                       
              preparations offer unique opportunities for studying the role of               
              calcium in early development. Two calcium transients, one at                   
              fertilization, and another at cleavage, are crucial for normal                 
              development. This project will employ photon counting techniques               
              and image intensified video microscopy methods to determine if                 
              the fertilization calcium transient is due to a calcium wave, and              
              microinjection experiments to determine what second messengers                 
              participate in its initiation and propagation. Cytokinesis in                  
              hydrozoans is slow and requires external calcium. Photon                       
              counting, fluorescent dye injection, and drugs will be used to                 
              investigate how the calcium transient during cytokinesis is                    
              regulated. Voltage dependent calcium channels first become                     
              functional about one hour after fertilization. These channels                  
              play a major role in rapid calcium influx but very little is                   
              known about the developmental events that lead to the onset of                 
              channel function. This project will define the factors that are                
              responsible for initiating calcium channel function in                         
              hydrozoans. When calcium rises in the cytosol of cleavage stage                
              embryos, calcium is simultaneously transported from the                        
              endoplasmic reticulum to the external medium. This project will                
              identify the mechanism that mediates this calcium efflux.
