Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Function Complexes And The Steenrod Algebra In Homotopy
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1994  
File        : a9207731

Award Number: 9207731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarence W. Wilkerson   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. McClure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey H. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The three investigators, Wilkerson, Smith, and McClure, are               
              involved in three connected general investigations in homotopy                 
              theory.  A major goal of Wilkerson's research is to complete the               
              classification of finite loop spaces as a generalization of compact            
              Lie group theory.  The tools are function complexes and                        
              calculations with the Steenrod algebra going back to work of Adams-            
              Wilkerson, Miller, Carlsson, and Lannes.  Part of the work                     
              generalizes known facts about group actions and fixed points to                
              homotopy fixed points.  Smith seeks an explicit construction of the            
              Morava K-theories.  These homology theories play a vital role in               
              the Devinatz-Hopkins-Smith nilpotence theorem.  Previous                       
              constructions rely on geometric techniques which are hard to                   
              interpret homotopically.  The resulting classifying spaces can                 
              really be constructed only "up to homotopy," leaving many questions            
              about their nature open.  Finally, in joint work with S. Jackowski             
              and R. Oliver, McClure intends to try to find a simplified proof of            
              the immersion conjecture.  His other three problems all involve                
              some aspect of the theory of topological Hochschild homology.                  
                   The details of these three parts vary, but all are concerned              
              either with reducing geometric information to a subject for                    
              calculation or to perfecting one of the principal algebraic tools              
              used for this purpose.  The nature of the geometric information                
              involved is the crux of the difficulty.  While questions about                 
              lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and so forth virtually cry out to             
              be reduced to calculations, it is far different with what are known            
              as topological properties of geometric objects.  These are                     
              properties such as connectedness (being all in one piece),                     
              knottedness, having no holes, and so forth.  All systematic study              
              of such properties, for example, how to tell whether two geometric             
              objects really differ in respect to one of these properties or are             
              only superficially different, or how to classify the variety of                
              differences that can occur, all these have only truly been                     
              comprehended and mastered when they have been reduced to matters of            
              calculation.
