Title       : Uridine Nucleotide Sugar Transport into the Golgi Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9207142

Award Number: 9207142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara C. Waldman bwaldman@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1132,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The long-term goal of the proposed research is to understand the             
              molecular mechanisms by which nucleotide sugars are transported                
              across intracellular membranes and how such transport systems                  
              regulate glycoconjugate biosynthesis in mammalian cells.  The                  
              proposed research will focus on determining how uridine nucleotide             
              sugars are transported across the Golgi apparatus membrane.  UDP-              
              galactose transport across the Golgi membrane will be characterized            
              using Golgi vesicles isolated from rat liver.  This                            
              characterization will include determination of the kinetic                     
              constants and driving force for UDP-galactose transport.  The UDP-             
              N-acetylglucosamine and UDP-galactose transporters will be                     
              solubilized and reconstituted into liposomes, as a first step                  
              toward the ultimate purification of these transporter proteins.  A             
              cDNA encoding for the UDP-galactose transporter will be isolated               
              utilizing an expression cloning strategy to clone by                           
              complementation analysis using a chinese hamster ovary cell mutant             
              which is defective in UDP-galactose transport.                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Glycoconjugates, including glycoproteins and glycolipids, are                  
              critical to the life of all cells.  They are synthesized by the                
              stepwise addition of covalently linked simple sugars to nascent                
              structures (proteins or lipids).  These reactions generally proceed            
              by the transfer of the sugar moiety from a biosynthetic activated              
              precursor, or nucleotide-sugar, to the nascent glycoconjugate.  In             
              eukaryotes, these glycosyltransfer reactions usually take place                
              within the lumens of intracellular membrane-bounded compartments               
              (e.g. endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus).  Most nucleotide             
              sugars (e.g., UDP-galactose, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine) are                      
              synthesized in the cytosol, and because of their ionic charge,                 
              cannot passively diffuse across a biological membrane.  Therefore,             
              specific transporters exist in the intracellular membranes which               
              effect the translocation of the nucleotide sugar precursors from               
              the cytosol into the lumen.  This project focuses on the transport             
              of UDP-galactose across the Golgi apparatus membrane, and in                   
              particular on the biochemical description of the membrane                      
              transporter.  The work will lead to the eventual understanding of              
              how this class of transport protein operates, and also will further            
              our understanding of the functions and organization of the Golgi               
              apparatus, a subcellular organelle which plays a central role in               
              protein sorting and secretion, and in the biosynthesis of                      
              glycoproteins and glycolipids.  The results of these studies may               
              have practical application in engineering cells to produce various             
              specific glycoconjugates on a commercial scale.
