Title       : A NITROX SCUBA Facility for the Bodega Marine Laboratory and Reserve
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1992  
File        : a9207551

Award Number: 9207551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48617              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard J. Spero spero@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Connors  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Bodega Marine Laboratory (BML) is a research unit of the                   
              University of California                                                       
              (UC) located on the Sonoma coast 70 miles north of San                         
              Francisco.  Since 1966 the                                                     
               Laboratory has provided unique opportunities for field                        
              research on a rich flora and fauna in close proximity to the                   
              Laboratory buildings.  BML has well-equipped laboratories,                     
              an excellent seawater system, strong on-site support staff                     
              and a firm commitment from the Davis campus to continue                        
              developing the facilities and support needed by the growing                    
              number of resident and visiting researchers at the site.                       
              The Laboratory is located on the Bodega Marine Reserve                         
              (BMR), a 362-acre protected field site with a diverse set of                   
              marine and terrestrial coast habitats.  Adjacent subtidal                      
              areas are protected and available for study within the                         
              Bodega Marine Life Refuge.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Subtidal research on invertebrates, algae, and fish                            
              (population biology, physiological                                             
              ecology, biochemical and behavioral studies) is expanding                      
              rapidly at BML.  This project will supply partial support                      
              for expansion of the existing dive locker and  installation                    
              of an Enriched Air Nitrox Scuba facility.  Nitrox Scuba is                     
              quickly evolving as the technology of choice for scientific                    
              underwater operations.  Current research diving at BML is                      
              accomplished using air Scuba under physically demanding                        
              conditions.  Nitrox Scuba capability will approximately                        
              double the time available per dive for benthic studies,                        
              while reducing diver fatigue, nitrogen narcosis, and                           
              incidence of decompression                                                     
              sickness.  An enhanced diving facility is vital if BML and                     
              visiting researchers are to expand in situ benthic research                    
              exploiting the unique aspects of the site.
