Title       : Topics in Price Theory and Game Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1994     
File        : a9207850

Award Number: 9207850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209372             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Wilson rwilson@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This work includes several topics in price theory.  The first major            
              topic develops analyses of multiproduct pricing and related                    
              problems of taxation, regulation, and contracting.  This includes              
              several tasks: elaboration of some basic results to take advantage             
              of implicit bundling, extensions of an alternative formulation that            
              relies only on observable demand data, development of computational            
              methods for both formulations, and exposition of applications to               
              practical aspects of multiproduct pricing in industries such as                
              communications and power.  Also, these methods will be used to                 
              elaborate a more general theory of optimal mechanism design that               
              allows risk aversion, correlated information, and other realistic              
              features.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The second major topic develops the theory of the option value                 
              component of the prices of flexible substitutes for irreversible               
              durable investments, including the characterization of optimal                 
              investment policies in such contexts.  The main applications are               
              to prices of sulfur dioxide emission allowances for electric                   
              utilities, and to investments to reduce or alleviate the effects               
              of global warming.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Additional topics include studies applying theories of bargaining              
              to labor negotiations and to pre-trial negotiations between                    
              litigants,  and development of computational methods for computing             
              stable equilibria.  This study will have important contributions               
              in many fields.  For example, the solution to the class of pricing             
              problems may be helpful in such matters as space shuttle cargo                 
              allocation and allocation of computer time among several users.                
              The option value study would be relevant for policy issues                     
              concerning the abatement of global warming by limiting carbon                  
              emissions.
