Title       : Regulation of Antifreeze Protein Production in Insects: An In Vitro Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9207044

Award Number: 9207044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen L. Horwath khorwath@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9181,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The remarkable adaptability of insects is clearly demonstrated in              
              examples of overwintering responses.  Some insects have even been              
              known to inhabit areas where temperatures reach -75 degrees C.                 
              Although researchers have been able to identify many physiological             
              and biochemical parameters that may contribute to survival at such             
              low temperatures, little is known about the underlying cellular                
              mechanisms for these responses and how they are regulated.  One                
              major obstacle has been the lack of an in vitro model, i.e. where              
              tissues or cells from these insects are maintained in culture and              
              subjected to experimental manipulation.  Recent research in my                 
              laboratory has now established a system for the long-term culturing            
              of fat body cells derived from cold-hardy beetles shown to produce             
              antifreeze proteins during the winter.  The proposed study uses                
              this system to more directly investigate the physiological and                 
              cellular mechanisms of antifreeze protein biosynthesis and                     
              regulation.  First, it will characterize the cell types that                   
              predominate in vitro, how they relate to intact tissues, their                 
              degree of developmental maturation, and their ability to produce               
              antifreeze proteins, using very sensitive immunological and                    
              fluorescent labeling techniques.  We will then examine the cellular            
              means by which these proteins may be stored and then secreted,                 
              through ultrastructural immunolocalization with electron                       
              microscopy, and by charting transport of newly synthesized                     
              antifreezes from cells to culture media.  Concurrently, we will                
              examine how hormones and low temperature may directly influence                
              antifreeze protein production and secretion by these cells.  Thus,             
              this study introduces a powerful and state-of-the-art tool to                  
              research on insect fat body, and low temperature adaptations, and              
              provides the first cellular analyses of environmental and hormonal             
              control of antifreeze protein production and secretion.
