Title       : Habitat Patchiness, Dispersal and Population Structure: Tests of Patch Dynamic
               and Demographic Models Using Small Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1994        
File        : a9207722

Award Number: 9207722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Bowers mab3g@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Dooley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A recently developed class of models demonstrate that local                    
              population dynamics can be influenced by processes that operate                
              between spatially separated sub-populations.  In theory these                  
              models are directly applicable not only to understanding large-                
              scale patterns of abundance but in evaluating the degree to which              
              habitat fragmentation/patchiness affects species of concern.                   
              Critical factors in gauging species responses to habitat                       
              patchiness are:  i) dispersal ability relative to patch isolation              
              and dispersion; and ii) patch differences in social structure                  
              that determine whether individual patches are net producers or                 
              consumers of immigrants.  Few studies, however, have examined the              
              importance of these factors to field populations.  Here we                     
              propose to study the responses of two small mammal species to an               
              experimentally created landscape of habitat patches distributed                
              over a 36 ha area.  Sub-populations within the fragmented system               
              would be compared to that in a continuous (unfragmented) habitat               
              control.  Objectives include examination of the interplay between              
              patch size, animal dispersal ability, and how these affect--and                
              are affected by--patch to patch variation in population                        
              structure.  This system will serve as an empirical model for                   
              studying the importance of dispersal to populations inhabiting                 
              heterogeneous habitats, patches, and /or habitats that are                     
              threatened with fragmentation.
