Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Lie Algebras, Lie Superalgebras, and Quantum Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1992       
File        : a9207701

Award Number: 9207701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ann K. Boyle                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Block   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ivan B. Penkov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vyjayanthi Chari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    This award concerns research on the theory of Lie                        
              algebras.  One of the principal investigators will work on the                 
              classification of simple and semisimple Lie superalgebras of                   
              prime characteristic.  He will also work on vertex operators,                  
              specifically on explicit construction of certain modules, as well              
              as on certain Hopf algebras.  A second principal investigator                  
              will study representations of quantum groups and associated                    
              solutions of the quantum Yang-Baxter equations.  She plans work                
              on the case of quantum enveloping algebras of affine Kac-Moody                 
              Lie algebras at roots of unity.  She also plans to describe                    
              minimal cyclic representations, and in particular to show that                 
              the minimum dimension equals the dimension of the minimal orbit                
              of the corresponding Lie group.  A third principal investigator                
              will study various aspects of the representation theory of Lie                 
              superalgebras.  He will work on generic modules over classical                 
              Lie superalgebras and twisted D-modules; finite-dimensional                    
              atypical modules of classical Lie superalgebras; representations               
              of Cartan-type classical Lie superalgebras; representations of                 
              semisimple Lie superalgebras; and representations of Kac-Moody                 
              Lie superalgebras.                                                             
                   This research is concerned with a mathematical object called              
              a Lie algebra.  Lie algebras arise from another object called a                
              Lie group.  An example of a Lie group is the rotations of a                    
              sphere where one rotation is followed by another.  Lie groups and              
              Lie algebras are important in areas involving analysis of                      
              spherical motion.
