Title       : Inbreeding Depression and Selfing Rates in Hermaphroditic Species of Schiedea
               (Caryophyllaceae): A Comparison to Diclinous Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9207724

Award Number: 9207724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Weller SGWELLER@UCI.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann K. Sakai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,1176,1577,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Unlike most animals which have individuals with separate male and              
              female sexes, plants exhibit a great range in breeding systems.                
              Most plant species are hermaphroditic with male and female function            
              in the same flower, but many other species, including a number of              
              important crop plants, have separate male and female flowers on the            
              same plant or consist of populations of separate male and female               
              plants (dioecy).  Many different hypotheses have been proposed to              
              explain the diversity of breeding systems in plants and the                    
              evolution of dioecy.  One major argument suggests that dioecy has              
              evolved to avoid inbreeding depression.  Inbreeding depression                 
              occurs when closely related individuals mate and the resulting                 
              offspring show reduced vigor and ability to reproduce.  If                     
              inbreeding depression is a factor, then one should expect to find              
              both high levels of inbreeding self-pollination occurring as well              
              as high levels of inbreeding depression in populations that are                
              evolving dioecy.  Although there have been many theories proposed,             
              very little empirical data on this question is available.  We are              
              examining the role of inbreeding depression in the evolution of                
              dioecy in the Hawaiian plant genus Schiedea.  This group is                    
              apparently evolving dioecy and exhibits a range of breeding systems            
              in very closely related species.  This research is of special                  
              urgency because many important intermediate species from the                   
              fragile Hawaiian ecosystems are near extinction because of habitat             
              destruction, grazing introduced by herbivores and competition with             
              introduced plants.  Knowledge of factors promoting changes in plant            
              breeding systems has many potential breeding applications to                   
              practical problems in agriculture and forestry.  Inbreeding                    
              depression is well known to influence yield in many economically               
              important crop plants, such as corn.  Knowledge of factors causing             
              dioecy may lead to greater ability to manipulate sex ratios in                 
              plants and is of tremendous value where yield depends upon the                 
              production of fruit or seed by  the females as is the case of many             
              crop species.  Understanding the basis of unisexaulity will also be            
              important in production of hybrid strains, since female individuals            
              are easily hybridized without the necessity of time-consuming                  
              costly emasculation of hermaphroditic flowers.
