Title       : Monograph of Bactris (Palmae) for Flora Neotropica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1996  
File        : a9207311

Award Number: 9207311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Henderson ahenderson@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Bactris is one of the largest neotropical palm genera, and                
              one of the most poorly known taxonomically.  The aim of the                    
              research proposed here is to provide a taxonomic treatment of                  
              three sections, containing approximately 40 species, as a                      
              preliminary to a revision of the whole genus for Flora                         
              Neotropica.  Bactris is widespread throughout the neotropics,                  
              from Mexico south to Bolivia, and also in the Caribbean.  The                  
              Amazon basin contains the greatest concentration of species.                   
              Approximately 350 names exist, but there are probably nearer 120               
              actual species.  The genus is important for several reasons.  It               
              contains the economically important B. gasipaes, the source of                 
              edible fruits which are grown and consumed throughout the humid                
              Neotropics.  The ancestors of this cultivated species are                      
              unknown, and yet are of great interest to agronomists.  Other                  
              species provide a host of minor products.  The genus is important              
              in the lowland tropical forest ecosystems, and is a conspicuous                
              component of the understory.  Despite its large size and economic              
              importance, the genus is very poorly understood.  A recent                     
              phylogenetic analysis has divided the genus into four sections,                
              three of which will be revised in the project proposed here.  The              
              methods used for this revision will include field collecting in                
              critical areas and analysis of morphology, pollen morphology,                  
              stigma morphology and leaf anatomy from herbarium specimens and                
              pickled material.
