Title       : Regulation of the Growth and Activity of Leaf-decomposing Fungi by Dissolved
               Nutrients (N and P) in Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1992    
File        : a9207789

Award Number: 9207789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keller Suberkropp ksuberkp@biology.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1128,
Abstract    :
              Fungi have been demonstrated to play key roles in mediating energy             
              flow in the detritus-based food chains in streams.  Until recently,            
              however, there have been no methods available that would allow                 
              determination of instantaneous growth rates of fungi in any                    
              environment.  Consequently, quantitative data concerning fungal                
              production or flow of energy through the fungal community are not              
              available.  A method for estimating instantaneous growth rates of              
              natural fungal communities by determining rates of incorporation               
              of 14C-acetate into ergosterol was recently described.  The                    
              proposed studies are designed to adapt and evaluate this method for            
              use on the leaf-decomposing fungal communities in streams.                     
              Laboratory studies will establish optimum conditions for the                   
              incorporation of acetate into ergosterol and determine factors for             
              converting incorporation rates into growth rates of individual                 
              fungal species.  Laboratory studies of individual species growing              
              on leaf material will be used to compare estimates of growth rates             
              and production determined by the 14C-acetate method with production            
              estimates determined independently from changes in fungal biomass,             
              respiration and conidium production.  The method will then be used             
              to estimate growth rates and production of fungal communities                  
              during the decomposition of leaves in two streams that differ in               
              water chemistry.  These results will be compared with other                    
              measures of activity including total microbial respiration, total              
              microbial biomass and sporulation rates of stream fungi.  These                
              studies will contribute to the assessment of a new method that has             
              the potential to make a significant impact on our understanding of             
              fungal activities in the environment and should contribute needed              
              information concerning the productivity of fungi in streams.
