Title       : Hybridization of Darwin's Finches on the Galapagos Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9207505

Award Number: 9207505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Grant prgrant@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B. Rosemary Grant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The study of hybridization is important in evolutionary biology                
              because it reveals the forces at work in the final stages of                   
              speciation.  Some populations of animal species commonly hybridize,            
              but it is usually difficult if not impossible to determine the                 
              causes hybridization in nature.  The proposed research takes                   
              advantage of an exceptionally favorable situation for investigating            
              the causes of hybridization and the reasons for relatively high                
              fitness of the hybrids.  On the small island of Daphne Major in the            
              Galapagos archipelago the medium ground finch, Geospza fortis,                 
              occasionally interbreeds with two others; G. scandens, a resident              
              species, and G. fuliginosa, an immigrant.  Pedigree analysis has               
              shown that hybrids may survive and breed as well or better than the            
              parental species, over several years.  Ecological reasons for their            
              fitness will be investigated by intensive study of feeding                     
              efficiencies and diets.  Possible advantages arising from enhanced             
              heterozygosity will be assessed by an analysis of inbreeding                   
              effects in the G. fortis and G. scandens populations.  Causes of               
              interbreeding will be identified by statistical analysis of mating             
              patterns.  Results will be of theoretical importance to our                    
              understanding of speciation and the role of hybridization in                   
              maintaining genetic variation in small and potentially endangered              
              populations.
