Title       : Appropriate - Technology Access to Stimulate Research in Tropical Rain Forest
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1993  
File        : a9207796

Award Number: 9207796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193267             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Stone nao@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah A. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The La Selva Biological Station of the Organization for                        
              Tropical Studies, located in                                                   
              tropical wet forests of the Republic of Costa Rica, has                        
              become one of the world's most                                                 
              active sites for research on the ecology of pristine and                       
              altered tropical ecosystems.                                                   
              Recent developments at the Station have fueled a rapid and                     
              sustained increase in                                                          
              research usage.  Advanced laboratory facilities, spectacular                   
              biodiversity resources, a new                                                  
              Geographic Information/Database Management System, diverse                     
              habitats for observation                                                       
              and manipulation, excellent infrastructure, and a welcoming                    
              socio-political environment                                                    
              have all contributed to La Selva's continuing growth.                          
                                                                                             
              A substantial to fulfilling the research and education                         
              potential of the station, however,                                             
              has been the difficulty of access to approximately half of                     
              the reserve's area.  OTS will                                                  
              create an appropriate-technology, environmentally benign                       
              access system for pedestrians,                                                 
              bicycles, and small electric vehicles.  The Western Annex                      
              Rapid Transit system (WART)                                                    
              is a 6-km long, 1.7 m wide paved path that will link                           
              laboratory/living areas to the most                                            
              distant sections of La Selva.  Development of the WART                         
              concept and the environmental                                                  
              and engineering criteria employed in its design are well                       
              thought out.  The project will                                                 
              bring immediate and substantial benefits to researchers                        
              whose projects range from                                                      
              molecules to ecosystems, and in habitats from primary                          
              lowland rain forest to abandoned                                               
              pastures.  Improved access is critical to realizing La                         
              Selva's outstanding potential to                                               
              advance tropical science.  The Western Annex Rapid Transit                     
              system, using technology                                                       
              appropriate tot he scale of the transportation problem and                     
              applied in an                                                                  
              environmentally-sensitive design, will provide this access.
