Title       : The Seasonal Decline in Avian Clutch Size: Parental Condition or Environmental
               Deterioration?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9207231

Award Number: 9207231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204370             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Winkler dww4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              One of the strongest generalizations in ornithology is that birds              
              that lay later in the season tend to lay fewer eggs per clutch.                
              There is considerable disagreement over the causes of this pattern.            
              One school maintains that the seasonal decline is a nonadaptive                
              consequences of variation in female condition, which has an                    
              overriding effect both on timing of laying and clutch size.  The               
              other school sees seasonal clutch size declines as an adaptive                 
              response to variation in food availability for the laying female               
              or seasonally declining prospects for rearing offspring.  It is                
              proposed to distinguish between these possibilities in three ways.             
              One experiment will test for the effect of food supply for the                 
              laying female by decreasing the foraging profitability and the                 
              condition of the female prior to laying and looking for predicted              
              shifts in timing of laying and clutch size.  A second experiment               
              will alter the timing of chick-rearing.  If condition has the                  
              overwhelming effect on chick-rearing success, then the manipulation            
              will have no effect on offspring production across groups.  If, on             
              the other hand, the breeding environment has a predominant effect,             
              offspring production will vary across groups.  A statistical test              
              will take data on condition, clutch size, and laying date, and,                
              through partial regression analysis, look for a significant effect             
              of laying date on clutch size once condition is controlled for.                
              In all these tests, condition will be measured in terms of fat and             
              protein stores with the aid of newly developed nondestructive                  
              techniques.  These results should be of interest not only to                   
              physiological ecologists interested in the interaction between body            
              condition and avian histories, but also to population biologists               
              interested in life history variation.
