Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Nonlinear Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1993  
File        : a9207713

Award Number: 9207713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Aronson don@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Work supported by this award will focus on several aspects                
              of the behavior of solutions to nonlinear differential equations.              
              The first part of the project will be concerned with solutions of              
              the porous medium equation in more than one space dimension.  The              
              Graveleau solution of this equation is a solution of a radially                
              symmetric equation which is generated by an orbit of a related                 
              first order system of ordinary differential equations.  Solutions              
              of this type tend to a power of the radius; this power is often                
              referred to as the anomalous exponent.  The phenomenon occurs in               
              many other examples as well.  Recent work suggests methods for                 
              calculating the precise value of the exponent.  Knowledge of this              
              value measures the Holder continuity of solutions.                             
                   A second line of research concerns the stabilization in                   
              higher space dimensions for porous medium flow with reaction.                  
              Specifically, work will be done to classify positive and negative              
              solutions to the equation with a cubic forcing term.  Information              
              about these solutions is expected to play an important role in                 
              the studies of the general case.                                               
                   Continuing work is also being carried out on superconducting              
              quantum interference devices which are used in many applications               
              as a sensitive detector of magnetic fields.  It consists of two                
              coupled Josephson point junctions with a constant bias current.                
              The dynamics are described by a pair of ordinary differential                  
              equations.  In analyzing the system one is led to a Hill equation              
              with three simple eigenvalues and all the rest double.  In order               
              to understand the stability of solutions it is necessary to                    
              understand how the double eigenvalues behave under perturbation.               
              Work is being done in seeking alternative expressions for the                  
              eigenvalues which may shed more light on solution behavior.
