Title       : The Roles of Natural and Sexual Selection in the Evolution of Sexual Dimorphism
               in Body-Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1996     
File        : a9207895

Award Number: 9207895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard L. Snell snell@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Miles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Males and females of many organisms differ in size.  The                       
              explanation usually assumed, but rarely tested, for that difference            
              deals with different roles in reproduction.  However, these                    
              researchers have gathered preliminary data which indicates that the            
              differences may often be due to evolutionary pressures dealing with            
              survival rather than reproduction.  The proximate goals of this                
              project are to determine the relative contribution of evolutionary             
              forces (primarily selection) that act upon reproduction compared to            
              those that act upon survival.  This project will also identify the             
              nature of those evolutionary forces whenever possible.  Differences            
              between males and females of many organisms are of both basic and              
              applied interest.  Contributing to the understanding of the actual             
              mechanisms that have caused these differences will be an important             
              step.  Currently there is a great deal of controversy about the                
              relative roles of environmental and evolutionary forces as sources             
              of differences between males and females.  This project will                   
              provide important data that will help the debate.
