Title       : U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund Project Development for Research on Receptor Mediated
               Ion Translocation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1992       
File        : a9207396

Award Number: 9207396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 1,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Julianna Kardos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Res
	      H-1525 Budapest POB 49
	      Budapest, HU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5965      U. S. - HUNGARY JOINT FUND
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this U.S.-Hungary cooperative                         
              research project between Dr. Julianna Kardos of the                            
              Central Research Institute for Chemistry, Budapest and Dr.                     
              Derek Cash, University of Missouri, Columia is to use fast                     
              kinetic technique for the analysis of transmembrane ion                        
              fluxes mediated by the ion-channel forming                                     
              neurotransmitter receptor such as gamma-aminobutyric acid                      
              (GABA).  Determining the relationship between the binding                      
              reaction and the GABA receptor-controlled 36CL -ion fluxes                     
              requires the techniqus of rapid mixing because - due to                        
              rapid desensitization of receptor on exposure to GABA -                        
              the translocation process is complete within a few hundred                     
              milliseconds.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              For the existing fast reacting techniques, Dr. Kardos                          
              plans to explore the versatile quenched flow machine                           
              developed by Dr. Cash and is now constructing the machine                      
              in his laboratory.  The project development visit by Prof.                     
              Cash would focus on extending their previous work on the                       
              GABA receptor to drugs which effect its function using a                       
              preparation enriched in GABA receptors.                                        
                                                                                             
              Funds for this project are awarded through the US-Hungary                      
              Joint Fund, Budapest in accordance with established                            
              guidelines.
