Title       : Mycorrhizal Fungi and Components of Plant Fitness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1995     
File        : a9207281

Award Number: 9207281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger T. Koide rxk13@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed research is to determine the                     
              mechanisms by which mycorrhizal fungi influence the major                      
              components of plant fitness.  Mycorrhizal fungi are present in                 
              nearly all terrestrial ecosystems and have been shown to influence             
              nutrient uptake, growth and reproductive host plants under                     
              controlled conditions.  Unfortunately, very little is known about              
              the effects of mycorrhizal fungi on the population biology of their            
              host plants, particularly under field conditions.  Experiments in              
              the laboratory have shown that mycorrhizal infection can increase              
              both fecundity and offspring quality.  For example, it was shown               
              that infection of the maternal generation increased reproductive               
              output in the offspring generation.  Therefore, the effects of                 
              infection on maternal fecundity and offspring quality will be                  
              assessed separately in the proposed study.  A combination of field             
              and greenhouse experiments incorporating demographic and                       
              physiological measurements is proposed to establish the mechanistic            
              basis for observed phenomena.  In one study, maternal generation               
              host plants (Abutilon theophrasti) will be grown in the field in a             
              3 x 2 factorial experiment (3 levels of P amendment;  mycorrhizal,             
              non-mycorrhizal).  Growth, nutrient uptake, reproductive output,               
              leaf photosynthesis and root phosphatase activities will be                    
              monitored for two seasons.  In the second year of this study, a                
              third factor (natural reestablishment vs. thinning to a standard               
              density) will be incorporated in order to determine whether, in                
              addition to influencing fecundity, maternal treatments have                    
              independent effects on offspring performance within the maternal               
              environment.  In another 2 year study, seeds collected from mother             
              plants (from the various maternal treatments) will be transplanted             
              to another location in the field to determine whether interactions             
              between offspring environment (M/NM x high P/low P) and maternal               
              treatment (see above) exists for offspring vigor.  Seeds collected             
              from mother plants will also be used in controlled greenhouse                  
              studies in which the effects of maternal treatment on offspring                
              vigor mediated by seed weight will be distinguished from those                 
              mediated by seed P content.  In addition, greenhouse experiments in            
              which offspring from contrasting maternal treatments will be                   
              allowed to interact will allow a determination as to whether                   
              maternal treatment can influence competitive behavior.  The results            
              from these experiments should greatly increase the understanding of            
              the effect of mycorrhizal fungi on plant fitness.
