Title       : Applications of Modern Statistical Thinking to the Social Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1994       
File        : a9207456

Award Number: 9207456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald B. Rubin rubin@stat.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              21        Mathematics                             
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    The purpose of this project is to continue the development               
              of new statistical tools and methods that address real issues of               
              concern in empirical social science research.  The primary focus               
              of the prior work was on multiple imputation technology,  which                
              includes a family of techniques dealing with incomplete data.                  
              These techniques have been used increasingly by government agencies            
              such as the Census Bureau and the Internal Revenue Service.                    
              Applications also have grown in academic research on a wide range              
              of topics.  Incompleteness,  in fact,  pervades intensively used               
              scientific data as far ranging as social surveys and clinical                  
              medical protocols.                                                             
                                                                                             
                    Four main areas are addressed in the proposed research.                  
              First,  continuing efforts will be made to hone the tools for                  
              multiple imputation.  Second,  modern methods of statistical                   
              computation such as extensions of the EM algorithm and the Gibbs               
              sampler,  will continue to be pursued.  Third,  the foundations of             
              causal inference and practical methods for drawing causal                      
              inferences in observational studies will be further developed.  And            
              fourth,  a variety of other techniques relevant to social science              
              research,  such as meta-analysis and mixture modelling,  will be               
              explored.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                    The principal investigator's statistical contributions in the            
              broad areas covered by this project have been impressive both in               
              depth and volume.  In addition,  the many students he has trained              
              in this long-term research agenda are superbly equipped to                     
              disseminate the results and to join in advancing the state of the              
              art.  The prospect of his achieving further significant                        
              accomplishments is very high.
