Title       : RUI: The Archaeology of Southwestern New York State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1992       
File        : a9207643

Award Number: 9207643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah W. Neusius 4123572733  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynne P. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip Neusius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Sarah Neusius and                
              her colleagues will continue their archaeological excavations at               
              the Ripley Site which is located in Chautauqua County, N.Y.                    
              Previous excavation by both Dr. Neusius and earlier investigators              
              has confirmed the presence of a large earthwork or surrounding                 
              wall and rich deposits of cultural materials within.  Dating of                
              the site is uncertain and occupation may range from between the                
              thirteenth century A.D. to historic times. Seven weeks of                      
              excavation are planned.  The site will first be plowed and disced              
              to reveal the distribution of cultural materials.  An intensive                
              systematic surface pickup will then be conducted.  The material                
              will be plotted and on the basis of the results two types of                   
              excavation will be undertaken.  Hand excavation will be conducted              
              in a midden area to recover indentifable faunal and floral                     
              remains as well as carbon samples for radiocarbon dating.                      
              Secondly mechanical stripping of the plow zone will be undertaken              
              in selected portions of the site.  Features exposed will then be               
              excavated by hand. Fieldwork will be followed by analysis to                   
              accomplish five goals: 1. reconstruction of site plan; 2.                      
              analysis of representative and provenienced assemblages for                    
              different material classes; 3. interpretation of features,                     
              structures and activity areas; 4. documentation of occupational                
              history; 5. reconstruction of subsistence strategies and                       
              seasonality.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Many archaeologists have focussed on the effects of contact                    
              between native Americans and early colonial settlers.  Through                 
              cases of such culture contact, underlying processes of                         
              interaction and culture change can be discerned.  Particular                   
              attention has focussed on the Northeastern United States because               
              in this region the Iroquois confederacy had achieved a level of                
              political organization rare in chiefly societies.  This is also a              
              region with good historic documentation.  However for such work                
              to succeed it is necessary to have good baseline information                   
              about both precontact and early contact periods.  Many earth                   
              circles have been found in the Northeast yet their function is                 
              unknown.  Some archaeologists have argued that they surrounded                 
              and served to protect villages while others have maintained that               
              they relate not to occupation sites but rather ceremonial                      
              centers.  The answer to this question is important because it                  
              affects understanding of both population density and                           
              social/political organization.  Dr. Neusius research at the                    
              Ripley site will address this issue.                                           
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will shed new              
              light on America's unwritten past and increase our understanding               
              of the process of culture contact and culture change.  The grant               
              will also provide support to an undergraduate teaching                         
              institution and serve both to enhance the level of teaching and                
              training for students.
