Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1992    
File        : a9207039

Award Number: 9207039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6696               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. Hall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recent political events have begun to focus research on the               
              transformation of socialist economies.  Within socialist                       
              countries foreign direct investment is viewed as a vital                       
              component in economic development.  Yet, there is little                       
              understanding of the institutional basis which shapes the                      
              processes of foreign investment in a transforming command                      
              economic system.  Of concern is how different types of foreign                 
              investment interact with different segments of the decentralizing              
              economic system in socialist countries.  The phenomenon of                     
              Taiwanese investment in China since the mid-1980s provides an                  
              opportunity to empirically answer both sets of questions.  This                
              project will examine the process of manufacturing                              
              decentralization from Taiwan to localities in Guandong and Fujian              
              Provinces of China, and it will assess the impacts of this                     
              activity on employment, industrial structure, levels of                        
              technology, living standards, and the generation of industrial                 
              linkages in both the capital export region in Taiwan and the                   
              capital import localities in China.  It will test the hypothesis               
              that under specified conditions foreign investors will establish               
              a dynamic production linkage with the local production system and              
              generate favorable regional impacts.  Data will come from                      
              published statistics and personal interviews with key actors.                  
              The research will develop a typology of firms, localities,                     
              investment linkages, and production linkages between the import                
              and export regions.                                                            
                   This research addresses the basic issue of what local and                 
              regional consequences ensue from manufacturing capital outflows                
              from newly industrializing economies to other developing areas.                
              Does this phenomenon present an opportunity to promote economic                
              cooperation or more intense competition.  The case of Taiwanese                
              investment in China is important because of the strong ethnic and              
              social links between these two nations that are not present in                 
              other direct investment relations between capital exporting and                
              capital importing economies.
