Title       : Solid-State Rechargeable Batteries using Plasma Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9207525

Award Number: 9207525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter P. Zurawsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Recent advances in high energy density batteries have included                 
                                                                                             
              the development of solid polymer electrolytes to replace                       
              conventional liquid or gel electrolytes and the development of                 
                                                                                             
              organic based redox materials to replace traditional                           
              intercalation compounds as the cathode.  Problems need to be                   
                                                                                             
              addressed for the synthesis of these two materials because:                    
              (1) Solid polymer electrolytes have a much lower conductivity                  
                                                                                             
              than conventional liquid or gel electrolytes.  The resistance                  
                                                                                             
              of the polymer film can be reduced by making the film very                     
              thin.  It is difficult to make ultra-thin polymeric films,                     
              though, that are free of pin-holes.  (2)  The rate capability                  
                                                                                             
              of solid state lithium batteries can be improved by using                      
              organo-sulfur and di-sulfur containing polymers as the cathode                 
                                                                                             
              material instead of intercalation compounds (such as TiS2),                    
                                                                                             
              which are presently used in most thin, rechargeable batteries.                 
                                                                                             
              These new polymeric cathodes also present processing problems                  
                                                                                             
              because it is difficult to form the required ultra-thin films                  
                                                                                             
              without defects.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The PIs plan to develop plasma polymerization techniques to                    
                                                                                             
              produce solid polymer electrolytes and polymer redox cathodes                  
                                                                                             
              for thin, solid-state, rechargeable, alkaline batteries.  They                 
                                                                                             
              will prepare and characterize solid polymeric electrolytes                     
              based on plasma polymers of siloxane compounds and polymeric                   
                                                                                             
              redox materials based on plasma polymerized carbon-sulfur                      
              compounds such as carbon disulfide.  Substituted phenolic                      
              groups will be incorporated into the siloxane plasma polymers                  
                                                                                             
              (by co-sublimation / plasma polymerization techniques) to                      
              prepare the single ion (lithium, sodium or potassium)                          
              conducting electrolytes.  The relationship between deposition                  
                                                                                             
              conditions and properties of the materials will be examined.                   
                                                                                             
              Simple batteries based on these plasma polymerized films will                  
                                                                                             
              be constructed to test the applicability of these materials.
