Title       : Patterns of Responding within Experimental Sessions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1992    
File        : a9207346

Award Number: 9207346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108451             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances K. McSweeney fkmcs@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Hinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Responding is not constant across the experimental session when                
              animals respond on operant-conditioning procedures.  Instead,                  
              responding often begins slowly, increases to a peak and then                   
              decreases through the rest of the session.  The present                        
              experiments will begin to determine under what conditions these                
              within-session changes in responding occur.  They will also begin              
              to determine why these changes occur.  In particular, the                      
              experiments will try to separate the contribution of factors                   
              related to reinforcement, such as satiation, from factors related              
              to responding, such as fatigue.  They will try to separate the                 
              contribution of central factors, such as focusing of attention,                
              from factors at the periphery, such as interference from                       
              competing responses.  They will try to separate the effect of                  
              factors that accumulate over the session, such as fatigue, from                
              the anticipation of things to come, such as the return to the                  
              home cage at the end of the session.                                           
                                                                                             
              These experiments are theoretically important because rate of                  
              responding averaged over the session is one of the primary                     
              dependent variables in operant psychology.  Finding systematic                 
              changes in responding within sessions suggests that this measure               
              ignores important changes in behavior at a more fine-grained                   
              level.  The research is methodologically important because many                
              experiments are not designed so that their data can be                         
              interpreted if such within-session changes in responding occur.                
              Improving theory and methodology in operant psychology is                      
              important for applied reasons.  Operant techniques are used as                 
              methods for determining the effects of physiological variables                 
              and as the basis for some forms of therapy for human behavioral                
              problems.
