Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9207278

Award Number: 9207278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8625               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Leach  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The ponderosa pine is one of the most ubiquitous forest                   
              trees of western North America, spanning both large altitudinal                
              and latitudinal gradients.  It is extensively harvested for                    
              timber.  This species is very tolerant of drought and abnormal                 
              soils, is fire resistant, and it regenerates prolifically across               
              a wide range of environments.  Several varieties exist, and                    
              morphological, biochemical, and growth trials indicate that these              
              varieties can be further differentiated into geographic races.                 
              Several questions remain to be addressed in light of the overall               
              genetic diversity of the species, its ecological history as a                  
              recent invader of the forests of the western United States, and                
              its susceptibility to range extensions and contractions linked to              
              future climatic change.  This research project will focus on                   
              marginal, disjunct populations of ponderosa pine in eastern                    
              California to determine levels of genetic diversity, to isolate                
              the abiotic factors that control their distribution, and to                    
              document the life histories and demographies of these                          
              populations.  Ecological sampling will be used to assess                       
              population variation and demography, and isozyme analyses of                   
              intra- and inter-population variation will measure genetic                     
              variation within and among populations.  The approach integrates               
              two levels of ecological analysis to examine biogeographic                     
              implications of climate change and geographical isolation for                  
              populations of this long-lived, widespread species.                            
                   The distribution of genetic diversity in forest tree                      
              populations represents the potential of that species to adapt to               
              and survive environmental change.  Genetic diversity also                      
              reflects the evolutionary history of a species.  This project                  
              will advance our current understanding of how genetic diversity                
              is distributed among marginal and disjunct populations of a                    
              genetically wide-spread species.  This information is crucial to               
              breeding programs and efforts aimed at conservation of genetic                 
              diversity.
