Title       : Ethical, Legal and Technological Aspects of Computer and Network Use and Abuse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9207305

Award Number: 9207305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert H. Teich ateich@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Frankel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              The National Conference of Lawyers and Scientists (NCLS), a joint              
              body of the American Association for the Advancement of Science                
              and the American Bar Association, will address ethical and legal               
              aspects of computer use and abuse in two interdisciplinary,                    
              invitational conferences.  A broad based advisory committee will               
              oversee all aspects of the project, including preparation of                   
              meeting agendas, selection of authors and topics for commissioned              
              papers, development of invitation lists, and dissemination                     
              activities.  A call for open submissions of papers, in addition                
              to commissioned papers, will be issued and places at the meetings              
              will be reserved for those selected.  Conference one will address              
              the manner in which ethics and the law frame issues of computer                
              use and abuse.  Discussions will encompass current statutes and                
              law enforcement efforts related to computer abuse.  They will                  
              also look at the role of extra-legal institutions in shaping                   
              responsible computer use and discouraging and providing remedies               
              for abuse.  The conference will consider what professional,                    
              legislative and other public policy remedies are available.  The               
              second conference will examine international aspects of these                  
              issues.  It will include foreign experts, and discuss different                
              models for encouraging ethical behavior among computer users and               
              for limiting problems of abuse.  The international focus and                   
              participation will help to set the stage for future international              
              cooperation.  Two conference reports will be distributed.                      
              Primary dissemination of the conference papers will be through                 
              journal or book publication, as well as in summary articles in                 
              journals and newsletters of professional and policy groups.
