Title       : Investigation of Aqueous Biphasic Polyethylene Glycol Systems for the Selective
               Liquid/Liquid Extraction of Dissolved Metal Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9207264

Award Number: 9207264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin D. Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9181,9188,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal is concerned with using aqueous biphasic salts                   
              composed of polyethylene glycol (PEG) and an inorganic salt to                 
              separate dissolved metal ions. When PEG and salt are added to                  
              water, the solution separates into two distinct layers; one                    
              phase is rich in PEG and the other in salt. Metal ions                         
              dissolved in this system preferentially dissolve in the PEG                    
              rich phase, and hence ion separation can be effected by simply                 
              dissolving polymer and salt in a metal-containing aqueous                      
              stream, and then separating the phases. The variables which                    
              affect the metal partitioning are the pH, salt selection, PEG                  
              concentration, temperature and distance from the critical                      
              point (i.e. the polymer/salt composition at which two phases                   
              first appear).                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Several critical areas are proposed for study:                                 
              (i) In previous research, the PI has demonstrated in a series                  
              of batch experiments, that technetium in the form of TcO4- can                 
              be extracted into the PEG rich phase using carbonate (K2CO3)                   
              and sulphate ((NH4)2SO4 without the need of a complexing                       
              agent. The PI intends to study this novel result further, and                  
              to build on this discovery by finding a method to strip the                    
              metal ions from the PEG-rich phase and complete the separation                 
              process. Several methods will be tested including ion                          
              exchange, and oil-water batch extraction with  the PEG as the                  
              aqueous phase.                                                                 
              (ii) Optimize particular biphasic systems (SO42-,CO32-, PO43- or               
              alkmaline media) for the selective removal of Tc or Cr (in the                 
              form of CrO41-).                                                               
              (iii) Base-Side extraction of alkali and alkaline earth metal                  
              ions from synthetic waste solutions of high alkalinity and                     
              high nitrate concentration.                                                    
              (iv) Biphasic systems for the removal of toxic metal cations                   
              using inorganic anions to form extractable complex anions of                   
              metals.                                                                        
              (v) Organic separations in biphasic systems                                    
              (vi) f-element extraction using a combination of aqueous                       
              biphase and water soluble extractant.
