Title       : Developing and Testing a Method for Using Democratic Design Criteria Within
               Participatory Technology Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a0090256

Award Number: 0090256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210166             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold Salzman Hal_salzman@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah Kuhn  (Principal Investigator former)
              Richard E. Sclove  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop and pilot test a participatory technology assessment
              method that incorporates systematic attention to technologies effects on
              democracy. Scenario workshops use several competing scenario narratives -- each
              describing the role of alternative infrastructural technologies and
              institutions in advancing an important social objective (such as environmental
              sustainability) -- as their starting point.  Diverse groups of stakeholder
              participants: (1) critique and revise each scenario; (2) use the refashioned
              scenarios as one basis for developing preferred future visions for their own
              community or society; (3) identify barriers (e.g., cultural, institutional,
              technical, economic, and legal) to realizing their preferred visions; and (4)
              craft action plans for overcoming these barriers.  This project will modify the
              scenario workshop process to incorporate the participatory application,
              evaluation, and refinement of a set of technological design questions derived
              from democratic criteria developed in Democracy and Technology, a book
              published by the co-principal investigator in 1995.  To demonstrate and
              evaluate these methodological innovations, the project will conduct a pilot
              scenario workshop in the ethnically diverse city of Lowell, Massachusetts,
              involving approximately 40 local stakeholder representatives. The project will
              evaluate the workshop process, as well as its follow-up impact within the city
              of Lowell.  The methodological innovations resulting from this project have the
              potential to: (1) assist societies in coming to terms with the crucial but
              often-neglected effects of technologies on social and political structure; (2)
              find applicability in a wide variety of science, technology, and environmental
              decision-making contexts; (3) stimulate other scholars to pursue research into
              socially important but neglected democratic implications of technologies; and
              (4) provide one practical alternative to economistic methodologies -- such as
              cost-risk-benefit analysis and applied neoclassical welfare economics -- that,
              despite numerous recognized limitations, today dominate the discourse of
              technological decisions in public and private arenas alike.
