Title       : Vertebrate-specific Transcriptional Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2001  
File        : a0090884

Award Number: 0090884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward E. Schmidt eschmidt@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0090884  Edward Schmidt
The TATA-binding protein, TBP, is a component of the
              basal transcription machinery.  Comparison of tbp gene sequences from diverse
              species reveals a C-terminal core that is highly conserved in all phyla.  In
              addition, all tetrapod vertebrate animals share a nearly identical N-terminal
              domain that is either absent from or unrelated to sequences in other eukaryotes
              including pre-vertebrate deuterostomes (e.g. echinoderms).  The hypothesis of
              this project is that the TBP N-terminus co-evolved with a novel set of
              structural genes and their transcriptional regulators to allow acquisition of
              some vertebrate-specific function.  Using targeted mutagenesis, a line of mice
              lacking most of the TBP N-terminus has been generated.  This region of the
              protein is dispensable for cell survival, proliferation, differentiation, and
              the assembly of most tissues and organs; however, development of mutant embryos
              arrests in mid-gestation.  In this project, the genetic pathways acting through
              the TBP N-terminus will be characterized.  The PI's laboratory is in a unique
              situation to address these questions because, when candidate members of the
              pathway are identified, the mutant mice provide the ideal system within which
              to verify expression and activity.  Perhaps the three most important advances
              that occurred between early chordates and tetrapod vertebrates are: 1)
              evolution of the vertebrate body plan; 2) evolution of the adaptive immune
              system; and 3) specializations for terrestrial life.  The spontaneous abortions
              in the mutant mice are consistent with defects in any of these three processes.
               Global analysis of differential gene expression between mutant and wild type
              embryonic fibroblasts, embryos, and placentas is being performed on samples
              harvested at a stage immediately preceding manifestation of the pathological
              phenotype.  The expression of candidate target genes is being verified by
              direct analysis in mutant and wild type embryos.  As a result of these
              analyses, this project will first, further resolve the evolutionary timing of
              acquisition of the TBP N-terminus, and then determine what genes are
              mis-regulated in mice lacking this region.  This study is expected to provide
              important advances toward an understanding of vertebrate evolution, gene
              regulation, and the mechanisms of transcription.

