Title       : SGER: Initial User Experiments Towards a Spoken Language Interface for
               Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0090100

Award Number: 0090100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54661              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Zachary zachary@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen M. Riloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The PIs are exploring issues relating to the development of viable systems that
              would allow programmers to create Java programs via spoken English input.  
              They have to this end designed and implemented a proof-of-concept prototype
              called NaturalJava which supports user input of simple Java programs via
              written English sentences.  Their ability to improve the prototype is limited
              at present both by software architecture shortcomings and by a lack of
              understanding of how real users would prefer to interact with a spoken
              programming interface.  What kinds of written and spoken English sentences
              would they use?  What type of navigation/editing model would be effective in
              such an environment?   To answer questions such as these, the PIs plan to
              conduct a Wizard-of-Oz user study in which they will invite Java programmers to
              write programs under controlled conditions.   Subjects will write programs
              using a system that behaves like an improved version of NaturalJava;   half of
              them will use a written English interface, and the other half will use a spoken
              English interface.  A hidden expert Java programmer will play the role of
              NaturalJava, reading (or listening to) the commands and creating the source
              code.   The PIs expect to learn a great deal by recording and transcribing the
              sessions, interviewing the programmers, and examining the resulting Java
              programs.   At the end of the year the PIs expect to have acquired a solid
              understanding of the issues, so that they will then be in a position to detail
              and pursue their long-term agenda which, if successful, would prove especially
              valuable to people with certain kinds of disabilities.  The research team will
              include a graduate student who is blind, and for whom most of the NSF funds are
              allocated;  the PIs are not charging for their time.
