Title       : Advanced Polymer Materials for Construction and Aquaculture Marketing
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a0090472

Award Number: 0090472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $597378             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julio F. Davalos   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl E. Barth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen C. Cogley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pizhong Qiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger C. Viadero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is to The University of West Virginia to support the activity
              described below for a period of 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnernerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
University of Akron; Kansas/West Virginia Structural
              Composites, Inc.; West Virginia Department of Highways; Transportation Research
              Board; U.S Department of Agriculture

Proposed Activities
The proposed
              activities include: develop, manufacture, implement, field-test, and market
              novel honeycomb fiber-reinforced polymer sandwich composite materials for
              applications in civil infrastructure and aquaculture industries, with
              particular emphasis on highway bridge decks, guardrail systems, and modular
              fish culture tanks for use with impaired mine water supplies in rugged terrain.
               Kansas/West Virginia Structural Composites, Inc is in the process of
              establishing a manufacturing plant close to the West Virginia University
              campus. The program will include cost-effective innovations for manufacturing
              technologies; concurrent optimization of materials and design; prototype
              development and evaluation; product implementation and marketing; work-force
              training and curriculum development; technology transfer.  The initial effort
              will emphasize development and marketing of bridge decks, guardrail systems,
              and modular fish culture tanks.  Feasibility studies and field implementation
              studies are being supported by West Virginia Department of Highways,
              Transportation Board, and U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Proposed
              Innovation
The proposed innovation includes: technology transfer of new
              knowledge of composite materials to improve highway civil infrastructure and to
              create technology for aquaculture for economic enterprise (fish farming) and
              food production, as well as education of engineers in design with new materials
              for civil infrastructure.

Potential Economic Impact
Estimated income from
              fish aquaculture is $12M annual sales ($4.6M annual income) and includes
              approximately 300 new jobs.  Highway materials are targeted to a potential
              percentage of the $1T civil infrastructure market.  West Virginia estimates
              that 40% of the highway bridges are in immediate need of repair.

Potential
              Societal Impact
Potentail societal impact includes increased food production,
              jobs, and improved highway safety.


