Title       : Bacteriophage Mu Transposition and the Role of Gyrase Binding Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0090898

Award Number: 0090898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin L. Pato martin.pato@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bacterial virus Mu, by virtue of its being both a virus and a transposon, is
              unusual among transposons in its large size and its high frequency of
              transposition. Amplification of the 37.2 kb Mu DNA during the virus growth
              cycle occurs by a series of replicative transposition events which take place
              within the bacterial nucleoid (DNA and associated proteins), despite the
              constraints imposed by the complex structure of that body. Interest in the
              long-range DNA interactions involved in synapsing the ends of prophage DNA
              within the nucleoid, an early step in the transposition process, led to studies
              which uncovered a strong gyrase binding site (SGS) in the center of the Mu
              genome that is required for efficient replication. An earlier model postulated
              that the SGS promotes synapsis of the Mu prophage termini, and that it does so
              by organizing the topology of the supercoiled prophage DNA to form a
              plectonemically interwound loop with the SGS at the apex of the loop and the
              termini at the base.  Experimental tests of predictions of the model have
              offered strong support for the proposed role of the SGS. While a similar site
              was found in a second transposing virus, an extensive search found no
              chromosomal or plasmid sites which could replace the SGS in Mu replication. To
              determine the unique features of the site, a genetic analysis of the SGS was
              performed. A region downstream of the "core" of the gyrase site was identified
              that is responsible for imparting to the SGS the ability to promote Mu
              replication.  This project focuses on two important questions raised by the
              model: 1) Why is a novel mechanism required for promoting the synapsis of Mu
              prophage ends; and 2) How does the SGS function in promoting synapsis of the Mu
              prophage ends?  The first question will be addressed by exploring the factors
              that are responsible for the long delay in Mu replication in the absence of the
              SGS. A recently developed sensitive assay for detecting the early stages of the
              first round of transposition after induction of a lysogen will be used to
              examine factors including the constraints imposed by the domain structure of
              the bacterial nucleoid, the topological consequences of transcription, and the
              role of Mu and host encoded proteins.  The second question will be addressed by
              a combined structural and functional analysis of the SGS, with emphasis on the
              downstream region which imparts to the SGS the ability to promote replication.
              The analysis will include studies of the binding of gyrase to the SGS and to
              other gyrase sites and studies on the effects of genetic alterations of the SGS
              right arm on synapsis of prophage ends.  These studies will further
              understanding of the mechanism of Mu replicative transposition and provide
              insights into the structure of the bacterial nucleoid (the DNA has to be
              compacted several thousand fold to fit into the bacterial cell, yet still has
              to be able to replicate and be transcribed) and the biochemistry of DNA gyrase.
               Work with this genetically tractable system should provide insight into
              transposons and viruses of plants and animals that move in and out of their
              hosts' chromosomes.



