Title       : Transcriptional Regulation and Role of a Transcription Factor Involved in Gut
               Development.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a0090201

Award Number: 0090201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian T. Livingston   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0090201
Livingston

A crucial step during embryonic development is the
              formation of the three tissue layers that make up the basic animal body plan: 
              ectoderm, endoderm and mesoderm.  The Livingston laboratory is investigating
              how the endoderm, which gives rise to the digestive system and associated
              organs, is formed during development.  Specifically, Dr. Livingston studies how
              endoderm-specific genes are regulated at the level of transcription using sea
              urchin embryos as a model system.  This involve studying both the segments of
              DNA involved in controlling gene expression and the proteins that bind to these
              DNA sequences and regulate transcription by RNA polymerase.  Spfkhl, a gene
              that encodes a winged helix transcription factor that is centrally located in
              the cascade of gene regulation leading to endoderm differentiation, will be
              utilized as a starting point.  In Specific Aim 1, the Livingston laboratory
              will examine the cis-regulatory sequences that control Spfkhl expression using
              powerful techniques that have been developed in sea urchins for studying gene
              regulation using reporter constructs.  In Specific Aim 2, the Livingston
              laboratory will examine the role of the Spfkhl protein in endoderm formation. 
              This will be accomplished using injection of either full length mRNA encoding
              Spfkhl to assess the effects of overexpression of this gene on endoderm
              development, or dominant-negative forms of Spfkhl mRNA, which will assess the
              effects of the loss of Spfkhl function on endoderm development.  In Specific
              Aim 3, the Livingston laboratory will isolate and characterize genes that are
              regulated by Spfkhl, and will begin to analyze the function of these genes in
              endoderm development.  These studies should allow the Livingston laboratory to
              learn more about the interactions of transcription factors on an
              endoderm-specific gene regulatory region, including both positive and negative
              regulators and the importance of context on the role of these factors.  Such
              studies, when compared to studies on other endodermal genes in a variety of
              organisms, will allow Dr. Livingston to begin to dissect the conserved
              mechanisms in endodermal gene expression.  Identification of novel regulators
              of this gene, and targets of this gene, will identify new molecules that play a
              role in endoderm development.  These can then be studied both in the sea urchin
              model system as well as in other species.


