Title       : Low Cost RTM Based Carbon/Carbon Composites for Automotive to Space Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2001  
File        : a0090518

Award Number: 0090518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kunigal N. Shivakumar kunigal@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Earnstine Psalmonds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090518	
Shivakumar			

This award is to North Carolina A&T State University
              to support the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was
              submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation
              (NSF 0082).

Partners
North Carolina A&T State University; 3-TEX Inc.;
              General Electric Aircraft Engine Group (Cincinnati, OH); NASA Glenn Research
              Center Cleveland, OH)

Proposed Activities
The activities include commercial
              technology development and work-force advancement; commercial development;
              attract minority students to graduate programs; launching new start-up
              companies; licensing technology for transfer to existing
              businesses.

Proposed Innovation
Carbon/carbon composites are being
              developed for ion thruster optics and other ion thrusters for deep space flight
              engines, bearing cages for large and small aircraft engines, valves for
              internal combustion engines, textile products, and sports
              equipment.

Potential Economic Impact
The current market for these materials
              is not known at this time, but the potential market for engines for commercial
              aircraft is very large. The combination of small business to manufacture the
              components, a large aircraft engine manufacturing company, and NASA produces a
              partnership that has the potential to sustain the economic enterprise for the
              short-term future.  Once manufacturing produces a product for a reasonable
              market price, additional applications may arise. 

Potential Societal
              Impact
North Carolina A&T is a historically African-american institution.  The
              program would increase the number of African-american engineers with BS and
              post-graduate degrees in the US.  The economic activity has the potential to
              create new markets and new jobs.

