Title       : Prevention of Environment-Induced Decrements in Mood and Cognitive Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0090343

Award Number: 0090343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480782             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Palinkas lpalinkas@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cognitive performance degrades with residence in Antarctica and mood alteration
              fits a seasonal change during extended residence in Antarctica. Although these
              changes suggest psychological response to certain physiological adaptations to
              cold and dim light, the exact mechanism linking these two sets of processes are
              poorly understood. This project has two objectives. The first is to determine
              whether long-term exposure to cold temperatures and/or to dim light, both of
              which are characteristics of polar winters in high latitude environments, are
              associated with significant changes in cognitive performance and emotional
              well-being. The specific aim is to determine whether physiological adaptation
              to cold, reflected in measures of core body temperature and thyroid hormone
              levels, and/or adaptation to dim light, reflected in measures of melatonin
              production, are independently or synergistically associated with decrements in
              cognitive performance and emotional well- being. An additional goal is to
              determine whether personnel at South Pole Station (latitude 90o S) experience
              greater physiological adaptation to cold and dim light and decrements in mood
              and cognitive performance than personnel at McMurdo Station (Latitude 77o 51'
              S) The second objective is to determine whether decrements to mood and
              cognitive performance can be effectively prevented or minimized. The project
              will involve the development of a management and informational infrastructure
              for the integration of research activities on the etiology and prevention of
              environmentally induced performance decrements in high latitudes. The project
              will involve graduate level training in human adaptation to polar environments.
              This project will lead to an improved understanding of the specific
              environmental conditions and physiological mechanisms that affect behavior and
              performance in the Antarctic and other high latitude environments.
