Title       : Population Density Methods and Applications in Large-Scale Modeling of Neural
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0090159

Award Number: 0090159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298441             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Tranchina tranchina@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1266,1271,9107,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Computational models of networks of neurons in the brain usually are based on
              following the details of activity patterns in large numbers of individually
              explicit neuronal elements and their synapses.  Simulations of activity in
              functional units based on hundreds or even thousands of such neural units, such
              as a column within the sensory cortex, can take hours of computer time to model
              seconds of real time.  The goal of this project is to develop new techniques to
              facilitate large-scale modeling of neural networks in the mammalian brain.  The
              theory of probability (population) density function, borrowed from the field of
              statistical mechanics, uses large numbers of elements to advantage.  In the
              population density method, similar neurons are lumped together in a population,
              and one tracks the distribution of neurons over 'state space' in each
              population.  The state of a neuron is determined by the dynamic variables in
              the underlying single-neuron model, to allow deriving a population firing rate
              from a flux of probability across a particular surface in state space, taking
              into account coupling between neurons by excitatory and inhibitory input events
              at stochastic synapses.  The present project will extend the population density
              theory by incorporating realistic synaptic kinetics.  This consequent increased
              computational complexity will lead to developing and testing new simulation
              methods to compare with conventional direct simulations for accuracy and speed.
               Population density methods will be applied to the well known primary visual
              cortex, including interactions among cortical layers and columns, to account
              for physiologically known features such as sensitivity to orientation of visual
              bar stimuli, and the relation of responses to stimulus contrast levels.
    
              Results will have an impact on visual neuroscience as well as computational
              neuroscience, and on understanding information processing in the brain in
              general.  These new methods could accelerate network simulations by orders of
              magnitude, with the promise of applications in computer and information
              sciences.  Cross-disciplinary graduate training is an important added feature
              of this project.

