Title       : Signaling Pathways Regulating Proteolysis in Innervated Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0090734

Award Number: 0090734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis A. Jacobson LJAC@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1155,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Regulation of proteolytic processes is important in many kinds of physiological
              adaptations, in development, and in diverse pathological states, including
              wasting and atrophy in skeletal muscle, and hypertrophy or atrophy in cardiac
              muscle. Muscle proteolysis is well-known to be promoted by fasting or chronic
              starvation, by disuse or denervation, in sepsis and in cancer cachexia.
              Conversely, reduced proteolysis (in addition to increased synthesis) may
              contribute to cardiac hypertrophy. The mechanisms by which intracellular or
              extracellular signals are transduced to regulate proteolytic processes in
              muscle are poorly understood. This project aims to increase our understanding
              of these processes using the simplest genetically tractable model system
              available for studying innervated muscle, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
              The methodology uses transgenic animals in which the level of a 8-galactosidase
              fusion protein reports" on proteolysis specifically in 95 body-wall muscle and
              8 sex-muscle cells. The reporter protein is completely stable in fed animals,
              but is degraded under conditions of starvation, denervation, mutational
              activation of the homolog of the Ras proto-oncogene, or mutational
              hyperactivation of a fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor homolog. This
              research will determine whether control of muscle protein degradation by
              activated-Ras signals is mediated by the Raf/MEK/MAP kinase pathway, determine
              how it is affected by activity of the P13 kinase pathway, and determine if the
              relevant signals from activated FGF receptor are transmitted by way of the
              Ras/Raf/MEK/MAPK pathway. The roles of intramuscular calcium and diacylglycerol
              and the possible roles of calcium-activated protein kinases will also be
              explored. These questions will be approached by epistasis analysis of mutant
              strains in which one or two signal-transduction proteins are inactivated or
              hyperactivated, combined with the use of selective inhibitors of individual
              steps in signal transduction. Analysis of these signaling mechanisms in this
              simple system will provide paradigms for investigating the signaling pathways
              that control muscle proteolysis in more complex organisms.
