Title       : The Role of Zinc Finger Proteins During Target Gene Activation by HOM-C
               Proteins.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0090440

Award Number: 0090440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390003             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Mahaffey jim_mahaffey@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0090040
Mahaffey

Hox genes encode homeodomain-containing transcription
              factors that specify body pattern during embryogenesis in all metazoans. In the
              fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster these genes are located in the Antennapedia-
              and Bithorax-Complexes.  Each individual hox gene is expressed in a specific
              anterior/posterior domain wherein the encoded protein specifies regional
              identity through activation of a specific set of target genes. However, the DNA
              binding properties of the different hox proteins are quite similar  This has
              lead to the hypothesis that interactions with cofactors play an important role
              in target gene selection by the hox proteins, though few cofactors are known.
              Recent results from the Mahaffey lab indicate that regionally-expressed zinc
              finger transcription factors are likely cofactors for the Deformed (Dfd) and
              Sex combs reduced (Scr) hox proteins.  Loss of the two, redundant zinc finger
              genes, disconnected (disco) and disco-related (disco-r) causes a phenotype
              similar to loss of Dfd and Scr.  Dr. Mahaffey proposed that an interaction
              between the hox and zinc finger proteins supplies the additional specificity
              that is required for selection and activation of hox target genes.  Further, he
              proposes that this may be a conserved mechanism that governs body plan
              specification in other regions of the embryo and in other animals. This
              hypothesis leads to several predictions that Dr. Mahaffey will test.  Dr.
              Mahaffey will ectopically co-express Disco and Dfd in Drosophila to determine
              whether both proteins will cause a broader transformation than that of Dfd
              alone.  He will investigate the possibility of molecular interactions between
              Disco and Dfd, including protein-protein and protein-DNA binding studies.  He
              will also search for Disco/Disco-r response elements at known Dfd target genes,
              and, if found, he will undertake molecular characterizations of these response
              elements. To examine the possibility that this is a conserved mechanism, he
              will use RNAi to eliminate the disco/disco-r function(s) from beetle Tribolium
              to test whether this causes a homeotic transformation similar to that observed
              due to loss of Tc-Dfd and Tc-Scr.

