Title       : Directing Complex Biomacromolecular Assembly Using Triggers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0090384

Award Number: 0090384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kaplan david.kaplan@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed study is to understand how to 'control' or
              'direct' the process of morphology development in polymeric materials using
              external influences or molecular 'triggers'.  As we move towards more
              specialized polymeric systems with more demanding properties specifications
              more refined and powerful methods to control morphology will be required.
              Fibrous proteins provide a convenient 'bridge' between biological organization
              and synthetic polymer design and are therefore useful models to fill this need.
               To achieve the objective, protein-based triggers will be designed into silk
              consensus repeats. Based on preliminary data, the molecular triggers (chemical
              oxidation/reduction of methionines and enzymatic
              phosphorylation/dephosphorylation) function as intended - the phosphorylation
              trigger strongly alters conformation but a high degree of crystallinity is
              attained, whereas the methionine trigger preferentially blocks crystallization
              but b-strand conformation persists to moderate oxidation levels. Therefore,
              triggers that are conformation- versus crystallization-selective and separately
              initiate different length scales in self-assembly are available to be
              incorporated into the polymer designs to control complex pathways of assembly.
              Using these features the PI expects to be able to direct polymer assembly
              depending on placement of the different triggers in relation to the sequence
              motifs, as well as using external triggering of these blocks on a temporal
              basis.   These features may allow generation of distinct material morphologies
              from the same polymer sequence, as well as formation of gradient structures. A
              series of synthetic peptides with systematic variations in the location and
              nature of molecular triggers will be used to assess impact on assembly,
              including insigts into triggering kinetics, distribution of secondary
              structures (in solution and in the solid state), crystallization kinetics,
              crystal structure and solubility.  Subsequently, longer sequence combinations
              will be constructed by genetic engineering and assessed in a similar fashion. A
              variety of analytical tools, including MALDI, FTIR, CD, X-ray, TEM/diffraction
              analysis will be used to assess structure formation at different length scales.
              In the final stages of the project, these concepts will be utilized to assemble
              materials with gradient morphologies. 
%%%
This project is in a growing area
              at the interface of polymeric materials science and biotechnology.  The ability
              to control the pathway of polymer assembly in more precise ways, from the
              molecular level to macromolecular architecture, will provide important
              processing avenues in the fabrication of new materials with tailored
              structure/morphologies.  

