Title       : Comprehending The Unimaginable: Deciphering the Psychological Aspect of
               Resistance to Genocide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0090188

Award Number: 0090188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11853              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristen Monroe krmonroe@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project examines an area largely overlooked in the literature on genocide
              by focusing on two questions. What is the psychology underlying the early
              detection and comprehension of the threat of genocide? What factors facilitate
              the refusal to be victimized and the drive to protect oneself and family? The
              Principal Investigator examines the psychology underlying the resistance to
              genocide through a narrative analysis of interviews with German Jewish exiles
              who fled the Third Reich before the Holocaust. The work addresses five
              important substantive questions. (1) What is the relationship between
              cognition, ontological security and ethnic violence? (2) Are basic personality
              factors more important than contextual or situational influences in an
              individual's ability to withstand the psychology of victimization that
              accompanies genocide? (3) How social is the construction of identity, and how
              is our ethical-political action in turn shaped by our perceptions of others?
              (4) Was there something particularly virulent in German anti-Semitism, or can
              the kind of ethnic violence that occurred during the Holocaust occur elsewhere,
              given similar background conditions and social-psychological factors? And
              finally (5) can work on identity help formulate a theory of moral action that
              subsumes rational actor theory by encompassing that theory into a broader
              theory of human flourishing?

Why is this research appropriate for a SGER?
              The work meets 4 requirements for a SGER: urgency of data collection,
              dissemination of raw data, exploration of innovative research methodologies,
              and applying new approaches to an established research topic. (1) Urgency of
              data collection. There is an urgent need to collect raw data from this
              particular group of people, before their memories are lost because of death or
              health problems as a result of aging. Despite extensive work on the Holocaust,
              this sample represents one group that has rarely been interviewed, yet the
              investigator's few preliminary interviews suggest they provide unusual insight
              on this period. (2) Dissemination of raw data. The investigator's work on
              cognitive frameworks has broken new ground in our understanding of how identity
              and perceptions of self constrain choice. Detecting the subtleties of this
              process requires a particular skill and access to subjects. By publishing the
              full interviews, the investigator will be releasing valuable data to the social
              science community, thereby providing access to an unusually rich data source so
              others can perform the kind of technical analyses no one scholar can have
              either the time or skills to execute. (3) Exploration of innovative research
              methodology. Mixing survey with narrative and interpretive data is innovative.
              This methodology is highly promising and congenial to improvements in
              interviewing in ways that might reconcile important methodological and ethical
              issues concerning interviewing on sensitive topics, such as genocide and
              racism. (4) Application of new expertise or new approaches to an established
              research topic. Knowledge about individuals whose identities were threatened,
              in multiple ways, and yet who managed to flourish, personally and
              professionally, can yield important insights.

This investigation promises to
              enhance substantially our understanding of this topic and provide a valuable
              database for other scholars.



