Title       : NMR Study of Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0090218

Award Number: 0090218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287082             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bing M. Fung bmfung@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project on Nuclear magnetic Resonance (NMR) studies of liquid crystals will
              involve two new thrusts: (1) the use of carbon-13 NMR to measure long range
              dipolar coupling constants, and (2) the use of liquid crystals for NMR quantum
              computing.  Regarding area (1), the existing pulse sequence being used with
              newly developed methods in solid-state NMR will be modified to improve
              performance, and other types of liquid crystals will be synthesized and studied
              to provide the most stringent experimental criteria for judging the success of
              theoretical models, especially molecular dynamics simulations.  In area (2),
              the premise of NMR quantum computing requires that pseudopure quantum states,
              for which the populations of all energy levels but one are equal, be used
              instead of pure quantum states.  To prepare these pseudospure states for
              systems with three or more quantum bits, new approaches will be developed to
              overcome the existing methods for elaborate pulse sequences with many steps
              that make these experiment very difficult.  Multifrequence radiation will be
              used to prepare the pseudopure states via population transfer to greatly reduce
              the number of steps needed.  Another method to be explored is the use of pairs
              of pseudopure states and their extension to study liquid crystal systems with 4
              to 7 qubits.  The main emphasis will be the development of NMR, methodology and
              the search for proper spin systems rather than devising algorithms to solve
              problems requiring complicated quantum computation.
%%%
This liquid crystal
              research project is very multidisciplinary involving a broad scope of training
              opportunities for students in areas that include synthetic chemistry, quantum
              physics, and modeling and simulation, as well as applied technologies involving
              liquid crystals as optical materials for displays and for quantum computing. 
              Because these areas of high priority in industry, these students are highly
              competitive in the job market.

