Title       : Elements Controlling Fed-1 mRNA Stability and Light Regulated Translation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a0090666

Award Number: 0090666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie E. Petracek marie_petracek@biochem.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0090666  Marie Petracek
The ability to recognize and respond to extracellular
              cues is essential for all living organisms.  In plants, one of the most
              important cues is light, which regulates growth and development through
              transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of nuclear and chloroplast
              gene expression.  One of the best examples of post-transcriptional regulation
              of a nuclear-encoded mRNA is that of the pea Fed-1 gene, which encodes the
              chloroplast ferredoxin protein.  Fed-1 is regulated by light at the levels of
              mRNA stability and translation.  A decrease in photosynthesis results in a
              rapid decrease in the cytoplasmic translation of Fed-1 mRNA followed by
              degradation of the Fed-1 mRNA.  Importantly, the polyribosome association of a
              subset of other nuclear-encoded mRNAs also declines rapidly in the absence of
              photosynthesis, suggesting that photosynthetic regulation of cytoplasmic
              translation, and perhaps subsequent mRNA decay, is an important mechanism for
              light regulation of nuclear gene expression.  Further analysis of the
              light-responsive properties of Fed-1 mRNA will yield important information on
              how the translational apparatus responds to changes in photosynthesis, on how
              specificity of these translational changes is conferred on a subset of mRNAs,
              and on how translation and mRNA degradation are coupled.  For Fed-1,
              light-regulated mRNA stability and translation appear to be conferred by two
              separate elements.  The first element, necessary for destabilization of the
              mRNA in the dark, is within a region of the Fed-1 5' UTR that contains a
              (CATT)4 repeat.  The (CATT)4 repeat and the surrounding region will be mutated
              to delineate the mRNA instability element, to test if the function of the
              instability element is position dependent, and to determine if the element is
              sufficient to destabilize non-light-regulated mRNAs.  To identify proteins
              involved in regulated Fed-1 mRNA degradation, the instability element will be
              used as a bait in a yeast 3-hybrid screen.  The second element in Fed-1 mRNA,
              required for light-regulated translation, may be in the Fed-1 mRNA coding
              sequence.  The translational control element will be further delimited by
              mutagenesis and, once characterized, the element will be added to non-light
              regulated mRNAs to determine the minimal sequence sufficient to repress
              translation in response to darkness.  It is possible that the Fed-1
              "translational control" element is an mRNA localization element rather than an
              element that directly controls translation.  To determine if the translational
              control element is an mRNA localization sequence, Fed-1 mRNAs that are
              wild-type or mutant for translational regulation by light will be localized
              using a GFP system adapted to plants. These studies will extend our rudimentary
              knowledge of post-transcriptional gene regulation in plants and provide a
              foundation to uncover the mechanism of photosynthetic control of cytoplasmic
              translation in plants.  

