Title       : Transient Intermediates of Chemical Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0090930

Award Number: 0090930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frantisek Turecek turecek@.chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Frantisek Turecek, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Washington, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              for his research on transient intermediates of chemical reactions in the gas
              phase. The objectives of the proposed research are to (1) generate in the gas
              phase elusive and highly reactive radicals relevant to the high-energy
              chemistry of peptides, nucleic acids, and organometallic compounds, (2)
              investigate the stabilities, dissociation kinetics, and photoexcitation of the
              transient species, and (3) use high-level quantum chemistry calculations
              combined with RRKM theory to obtain relative, dissociation, and activation
              energies for the transient intermediates and gauge the dissociation kinetics.
              The basic experimental method is neutralization-reionization mass spectrometry
              (NRMS), using a "non-chemical" means to generate transient species. In NRMS the
              short interaction time between ion and target results in maintaining both bond
              connectivity and geometry in the nascent neutral species generated. New methods
              are proposed to extend the NRMS methodologies to study transient intermediates
              from polar compounds and allow for measurements of fast dissociations. The
              potential impact of these studies is in providing new insights into the complex
              chemistries of highly reactive polyatomic species that are formed transiently
              by high-energy processes. These studies, complemented by computational
              analyses, address the stabilities and reactivity of these transient
              intermediates, shedding light on the fundamental events that occur during
              high-energy processes.

The reaction of atmospheric oxygen with molecules
              containing sulfur occurs on a scale of one million tons per year globally
              making it of considerable environmental importance. With the support of the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program Professor Frantisek Turecek will
              generate and study in the laboratory the many products from these and related
              reactions. In addition to studying these smaller molecules that are of great
              significance to the environment and sustaining life on this planet, Professor
              Turecek's research focuses on larger molecular systems relevant to nucleic
              bases. Radicals derived from nucleic bases are presumed to occur as short
              lifetime species that can cause the modification of RNA and DNA, especially in
              radiation damage caused by exposure to sunlight, background radiation, or other
              high-energy processes. Characterization of transient intermediates represents a
              formidable challenge to the experimental and theoretical methods of chemistry.
              This inquiry into the processes and dynamics of transient intermediates has the
              potential for practical usefulness in peptide sequencing.

