Title       : Theory and Simulation of Fast and Slow Dynamics in Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0090975

Award Number: 0090975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Keyes keyes@chem.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thomas Keyes of Boston University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to continue his studies of liquid state
              dynamical theory, using a unified approach based on instantaneous a normal
              modes (INM), the topology of the potential energy surface, and molecular
              dynamics simulation.  This work seeks to improve understanding of diffusion
              mechanisms and other slow processes in supercooled liquids, and the difference
              between "strong" and "fragile" liquids, with Arrhenius and
              stronger-than-Arrhenius temperature dependence of relaxation.  Simple liquids,
              atomic mixtures, carbon disulfide, water, and silica will be studied, covering
              fragile and strong systems.  A comprehensive nonequilibrium simulation/INM
              project will be launched on femtosecond fifth-order scattering, making contact
              with current experimental efforts.  The outcomes of this project are expected
              to lead to new theoretical and simulation methods, and to physical insights
              into liquids based on intuitive INM/potential energy surface
              ideas.

Supercooled liquids exist at temperatures below the ordinary freezing
              point to become solid.  Outcomes from this work are expected to enhance the
              understanding of supercooled liquids, which play an important role in
              crystallization processes and the production of amorphous solids.  As well, the
              research methods explored in this work have the potential to enhance
              theoretical research in the understanding of protein folding and structure
              rearrangements in clusters of molecules. 
