Title       : Dissertaton Research: Decentralization and Social Capital: Implications for
               Institutional Innovation in Forest Management and Development Planning in India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a0090113

Award Number: 0090113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7625               (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Scholz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This proposal aims to contribute to understanding decentralized forest
              management by examining, the role of social capital in the success or failure
              of the decentralization efforts in comparative perspective.  In addition, my
              objective is to analyze the links among decentralization, development, and
              forest conservation.  I do so through a focus on three questions.
The first
              question involves how the level of social capital influences decentralization
              in forest management in the communities.  This question allows us to relate
              interaction among people and networks to the efficient functioning of
              organizations.   I refer to this as the operational level.  The second question
              pertains to the importance of linkages between organizations in the two domains
              of forest management and development planning for the functioning of
              forest-related committees.  The important point here is that the specialized
              forest-related committees are nested within more generalized development
              planning committees.  Answering this question allows us to explore and analyze
              whether the de facto linkages between the two bodies are beneficial to the
              smaller and more specialized organization.  I refer to this as the
              complementary level. The third question asks how inter-departmental linkages at
              higher levels in the state government hierarchy affect the performance of the
              decentralized forest management bodes.  This question helps us to move from the
              operational level to the collective choice level.  Many studies show that the
              operational rules are important to overcome collective action problems. 
              However, there has been very little inquiry into the links between the
              operational and collective choice level.  The third question attempts to
              undertake this inquiry.  The research is conducted in Jalpaiguri and Darjeeling
              districts in North Bengal, India.


