Title       : Candidate Genes Controlling Cortical Neuroplasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0090777

Award Number: 0090777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Mower   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,9150,9184,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of the proposal is to identify candidate genes that control neuronal
              plasticity during postnatal critical periods in neocortex.  The proposed
              studies will utilize the most understood model of neuronal plasticity, the
              postnatal critical period in visual cortex.  To date, studies aimed at
              identifying molecular mechanisms of visual cortical plasticity have
              concentrated on the signaling pathways from the cell surface to the nucleus. 
              Dr. Mower's studies will extend this analysis to the output of transcriptional
              processes in the nucleus, the changes in gene expression which produce the long
              term structural and functional changes that underlie neuronal plasticity. The
              strategy capitalizes on the well- established finding that rearing animals in
              total darkness slows the entire time course of the critical period and prolongs
              neuronal plasticity far beyond its normal age limits.  Prior
              electrophysiological results in Dr. Mower's laboratory indicate that the effect
              of dark rearing is to slow the entire time course of the critical period, such
              that at young ages normal animals are more plastic than dark reared, while at
              later ages dark reared animals are more plastic.  Thus, a stringent criterion
              is that genes that are important for plasticity in visual cortex will show
              differences in expression between normal and dark reared animals that are of
              opposite direction in young vs. older animals.  In preliminary work, Dr.
              Mower's laboratory has completed a differential display PCR (ddPCR) screening
              of all of the expressed genes in the visual cortex of normal and dark reared
              animals to directly identify candidate plasticity genes (CPGs) which are
              differentially expressed according to the above criterion.  A manageable number
              (20) of CPGs were identified.  These CPGs will be confirmed by northern blots
              of visual and frontal cortex from normal and dark reared animals, cloned and
              sequenced to determine homology to known genes, and analyzed at a cellular
              level by in-situ hybridization studies.  Future uses of the candidate
              plasticity genes will include experiments to block their expression and
              determine effects on cortical plasticity in-vivo and in-vitro.  The application
              of differential screening techniques is a novel experimental approach to
              analyzing critical period plasticity.  The identification of effector genes
              that control development and plasticity would be a major leap in the state of
              knowledge regarding molecular mechanisms of the visual cortical critical period
              and neuronal plasticity. Such information is essential to our understanding of
              processes such as brain development, learning, and memory.

