Title       : Distance Education Delivery for Isolated Rural Communities: A Contingency
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2002   
File        : a0090474

Award Number: 0090474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $573662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis F. Willingham frank.willingham@ilisagvik.cc  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley V. Scott  (Principal Investigator former)
              Curt Madison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Courtney A. Bartholomew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edna A. MacLean  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ilisagvik College
	      P.O. Box 749
	      Barrow, AK  99723    907/852-9120

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090474		
Scott

This award is to Ilisagvik College to support the activity
              described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in response to the
              Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 0082).


Partners
The
              partners for this award include California Virtual Campus, Bay Area Region 1;
              Lewis-Clark State College; Northwest Indian College; Phillips Community
              College; Arctic Slope Regional Corporation; North Slope Borough Office of the
              Mayor; Alaska Growth Capital; Arctic Development Council; Central Council
              Tlingit Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska; Interior Athabascan Tribal College;
              Tanana Chiefs Conference. 

Proposed Activities
The activities for this
              award include delivery of post-secondary education to Alaska Natives living in
              intensely rural villages, typically far off the road system, with unemployment
              rates 3-5 times the national average;  develop, test, and refine a situational
              model for distance education that takes into account variables for indigenous
              communities; combine distance learning with technical assistance for
              entrepreneurs and job placement services to develop Alaska's rural economy;
              assess occupational demand in the region; determine the skill levels of the
              workers; design and deliver two rounds of distance learning; provide small
              business training and technical assistance; assess the emerging model and
              disseminate the learnings.

Proposed Innovation
The innovation goals for the
              award include providing distance training to prepare workers for job demands in
              remote Alaska; providing small business training and technical assistance;
              research and development of models for remote education in rural indigenous
              populations; enablement of increased business and job opportunities in rural
              Alaska.

Potential Economic Impact
The economic outcomes for this award
              include increased skills and technical assistance for small business in rural
              Alaska, as well as increased jobs and business training and
              opportunity.

Potential Societal Impact
The potential benefits to society
              from this award include involvement of indigenous tribal population in a rural
              environment in job training and opportunity, plus creation of increased wealth
              in remote Alaska.


