Title       : INNOVATION INCUBATOR: Flaming the Sparks of Creativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a0090596

Award Number: 0090596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Otto J. Loewer ojl@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Ahlen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ken Vickers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory J. Salamo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090596		
Loewer			

This award is to the University of Arkansas to support
              the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners in this award include the University of
              Arkansas; several venture capitalists; Arkansas Science and Technology
              Authority.

Proposed Activities
The activities in this award are creation of
              business start-ups at the campus incubator; advancing discovery and education
              in microelectronics and photonics; technology transfer; providing technical and
              business expertise to start-up companies.

Proposed Innovation
The
              innovation goals include providing the infrastructure to fill the gap between
              university research and commercialization in the form of an on-campus incubator
              in nano and microelectronics and photonics, and education of students in
              entrepreneurial activities.

Potential Economic Impact
The potentials
              economic impacts include increased success for small start-up ventures because
              of nurturing of small companies by faculty expertise; a workforce trained in
              entrepreneurial activities; an active  partnership between the schools of
              engineering and business.  The number of small businesses and jobs in the
              region will increase.

Potential Societal Impact
Small firms will be able to
              utilize the resources of the university including space, facilities, faculty
              and students.  The workforce in the region will become technologically literate
              and have more jobs available for their skills.  The number of african-american
              graduates in science and engineering will increase.



