Title       : The Role of Flightin in Thick Filament Assembly and Flight Muscle Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0090768

Award Number: 0090768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim O. Vigoreaux jvigorea@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Maughan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Striated muscle is a remarkable tissue. Within the cytoplasm of each muscle cell
              is a highly organized cytoskeletal lattice where actin and myosin are assembled
              in perfectly ordered, interdigitating arrays of thin and thick filaments. The
              architecture of the sarcomere is extraordinarily well designed to generate
              force for work and locomotion, as evidenced by its strong evolutionary
              conservation across animals of many phyla. The way in which myosin motors
              assemble into bipolar filaments of specific and uniform length, a requirement
              for proper muscle function, has long been a topic of great interest but few
              concrete answers have been found. An important goal of this research is to
              address this fundamental question in muscle biology through the
investigation
              of the functional properties of Drosophila flightin. Previous work from this
              lab has shown that Drosophila indirect flight muscle (IFM) thick filaments
              assemble to abnormally long lengths in the absence of flightin. This project
              will combine in vivo and in vitro approaches to establish the mechanism by
              which flightin participates in thick filament length determination during IFM
              development. 

A central thesis of this work is that flightin is a myosin
              binding protein. The first aim will be to test the hypothesis that flightin
              binds to two sites in the myosin rod region.  Recombinant fragments
              representing distinct parts of the myosin heavy chain protein will be tested
              for flightin binding using four different biochemical assays. The second aim
              will be to explore the role of flightin phosphorylation in thick filament
              assembly. Competing hypotheses, that phosphorylation is or is not required for
              proper assembly, will be tested using transgenic flies that express
              phosphorylation-site mutant flightin. Electron microscopy will be used to
              assess the effect of mutant flightin on sarcomere and thick filament length.
              These studies will be accompanied by experiments in vitro that will test the
              effect of flightin on myosin polymerization.

The combination of classical
              and molecular genetics with biochemistry, cell structure and
              physiology/biophysics will result in a coherent, integrated view of the
              functional roles of flightin and provide valuable insight into the mechanism of
              thick filament assembly and the mechanism of stretch activation.

