Title       : Redox Mechanisms Involving Main Group Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2001   
File        : a0090865

Award Number: 0090865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin S. Gould amcphers@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 1968,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Edwin S. Gould of Kent State University is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program in an ongoing program of
              research dealing with oxidation-reduction reactions involving main-group
              centers. One part of this proposal deals with oxidations of strongly reducing
              main-group species, including In(I), Ga(II), and Ge(I). The study aims to
              elucidate factors that favor one-electron or two electron processes, and to
              clarify in what way and for what reasons reactions of these reductants differ
              from reactions of more usual inorganic reductants. A second part of the
              proposal concerns the effect of metal ions on reactions of the peroxynitrite
              ion. The goal of this section is to understand how and why metal ions change
              the rates and selectivities of peroxynitrite reactions.

Reactivity patterns
              of the elements on the right side of the periodic table (the so-called main
              group elements) are of central importance the functioning of biological systems
              and in the fabrication of solid state electronic devices, as well as in many
              other socially significant scientific and technological areas. Nevertheless,
              some aspects of the chemistry of these elements have received much less
              attentions from inorganic chemists than corresponding reactions of other
              elements. In particular, the peculiar reactivity patterns of lower oxidations
              states of the semi-metals indium, germanium and gallium have only recently been
              started to be explored. This research aims at gaining understanding of the
              factors that account for the unusual chemical features of these low-valent
              species. This  will be important in future applications of these elements, and
              also help to sort out aspects of other complicated oxidation-reduction
              processes. The   oxidation-reduction chemistry of compounds of nitrogen and
              oxygen is also being studied in this program. These reactions have been
              recently identified as having great biological and medical importance.
