Title       : Mouse Mutant Stocks Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0090367

Award Number: 0090367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Muriel T. Davisson mtd@jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              LeahRae Donahue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 1106      LIVING STOCK COLLECTIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1106,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides renewed support for the Mouse Mutant Stocks Center (MMSC) at
              The Jackson Laboratory (TJL).  For many years, the laboratory mouse (Mus
              musculus) has been the principal model organism used for experimental genetic
              studies of vertebrate animals. The MMSC maintains and distributes mutant stocks
              of Mus musculus and several other species of Mus to the scientific community,
              and also discovers and characterizes new spontaneous mouse mutations of
              potential interest to the scientific community. The collection currently
              contains 109 stocks and inbred strains carrying 125 spontaneous mutations on
              defined genetic backgrounds, 18 inbred specialty strains derived from wild
              populations, and 13 inbred strains and F1 hybrids.  Mutant strains are bred in
              sufficient number to meet the demand for their use in research; in addition,
              all strains are preserved as frozen embryos and as genomic DNA.  As part of its
              discovery program, the MMSC identifies new spontaneous mutations arising in the
              large TJL breeding colonies; because of their size, these colonies provide a
              rich source of new mutations. Mutations are initially identified by their
              effect on appearance or behavior.  Further characterization includes assessment
              of the mutation's inheritance pattern and chromosomal location, as well as its
              potential value for basic research as judged by genotypic and phenotypic
              properties. 
 The MMSC provides information about established and newly
              developed mutants through the Laboratory's catalog, special newsletters and Web
              site. Researchers who request one or more stocks of mutant mice from the MMSC
              are charged a modest fee based in part on the difficulty and expense of
              maintaining the particular lines requested.  

