Title       : Translational Patterns During Spermiogenesis in Marsilea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0090506

Award Number: 0090506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Wolniak sw36@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Marsilea vestita is a water fern that makes motile spermatozoids. Each of these
              gametes possesses ~140 cilia and a complex cytoskeleton. The gametes are formed
              in a rapid process that is initiated by placing dry microspores (meiotic
              products) into water, in a process known as imbibition. Spermiogenesis is
              synchronous in populations of microspores, and a distinctive feature of gamete
              formation in this organism is the de novo formation of basal bodies in cells
              that lack preexisting centrioles. In each spermatocyte, a discrete particle
              known as a blepharoplast forms approximately 4 h after imbibition, and during
              the next two hours the blepharoplast splits and functions as a centrosome for
              the last mitotic division in the gametophyte, and then it matures. Each
              blepharoplast produces approximately 140 basal bodies. Dry microspores contain
              large quantities of stored protein and stored mRNA. The translation of specific
              mRNAs at particular stages of spermiogenesis is necessary for gamete
              maturation, including formation of the blepharoplast and basal bodies.  The
              translation of centrin is essential for blepharoplast formation in these
              gametophytes, and centrin and b-tubulin can be detected immunocytochemically in
              blepharoplasts (where they serve as marker proteins for the organelle), which
              form 4 h after imbibition. This project will focus on aspects of spermiogenesis
              in M. vestita that extend ongoing work and utilize probes and procedures this
              lab has developed in the past several years. Studies on essential proteins that
              participate in the de novo formation of basal bodies will be expanded.
              Reverse-genetics with RNAi will be used to perform a series of translational
              knockouts to see how Xgrip109, RanBPM and other members of the g-tubulin ring
              complex participate in the basal body formation. Then, ongoing studies with
              mago nashi (a polarity gene in embryogenesis in a variety of organisms) will be
              extended to examine its role in the early segregation of cytoplasm in the
              gametophyte into spermatogenous and sterile domains as the single-cell
              gametophyte develops and forms its two distinct types of progeny - sterile
              somatic jacket cells and spermatogenous cells. The movements of stored mRNA and
              proteins will be monitored, and actomyosin as a driving force for some of these
              events will be examined.  This project will potentially provide new insights
              into the roles played by various proteins as cells assemble new basal bodies,
              the site in all eukaryotic cells where the growth of cilia and flagella
              initiates.  Also, new perspectives will be provided into how cells
              differentiate their cytoplasm into functionally distinct regions, a process of
              central importance in the growth and development of all cells.  
