Title       : The Genetic Architecture of Honey Bee Sucrose Response Thresholds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0090482

Award Number: 0090482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376404             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Page repage@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The genetic architecture of honey bee sucrose response thresholds

Robert E.
              Page, Jr.

	The long term objective of this project is to better understand
              variation in behavior.  Behavior is a consequence of the genetic makeup,
              development, and environment of an individual.  Observed differences in
              behavior between individuals can be a consequence of any of these factors, or
              the interactive combination of any or all of them.   There is relatively little
              known about the underlying causes of variation in behavior for any organism. 
              Honey bees afford a unique opportunity to study behavioral variation because
              their behavior is stereotypic and well known, they live in social groups, they
              undergo age related changes in behavior, they have very high rates of genetic
              recombination that facilitate the genetic mapping of their genes, and many
              genetic studies of their behavior have been performed.
	For this proposal, a
              detailed genetic map will be constructed in order to map major genes associated
              with a sensory trait, the perception of sugar and water.  It has been clearly
              demonstrated that this trait correlates with important behavioral "decisions"
              of worker honey bees with respect to foraging.  A detailed map will provide a
              test of the hypothesis that the same genes previously mapped for pollen
              hoarding behavior (the storing of surplus pollen in the nest) also effect
              sensory perception.  It will also identify new genes associated with sensory
              perception and will lead to a better understanding of how genes interact and
              affect behavior.  Finally, sets of genetic markers will be developed that are
              close to the mapped genes that can be used in future studies of gene and
              environment interactions that affect the behavior, and for use in population
              studies of this naturally varying behavioral trait. 

