Title       : Institute for Emerging Technologies: Strategic Technology Education for Non-Tech
               Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a0090427

Award Number: 0090427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599267             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Harris dharris@ucok.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Kreidler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Oklahoma
	      100 N University Drive
	      Edmond, OK  730345209    405/974-2524

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090427		
Harris			

This award is to the University of Central Oklahoma to
              support the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).


Partners
The partners in this award include the University of
              Central Oklahoma; Edmond Economic Development Authority; Oklahoma Technology
              Commercialization Center; Pinnacle Business Systems, Inc; Main Street
              Enterprises; Executive Women's Forum; Edmond Public Schools; Capitol Hill High
              School; Latino Community Development Agency.

Proposed Activities
The
              activities in this award include education of a workforce in computer
              technology-related fields; enhancement of faculty technology skills for
              information technology; summer internships for faculty and students in private
              sector; scholarships to the University of Central Oklahoma for high school
              students for technology training and internships in industry.  Industry will
              provide mentors for interns. 
Proposed Innovation
The innovation goals for
              the award are to provide increased computer-related skills for high school and
              college graduates for central Oklahoma to enable innovation in information
              technology.  Hispanics, women, and African American student populations will be
              targeted.  Interactions with industry partners will make the education and
              training relevant to the needs of the private sector in central
              Oklahoma.

Potential Economic Impact
Potential economic outcomes include
              thirty percent more technologically-competent students, including 20% more
              women and/or minorities will complete a higher-education offering technological
              training for high tech industry, as well as training for computer skills for
              non-computer majors at the University of Central Oklahoma.

Potential
              Societal Impact
Potential benefits to society from this activity include
              increased skills for under-represented groups to allow them to compete in the
              job market in information technology.  Resulting economic activity will
              increase available jobs in the area.


