Title       : SGER: Decision-making In Complex Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0090145

Award Number: 0090145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Y. Halpern halpern@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The PI is exploring applications of decision theory to large, complex systems,
              both from the theoretical and practical point of view.  From the theoretical
              end, he plans to use his previously-introduced concept of plausibility measures
              as a tool for exploring qualitative decision making.  Plausibility measures
              generalize probability measures, and provide an elegant framework for
              understanding what properties of an uncertainty measure are necessary to use
              that uncertainty measure for various purposes (e.g., as a model of belief
              revision or to apply the techniques of Bayesian networks).  The PI hopes
              plausibility measures will enable him to "fine-tune" approaches to decision
              making in applications where one does not have complete probability
              distributions and only rough utilities.  As far as practical applications go,
              the PI plans to extend his initial work on applying decision theory to query
              optimization in databases.  When a user poses a query, there are in general
              many different plans that can be used to compute the answer.  While all the
              plans will compute the answer correctly, they may differ wildly in running
              time.  What will be the best plan will in general depend on the values of
              certain random variables (how much memory the system has available when the
              query is run and the selectivity of various predicates).  Current query
              optimization algorithms just use a particular value (e.g., the expected value)
              for these variables.   The PI has previously shown how to modify these
              algorithms to allow for there being a probability distribution associated with
              each of these variables in order to compute the plan with the least expected
              running time.   In theory, this approach should substantially outperform the
              competition, but it remains to be determined experimentally whether the
              theoretical results hold up in  practice.
