Title       : Efficient Web-based Serving of Consolidated Multi-Source Biological Sequence
               Data Extracts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0090732

Award Number: 0090732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Volker Brendel vbrendel@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel F. Voytas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael K. Bergman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Many interesting questions in biology involve initial data preparation steps
              that can turn out to be very cumbersome and time-consuming.  Specialized and
              general public molecular biology data repositories continue to grow in size and
              number.  Many emerging research questions require access to multiple data sets
              for use in specific research situation, usually using only a subset of the data
              from each repository.  Access and querying of these multiple sources presents a
              very real problem to researchers.  A complicating factor is the erroneous
              nature of some annotation data associated with sequence.
 
The creation of a
              BioExtract Server for consolidating and serving curated data extract from
              public databases will be developed initially for subsets of GenBank and ZmDB to
              be of use to maize and other plant researchers.  The Server will provide
              automated curation and identification of misalignment in the sequence
              repository.   Accessed over the web, users will be able to select a specific
              set of techniques, make flexible queries, specify resources to use and name and
              keep their selections for reuse.

In addition to providing educational
              opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students, there will also be
              summer internships available.  Tutorial packages for various levels of
              expertise will be prepared for users to enhance the accessibility of the Server
              to as wide a range of users as possible.

