Title       : Structural Analysis of the Multisynthetase Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a0090539

Award Number: 0090539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mona T. Norcum mnorcum@biochem.umsmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mississippi Med Cen
	      2500 North State Street
	      Jackson, MS  392164505    601/987-3500

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0090539
Norcum
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases control fidelity of protein
              biosynthesis by accurate pairing of amino acids and transfer RNAs.  Nine of
              these enzymes and three auxiliary proteins are isolated from multicellular
              eukaryotes as a macromolecular complex.  The major biological function of the
              particle is likely organization of the translational machinery.  One of its
              constituents is the precursor of a cytokine released during apoptosis and so
              the multisynthetase complex may also link biological signaling, programmed cell
              death and inflammation.  This project will test and refine the three domain
              model of the rabbit reticulocyte multisynthetase complex.  Its
              three-dimensional structure will be calculated from electron microscopic images
              of frozen, unstained samples.  The reference volume obtained by random conical
              reconstruction methods will be refined by projection mapping.  Toward the
              overall goal of mapping the full protein topography within the particle, this
              project will focus on a subset selected to provide a broad test of the working
              model.  Using natural tRNAs or in vitro transcripts of synthetic tRNA genes as
              specific probes, at least one enzyme within each domain will be located.  Work
              will begin with the arginyl-, leucyl- and glutaminyl-tRNA synthetases. 
              Electron microscopy will provide general protein locations, which will be
              refined by difference mapping of control and labeled structures.  Probes will
              be visualized directly or by combination of chemical labeling with reporter
              molecules.  So that positions within at least one domain are confirmed and
              oriented, electron microscopy will be combined with fluorescence resonance
              energy transfer measurement of distances between pairs of bound
              fluorophore-labeled tRNAs.  Work will begin with the "base", which contains
              leucyl-, isoleucyl- and bifunctional glutamyl-/prolyl-tRNA synthetases.  This
              project's results are fundamental to understanding eukaryotic protein
              biosynthesis at the molecular level and to elucidation of principles underlying
              intracellular organization.  The information obtained will also provide
              information about differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic protein
              biosynthesis, a mechanism of autoimmunity, and a route to cell death.
