Title       : CONFERENCE: 2001 Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Biology of Proteolysis to be
               held at Cold Springs Harbor Laboratory, in Cold Springs Harbor, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0090530

Award Number: 0090530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1114      CELLULAR SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Proteolysis has emerged as a major fundamental mechanism of many biological
              processes ranging from development to apoptosis. Traditionally, studies of
              proteolytic enzymes have focused heavily on biochemical mechanisms, structure,
              and inhibition, and most meetings on proteolysis have reflected this interest.
              However, as new methods have emerged for the study of protease function in
              vivo, there are an increasing number of laboratories involved in studies of
              protease biology. The objective of the Third Meeting
on the Biology of
              Proteolysis is to bring together investigators of protease biology with those
              who study the biochemical and structural properties of these enzymes. Clearly,
              given the similarities between proteolytic systems involved in distinct
              biological processes, this meeting presents a exciting opportunity for
              participants to learn about recent developments that will be relevant to their
              own research.  The program will include 8 sessions covering the most prominent
              biological systems involving proteolysis, which will be led by two outstanding
              and well-known investigators in these areas. With the exception of overview
              talks presented by the session chairs, all of the talks and posters to be
              presented will be selected from submitted abstracts, and most of the talks will
              be given by students, postdoctoral fellows and other younger investigators. It
              is expected that more than 250 scientists will attend. Of these, over half are
              likely to be graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.

