Title       : Ion Interactions in Cloned Potassium Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0090662

Award Number: 0090662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted Begenisich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The electrical activity of many organs is shaped by potassium selective
              ion
channel proteins. Defects in potassium channels produce several types
              of
electrophysiological disturbances including cardiac arrhythmias
              and
epilepsy.  These channels are the targets of many therapeutic
              drugs
including the Class III anti-arrhythmic compounds.  While many types
              of
potassium channels have been cloned, many of their most basic
              properties,
including ion discrimination and permeation, remain poorly
              understood.  This
project is designed to probe the mechanism of the
              interaction between
tetraethylammonium ions (related to some Class III drugs)
              in the pore in
these channels.  This will be accomplished through a
              combination of
molecular biological techniques with electrophysiological
              recordings and
measurements of radio-labeled unidirectional ion fluxes. An
              additional
component of this work will be the development of new forms of
              ion
permeation models.  These models will be developed as
              quantitative
descriptions of the ion permeation mechanism but, more
              importantly, will be
used to design new experiments and test competing
              mechanisms.  A Web site
will be established in order to facilitate wide
              distribution of these models
for teaching and scientific uses.

The results
              from this work will aid the understanding of selectivity and
permeation in ion
              channel proteins.  Since many therapeutic drugs interact
with the pore in
              these channels and with ions in the pore, understanding the
mechanisms of
              permeation and block may lead to the development of better
drug therapies. 
              The modeling tools that will be developed and broadly
disseminated will help
              educate students and other scientists about these
fundamental properties of
              ion channel proteins.



