Title       : A Partnership for Innovation: Promoting Education and Research in
               Nanofabrication Applications to Biology and Medicine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0090393

Award Number: 0090393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Wormley dnwdo@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Fonash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090393		
Wormley			

This award is to The Pennsylvania State University to
              support the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners for this award include the Pennsylvania State
              University; Pennsylvania Nanofabrication Manufacturing Technology Partnership,
              which includes the Pennsylvania State University, industry in Pennsylvania, 14
              Community Colleges, and several public school districts.

Proposed
              Activities
The activities for this award include formation of an associates
              degree to train associate degree workforce in nanotechnology, biology, and
              medicine for the biomedical industry; assessment of the needs of industry for
              their workforce; curriculum development; research for industry.

Proposed
              Innovation
The innovation goals for the program include training a
              well-qualified workforce for the emerging nanotechnology field (biological and
              medically related).  The range of academe involved goes from high school to
              community colleges to the Pennsylvania State University.  The proposed effort
              should stimulate economic activity in the private sector creating jobs and
              economic well being in the state.

Potential Economic Impact
The potential
              economic outcomes include a trained workforce to attract and enable biotech
              industry; research infusion to provide technical assistance to new and emerging
              companies; state-of-the-art facilities for research and education.

Potential
              Societal Impact
The potential benefits to society include creation of new high
              tech jobs for all levels and all classes of people in the state and general
              economic well being in the state in emerging biotechnology and biomedical
              fields.


