Title       : The interaction of Social Experience and Hormone Changes in Modifying Aggression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0090739

Award Number: 0090739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391242             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Wilczynski wilczynski@psy.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1193,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates how social experiences involving aggressive
              interactions interact with stress to change how aggressively an  individual
              responds in future social interactions. The project will first document how
              aggressive tendencies and stress responses change over repeated bouts of social
              aggression over several days. Changes in hormonal state during this period will
              also be documented. Experiments will then follow to test whether two hormones
              are important in regulating the changes in aggressive behavior that follow this
              experience. These  hormones are the androgen sex steroid hormones (testosterone
              and dihydrotestosterone), and the stress steroid hormone corticosterone. The
              project will also use a neuroanatomical functional imaging technique,
              cytochrome oxidase histochemistry, to identify brain areas that change their
              metabolic, or functional, properties as a result of aggressive interactions and
              as a result of chronic changes in hormone levels. These neuroanatomical data
              will be correlated with the behavioral data to identify key brain changes that
              underlie the shift from less to more aggression and that differentiate dominant
              from subordinate status. The results from all parts of the project will
              ultimately be used to model the interrelationships of behavioral experience,
              hormone level, and brain metabolic profiles using a statistical technique
              called "structural equation modeling" in order to test hypotheses about causal
              interactions among all three classes of variables. The results of the project
              will provide new information about the factors leading to individual
              differences in aggression and other responses to social challenges.
