Title       : RCN: Beyond "Deep Green": Toward an Integration of Plant Phylogenetics and Plant
               Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0090227

Award Number: 0090227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $496431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent D. Mishler bmishler@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1664,9169,9184,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0090227
Brent Mishler
An award has been made to Dr. Brent Mishler of the
              University of California at Berkely to direct a research coordination network
              of plant phylogeneticists and genomicists to develop integrated research
              activities between these two botanical disciplines over the next 5 years. The
              green plants represent one of the biggest branches of the tree of life -- more
              than 1/2 million species -- a clade at least 1 billion years old.  Their
              morphological and chemical diversity, ecological dominance, and importance in
              human affairs (for food, shelter and medicine) are paramount among life's
              lineages.  A recently improved understanding of their phylogeny (evolutionary
              history) generated from the efforts of the "Deep Green" collaboration not only
              allows the intellectual satisfaction of discovering the "roots" of this major
              component of the world's biotic diversity, but also has important practical
              benefits as well.  Likewise, the recently completed Arabidopsis genome, and
              similar ongoing genomic studies of diverse crop plants provide an unprecedented
              opportunity for comparative genomics to identify, isolate, and determine the
              function of plant genes that are associated with both vegetative and
              reproductive phenotypes. These two areas of research have so far proceeded
              entirely separately, but are poised for a synthesis. Both groups of researchers
              would benefit greatly from increased communication and collaboration.    The
              goal of this project is to establish a new research coordination network to
              explore the ways in which comparative phylogenetic studies can inform genomic
              studies, and vice-versa. The group proposes a series of professional meetings,
              workshops, training activities for K-12 teachers, undergraduates, and graduate
              students, and a web site that will contain information for professional
              scientists as well as educational materials for the general public.
       
              The project will result in a newly well-coordinated, cohesive scientific
              community that will be able to use this phylogenetic and genomic information
              for such new applications as predicting the evolution of biochemical pathways,
              identifying gene duplications and promoter evolution contributing to
              morphological changes, predicting useful chemicals for pharmacology, selecting
              promising genes for biotechnology studies, and carrying out comparative
              functional and genomic studies.  The fruits of such collaboration could
              include:  new tools for assessing plant relationships, new comparative
              approaches to functional questions combining data from phylogeny and genomics,
              and enhanced training of scientists at all levels.

