Title       : Dissecting Induction of Cell Cleavage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0090725

Award Number: 0090725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dahong Zhang Zhangd@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cytokinesis ultimately ensures the proper partition of chromosomes and cytoplasm
              into two daughter cells. In animal cells, this is achieved by the formation of
              a cleavage furrow that bisects the mitotic (or meiotic) spindle between
              segregated chromosomes. Failure in, or improper positioning of the cleavage
              furrow may lead to cancer or birth defects. It is known that the mitotic
              apparatus defines the cell cleavage plane. However, it is not clear how the
              mitotic apparatus initiates the cleavage furrow due to our lack of in-depth
              understanding about the source and nature of the furrow signal. Each part of
              the mitotic apparatus; namely asters, central spindle (microtubule arrays and
              spindle midzone), and chromosomes, has been found capable of inducing a
              cleavage furrow in certain cell types. Yet it is uncertain which part is the
              essential source of the signal and whether all parts act in concert. The
              specific aims of this project are to: 1) determine which spindle constituent is
              the essential source of furrow signal by testing furrow induction with each
              single spindle constituent in the absence of all the others; 2) distinguish the
              role of spindle midzone (or telophase disc/midbody) from microtubules by
              dissecting the central spindle into discrete parts (the telophase disc and the
              remaining microtubule arrays), and testing their independent role in furrow
              initiation. These experiments combine micromanipulation with digital-enhanced
              polarization microscopy and epifluorescence microscopy, in which mitotic
              spindles in living cells are mechanically dissected and rearranged as desired,
              which allows real-time observation of the resulting effect on furrow
              positioning in living cells. Incorporation of micromanipulation into
              epifluorescence microscopy permits direct microneedling of
              fluorescently-labeled microtubules and actin filaments while observing their
              dynamics with respect to contractile ring formation during furrow initiation.
              In addition, micromanipulated cells will be fixed at moments of interest and
              stained for confocal or EM microscopy to better determine the distribution of
              microtubules, actin filaments and other factors involved in cytokinesis.
              Through dissecting independent and/or overlapping roles of the spindle
              constituents in furrow initiation under these stringent conditions, the
              currently most attractive models for cleavage furrow positioning will be
              scrutinized. These models include "astral stimulation" by signals from the
              asters acting on equatorial cortex, "polar relaxation" by signals from the
              asters acting on polar cortex, and "equatorial stimulation" by signals from the
              spindle midzone (telophase disc and/or chromosomes) acting on the equatorial
              cortex. The project aims to provide new insights towards understanding of the
              impact of spindle microtubules, either from asters or the central spindle,
              chromosomes, and the telophase disc on the organization of actin filaments
              during furrow positioning. 
