Title       : POWRE: Understanding Contribution Choice: Experimental Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2002  
File        : a0090035

Award Number: 0090035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74285              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra L. Cooper coopera@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1371,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the strategic choices made by campaign contributors who
              seek to make donations to winning candidates. In this project, the investigator
              uses computer experiments to present subjects with a simulated "election" and
              rewards them for contributing to the winner. The main theses investigated
              involve the use of information and the extent and range of learning. What cues
              do subjects use to identify winners, and how effective are they at doing so?
              The primary dependent variable is the performance of the human subjects in
              solving the contribution problem. The manipulated experimental conditions
              include the number of candidates, the number of (simulated) contributors, the
              predictability of the simulated contributors' "decisions," and the payoff
              subjects receive for selecting the winner.

Research into the choices made by
              campaign contributors lags behind that on other political actors such as voters
              and candidates. Despite recent advances in this area, the discipline knows
              relatively little about why individuals choose to contribute to candidates, how
              they choose candidates to support, and what impact money has on elections and
              policy. Although research into contribution choice can be informed by the
              literature on vote choice, the decisions are not analogous. Unlike votes,
              campaign contributions are fungible, that is, they can be applied to many other
              purposes. Money not "invested" in (or spent on) a candidate can be "invested"
              (or spent) elsewhere. Contributors can give to multiple candidates, or even to
              every candidate. Unlike votes, contributions can be made at different times,
              i.e. early or late in the campaign. The question underlying the research is
              essential to understanding the decisions of political actors: how do people
              make strategic choices?

This POWRE grant provides the investigator valuable
              resources with which to further her professional development. It enables her to
              advance her skills in computer experimentation, an area of the discipline in
              which women are significantly underrepresented. It also enables her to
              undertake this major research project and to involve students in her research
              as she begins her first tenure-track position. Completing this research will,
              in turn, suggest additional avenues for investigating the choices of campaign
              contributors, a central focus of the PI's research agenda. In short, this POWRE
              grant allows the PI to make significant progress on her research agenda at a
              critical stage in her professional development.

