Title       : GOALI: Long-term Planning of Plant-wide Recovery and Treatment Options
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0090370

Award Number: 0090370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas A. Linninger Linninge@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Colberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Andreas Linninger and Richard Colberg 
Institution: University
              of Illinois at chicago
Proposal Number: 0090370

Planning of waste reduction
              and pollution prevention efforts for multi-purpose batch manufacturing sites is
              concerned with the mindful use of resources such as raw materials, mass
              separating agents and energy to support the production of chemicals.   It is a
              dynamic open-ended problem, since strategies should anticipate emerging trends
              in future business operations, availability of new technologies beyond current
              manufacturing practices or environmental concerns.  Uncertainty stems from a
              continuous sequence of production campaigns, each lasting from weeks to months.
               Plant-wide waste management typically builds on existing site infrastructure
              such as solvent recovery plants, incinerators, chemical treatment technologies,
              and biological treatment.  The retrofit situation in the presence of
              uncertainty contrasts the deterministic grass-roots design approach predominant
              in dedicated plants used in the bulk commodity business.  This research
              consists of developing optimal design methodology for plant-wide waste
              management for a fixed planning horizon.  Due to the multi-faceted nature of
              the problem, a synergistic academic-industrial collaboration (GOALI project) is
              planned.

The PIs plan to develop a new technique they call "combinatorial
              process synthesis," which uses a two-phase solution approach.  In phase one,
              superstructure generation, a knowledge-based reasoning mechanism searches for a
              superstructure of technically feasible recovery and treatment options. 
              Non-linear balance and constitutive  equations are enforced to safeguard the
              consistency of the evolving state task network.  In step two, superstructure
              optimization identifies plant-wide waste management strategies subject to
              plant-specific logistic, capacity and emission constraints.  Optimal strategies
              also suggest investment decisions such as new recycle technologies or treatment
              options to simultaneously increase economic and ecological performance or to
              address more stringent environmental standards.  The major advantage of the
              combinatorial process synthesis method lies in its ability to render an
              algorithmic solution to open-ended problems via a combination of informed
              search and mathematical programming.

