Title       : Biological Role of Motility in the Plant Pathogenic Bacterium Ralstonia
               Solanacearum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0090692

Award Number: 0090692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caitilyn Allen cza@plantpath.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Most plant-associated bacteria can move, even though motility uses much energy
              and may elicit host defense responses.  The ability to move is known to help
              bacteria pathogenic to animals, but the role of bacterial motility in plant
              pathogenesis is largely unexplored.  Two well-characterized nonmotile mutants
              of the plant pathogen, Ralstonia solanacearum, caused significantly less
              disease on tomato in a realistic soil invasion virulence assay, showing that
              this trait does contribute to virulence.  The goal of this project is to
              combine genetic, histopathological, and ecological approaches to
              comprehensively describe the role of motility in the life history of this
              plant-associated bacterium.  

The first objective is to determine how
              motility contributes to organismal fitness.   The investigators will
              microscopically examine tomato roots infected with fluorescent motile or
              nonmotile bacteria to compare the behavior of these strains during the early
              stages of pathogenesis.  These experiments will test the hypothesis that
              motility plays a key role early in host invasion and colonization.  To test the
              hypothesis that motility late in disease development is actively
              disadvantageous, the investigators will measure the virulence of a regulatory
              mutant that is always motile.  Because motility is likely to affect bacterial
              fitness outside the plant as well, they will compare soil survival of motile
              and nonmotile strains to test the hypothesis that motility increases
              saprophytic survival in soil and decaying plant material.  The second objective
              is to separate the effects of bacterial movement from those of the flagella
              themselves, because flagella may mediate attachment to plant surfaces and
              recognition by the host.  To determine if flagella attach bacteria to plant
              surfaces, investigators will compare attachment of non-flagellated and
              flagellated but paralyzed mutants to tomato roots.  Analysis of plant
              biochemical responses and defense gene expression will reveal whether host
              plants recognize purified R. solanacearum flagella or their component
              flagellins.  The third objective is to explore how R. solanacearum regulates
              its motility.  This trait is likely controlled by a complex hierarchy involving
              an internally responsive flagellar regulon, known virulence factor regulators,
              and host plant signals.  Investigators will use reporter gene fusions and
              regulatory mutants to define motility gene regulation in this species.  Because
              R. solanacearum motility in culture does not reflect the behavior of the
              pathogen in its natural habitat, gene expression studies will be conducted in
              planta.  Collectively, the experiments proposed here will yield an integrated
              understanding of how the ability to move helps, and possibly hinders, this
              bacterium throughout its complex life cycle.  

