Title       : Revision of the Bee-killing Flies, Genus Melaloncha (Insecta: Diptera: Phoridae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0090031

Award Number: 0090031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian V. Brown bbrown@nhm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Kizirian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB 0090031
Brian V. Brown

Dr. Brian Brown of the Los Angeles County Museum
              of Natural History has been awarded a grant to revise the genus Melaloncha,
              commonly known as the bee-killing flies, a large group of phorid flies. All
              species are found in South and Central America, and all parasitize bees: bumble
              bees, stingless bees and the introduced western honey bee, Apis mellifera (thus
              they are potential agricultural pests in tropical countries). Thirty-two
              bee-killing fly species have been described, but many more have been collected
              and it is estimated that re-examination of this fascinating group will
              ultimately involve as many as 100 species. 
Relationships among the species
              will be investigated using structural characters of adult flies. This analysis
              will be used as a framework for examining host-parasitoid specialization, host
              switching and other behavioral traits. Field work to make further collections
              of Melaloncha associated with their host bees will be conducted in Bolivia,
              Costa Rica, Panama, and Brazil. Collecting of specimens in the field will
              result in knowledge of host-parasitoid relationships, allow males and females
              of Melaloncha species to be associated and will uncover further new species.
              
Results from this study will include a taxonomic revision in two parts,
              including descriptions of species, relationships, keys for the identification
              of species, and color images on CD-ROM. Products on the World Wide Web will be
              the following: a web-based interactive identification key, web pages for each
              species, a web page for phorid-bee relationships (which will be extremely
              useful to beekeepers and bee ecologists), a digital image archive, a
              host-parasitoid list and a catalog with literature.

