Title       : Partnership for Innovation (PFI) to Enhance Puerto Rico's Economic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0090517

Award Number: 0090517
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel Gomez m_gomez@upr1.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brad R. Weiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Rivera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Winston W. Liang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090517		
Gomez			

This award is to the University of Puerto Rico to support
              the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners for this award include the University of
              Puerto Rico; Inter American University of Puerto Rico; Polytechnic University
              of Puerto Rico; Industry/University Research Consortium; Chamber of Commerce;
              Puerto Rico Manufacturers Association; venture capital; incubator
              facilities.

Proposed Activities
The activities for this award include
              workforce development; improved access to new knowledge for companies; creation
              of infrastructure for innovation; development of a strategic plan for
              innovation for Puerto Rico.

Proposed Innovation
The innovation goals
              include development of entrepreneurial skills in the workforce; integration of
              research and education; technology transfer to create new companies; creation
              of the infrastructure for innovation in Puerto Rico; development of a strategic
              plan for innovation in Puerto Rico; creation of new jobs and a technologically
              literate workforce.

Potential Economic Impact
This activity should have the
              following outcomes: general economic well being with new start-up companies and
              new high tech jobs for the citizens of Puerto Rico.

Potential Societal
              Impact
This activity should provide new jobs and economic well being for
              under-represented groups.



