Title       : New Block and Gradient Copolymers by Controlled/Living Radical Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2000   
File        : a0090409

Award Number: 0090409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krzysztof Matyjaszewski km3b@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to synthesize and characterize new block and
              gradient copolymers prepared by controlled radical polymerization methods. 
              Block and gradient copolymers tend to microphase separate and may form various
              periodic and continuous nanostructures.  Three groups of copolymers will be
              prepared and characterized.  They include copolymers composed of a-butyl
              acrylate (BA) and methyl methacrylate (MMA) which may have good adhesive
              properties, amphiphilic blocks for study as surfactants and end-functional
              polymers for potential use as blend additives.  Various block and gradient
              copolymers will be made by precisely controlling the dimension, composition and
              functionality in the copolymer chains.  Preliminary results on the BA/MMA
              copolymers indicate that the mechanical properties of the blocks containing a
              gradient structure in the outer blocks are dramatically different from the pure
              triblocks. Various di- and triblock copolymers will be prepared in which the
              overall composition, molecular weight and sequence distribution along the chain
              will be varied.  In addition, the effect of the polydispersity and the gradient
              distribution on the mechanical and thermal properties of the copolymers will be
              studied in order to draw a structure-property correlation for the obtained
              polymers.  Preliminary results for the surfactants composed of polystyrene (PS)
              and poly(acrylic acid) (PA) demonstrated that by controlling and systematically
              varying the composition and topology of the polymer chains, it was possible to
              design surfactants and to correlate the copolymer structure (AS, ASA, SAS,
              trifunctional SA) with  its surfactant properties.  Extension of this study
              will include the preparation of new amphiphiles containing a random and/or
              gradient hydrophobic segment and non-ionic surfactants and probing the effects
              of the alterations on the stability of conventional   emulsions and water-borne
              ATRP.  The final project will involve preparing end-functional copolymers and
              evaluating their efficacy as blend additives.  A comparative study of block,
              random and gradient copolymers will be performed.
%%%
It is anticipated that
              through precise control and systematic variation of the structure of block and
              gradient copolymers, it will be possible to understand and predict how
              structural variations affect the thermal, mechanical and other properties of
              the targeted materials.  More efficient adhesives, elastomers, surfactants and
              blend additives may be developed based on this type of structure-property
              correlation.
***

