Title       : RCN: The Pyloric Model Group: Functional Analysis of a Complex, Distributed
               Biological Neural Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0090250

Award Number: 0090250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Hooper hooper@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1664,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Complex, distributed systems are those in which the components are highly
              interconnected and individually non-linear in operation.  We have little
              understanding of how such systems operate.   Nervous systems are highly complex
              and non-linear, and this lack of understanding is an impediment to
              understanding nervous system function, and to designing computational devices
              that can mimic nervous system capabilities.  Experimental and computational
              studies of advantageous animal models have led to some useful advances.  This
              proposal describes such an approach using a small network of nerve cells
              (neurons) called the pyloric neural network, part of a larger complex called
              the stomatogastric ganglion, which generates rhythmic activity in the gut of
              crustaceans.  This network generates a suite of behaviors and is small,
              extremely well understood, and very amenable to experiment and computational
              modeling.  These investigations have been done in many different laboratories,
              with a far broader scope than any one or two labs could approach, and this
              Research Coordination Network is established to coordinate their efforts.  The
              Pyloric Model Group is set up to construct a computational model of the pyloric
              network, to supervise a postdoctoral fellow who will help fill critical gaps
              and construct the model, to sponsor annual meetings to share the knowledge of
              the pool of labs that conduct stomatogastric ganglion research, and to share
              the results of the collaboration with the broader scientific community by Web
              and CD distribution.  
     This project will have an impact on the
              fundamental understanding of the neurobiological basis of behavior, will
              provide insights into the function of complex distributed systems in general,
              will promote cross-disciplinary collaborations including small colleges with
              major universities, and will broaden the experience of students in a
              cross-disciplinary environment.

