Title       : Molecular Mechanisms by which Maternal Touch Regulates Growth Related Gene
               Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0090769

Award Number: 0090769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saul Schanberg schan003@mc.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia M. Kuhn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Survival of the mammalian neonate is highly dependent on its ability to
process
              sensory information and then adapt to changes by choosing an
appropriate
              behavioral and physiological condition.  Because the mother
normally comprises
              the prime source of sensory input, she essentially
determines the infant's
              psychobiological state.  Previous work from this
laboratory has shown that the
              loss of certain tactile cues from the mother
initiates in the rat pup and
              human infant a shift from a growth strategy to
one of energy conservation and
              growth suppression until contact with the
mother is re-established.  Overall
              the specific goals of this project are
1) to define the roles of CNS
              Bata-endorphin and bombesin in mediating how
tactile stimulation by the dam
              regulates cell development in the pups and
2) to determine the molecular
              mechanisms by which maternal tactile
deprivation (MTD) suppresses peripheral
              organ responsivity to the
growth-promoting hormones GH and prolactin. 
              Growth-related molecular
parameters i.e. DNA synthesis and expression of the
              ornithine decarboxylase
(ODC) gene in developing organs will be assessed and
              used as indices of the
altered maturation resulting from MTD.

The
              similarities between MTD syndrome in rat pups and human babies suggest
a
              common etiology.  Hence, identifying the underlying mechanisms by
              which
maternal-infant interactions optimize growth potential in the neonate
              is
essential in order to advance our understanding of the basic
              principles
governing normal mammalian development.  As ODC activity is
              obligatory for
normal cell replication and differentiation, these mechanisms
              represent an
important control point at which "nurturing touch" regulates
              neonatal
development.  Such a mechanism can explain the maladaptive
              consequences of
disrupting mother-infant tactile interactions as occurs in
              isolated
premature and in non-organic failure to thrive human infants.


