Title       : Mechanisms Regulating Subcellular Distribution of the Thyroid Hormone Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0090923

Award Number: 0090923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lizabeth A. Allison laalli@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The nucleus forms a discrete compartment in eukaryotic cells. This allows gene
              expression to be regulated by altering the nucleocytoplasmic distribution of
              transcription factors in response to external stimuli. This project explores
              various aspects of the molecular mechanisms regulating nuclear localization and
              subcellular distribution of the thyroid hormone receptor (TR), a transcription
              factor, which either activates or represses the expression of its target genes
              in response to thyroid hormone. Thyroid hormone is essential for normal growth
              and development as well as for the regulation of a variety of metabolic
              pathways.  Recent studies of TR subcellular trafficking yielded a number of
              intriguing results: 1) novel alternative pathways exist for TR import in
              Xenopus oocytes: nuclear entry occurs by passive diffusion or by a
              signal-mediated process; 2) TR undergoes nucleocytoplasmic shuttling in Xenopus
              oocytes and mammalian cells, revealing an additional checkpoint in control of
              gene expression by TR; 3) there is an energy-requiring step in the nuclear
              retention/export phase of shuttling; 4) a phosphorylated form of TR is present
              in the nucleus of Xenopus oocytes but not in the cytoplasm, suggesting a role
              for phosphorylation in TR nuclear localization; and 5) three dominant negative
              variants of TR, the DNA binding mutant C122A, the transactivation mutant G121A,
              and the oncoprotein v-ErbA, have distinct subcellular distribution patterns
              compared with TR. Such dominant negative TR variants provide important, novel
              tools for tracking the subcellular pathway of TR.  In the proposed studies, the
              following questions will be addressed: 1) Does TR follow both passive diffusion
              and signal-mediated nuclear import pathways in mammalian cells? Permeabilized
              cell in vitro nuclear import assays, which allow for controlled reconstitution
              of nuclear import, will be used to determine the general mechanism of import of
              TR monomers, homodimers, and heterodimers. 2) Do dominant negative variants of
              TR that are defective in ligand binding or transactivation associate with
              specific subcellular compartments? Does interaction with these variants alter
              the subcellular distribution of TR? These questions will be investigated using
              green, yellow, and red fluorescent protein (GFP, YFP, and DsRed)-receptor
              fusions co-expressed in mammalian cells. Colocalization to cytoplasmic
              compartments and subnuclear domains will be visualized by staining with
              compartment-specific probes.  3) Does phosphorylation regulate
              nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of TR? Site-directed mutagenesis studies will be
              used to investigate the effect of phosphorylation on nuclear localization of
              TR. Shuttling characteristics of phosphorylation site mutants will be analyzed
              by Xenopus oocyte microinjection and mammalian cell heterokaryon assays.  In
              summary, these studies will not only increase understanding of the normal
              cellular response to thyroid hormone, but should also provide important insight
              into modulation of gene expression through both compartmentalization and
              dominant negative transcription factors. The proposed research makes use of
              techniques that, although sophisticated, are quickly mastered by competent
              undergraduate and graduate students, and will provide the invaluable
              opportunity for a diversity of students to gain hands-on experience with the
              scientific process.

