Title       : Asymptotic and Statistical Analysis of Volitility and its Implications for
               Derivative Pricing and Risk Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0090067

Award Number: 0090067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81034              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Ronnie Sircar sircar@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dear Professor Pang,

 Here is the abstract in text form.

Ronnie
              Sircar.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Asymptotic and Statistical Analysis of Volatility and its Implications
for Derivative Pricing and Risk Management

Proposal Number: 0090067
PI: K. Ronnie Sircar
    Department of Operations Research & Financial Engineering
 Princeton University.

In modern financial markets, investors are increasingly faced with
exposure to changing and uncertain volatility. This project concerns
mathematical models in which volatility is a stochastic process, and
their use in derivative pricing and risk management.  The main aim is
to develop an efficient and robust framework in which models are
calibrated from observable market data and then used to design
risk-minimizing strategies that hedge a portfolio against the
potentially serious consequences of changing volatility. This problem
is important for investors from large trading institutions to
individuals with pension funds.

The spectacular growth in the size of the derivatives market over the
last twenty-five years (currently it has a turnover of trillions of
dollars in the US) plus recent infamous (and equally spectacular) risk
(mis)management disasters, such as the Barings, Orange County and Long
Term Capital Management fiascos, have created an urgent need for smart
mathematical and computational models to quantify the respective risks
and rewards of such investments. This project aims to build on the
methodology introduced by Black, Scholes and Merton, to take into
account the fluctuating nature of market volatility. Mathematical
tools are combined with statistical analysis of past prices to produce
formulas and software that accurately capture the potential losses and
gains in today's vast derivative market.



