Title       : Timing of Glycoprotein Expression and the Evolutionary Success of Baculovirus
               Infection of Lepidopteran Hosts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0090632

Award Number: 0090632
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loy E. Volkman lvolkman@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Autographa californica M Nucleopolyhedrovirus (AcMNPV) is the best-studied
              species of the Nucleopolyhedrovirus (family Baculoviridae), a genus comprised
              of viral pathogens that infect caterpillars (i.e., larvae of butterflies and
              moths in the order Lepidoptera).  AcMNPV has been studied extensively as a
              potential microbial pesticide because it can induce fatal infection in a wide
              range of pest species that cause billions of dollars worth of damage each year
              (e.g., corn, tobacco, tomato, cotton). The unusually wide host range of AcMNPV
              suggests that its infection strategy is highly efficient at overcoming the
              defensive responses of many larval lepidopterans, one of which is sloughing
              infected midgut cells.  AcMNPV requires two different forms to complete its
              natural infection cycle.  One form, called ODV, is eaten by caterpillars and
              infects the midgut cells lining the gut lumen.  The second form, budded virus
              or BV, transmits infection beyond the midgut to nearly all other host tissues
              causing death within a few days.  AcMNPV has two traits that are highly unusual
              for a virus.  First, most ODV particles contain multiple nucleocapsids which
              all enter a single midgut cell; because a midgut cell can be successfully
              infected by virions containing only one nucleocapsid, this infection strategy
              appears inefficient. Second, the synthesis of the major BV envelope protein,
              gp64, begins early during infection.  Typically, structural proteins are only
              made late during infection, so this early synthesis of gp64 is highly unusual. 
              gp64 is essential for BV infectivity, and because it is absent from ODV, it
              must be synthesized in midgut cells in order for infection to progress.   The
              hypothesis to be tested is that after infection of a midgut cell by ODV
              containing multiple nucleocapsids, some of the entering nucleocapsids invade
              the nucleus where they express gp64 (and other viral genes) while others bypass
              the nucleus and bud from the basal plasma membrane containing newly synthesized
              gp64.   Thus, early expression of gp64, coupled with packaging of multiple
              nucleocapsids in ODV, may accelerate the onset of systemic infection and
              thereby counter the caterpillar's defensive midgut cell-sloughing response. 
              This hypothesis will be tested by comparing the pathogenesis of an AcMNPV
              recombinant (Ac-wt) that exhibits the normal, wild type (early and late) gp64
              synthesis with that of a recombinant that that can only synthesize gp64 late
              during infection (Ac-late).  Both of these viruses contain a reporter gene
              permitting temporal and spatial tracking of the viral infection as it moves
              through the tissues.  Dose/mortality relationships for Ac-wt and Ac-late will
              be determined in larvae of the Tobacco Budworm and the Beet Armyworm, two major
              agricultural pests.  If the hypothesis is correct, Ac-late should be slower in
              establishing systemic infection and also should require larger dosages to yield
              mortalities comparable to Ac-wt.  Additionally, ODV nucleocapsids of both
              recombinants will be radiolabeled to determine, directly, whether and when they
              are transported into secondary target tissues.  Finally, an AcMNPV recombinant
              lacking the ability to synthesize gp64 will be used both to confirm that gp64
              is essential for systemic infection of the two insect species, and to quantify
              rates of midgut cell sloughing by these hosts. This research is designed to
              answer basic questions about the evolution and ecological significance of
              baculovirus infection strategies and the defense responses of caterpillars. 
              The results will integrate the disease ecology of AcMNPV at the molecular and
              organismal levels, adding to our basic knowledge of baculoviruses and their
              utility in controlling agricultural pests.
