Title       : Upstate Alliance for Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0090569

Award Number: 0090569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Boyd dlbpop@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Coburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry McGuire  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie K. Zack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090569		
Boyd			

This award is to the Rochester Institute of Technology to
              support the activity described below for 27 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners for the award include Rochester Institute of
              Technology; the City of Buffalo; the City of Rochester; High Tech of Rochester;
              IP.com; State University of New York at Buffalo; University of Rochester;
              Western New York Technology Development Center.

Proposed Activities
The
              activities of this award include creation of an infrastructure for
              commercialization; creation of business start-ups; encouragement of academic
              patenting; establishment of regional practices to foster innovation; training
              of entrepreneurial experts who understand intellectual property, formulation of
              business start-up models; and development of community economic development
              resources; establishment of the infrastructure to connect university
              researchers, administrators, technology transfer offices, business builders,
              and venture capitalists to enable the innovation process.

Proposed
              Innovation
The innovation goals are to build the infrastructure to enable
              innovation connecting the universities to all of the other key elements in the
              innovation process; to train leaders in innovation; to start new businesses to
              create regional wealth.

Potential Economic Impact
The potential economic
              outcomes include increased patents and business start-ups (10-15 new ones);
              increased collaborative research; assessment of invention potential; education
              on intellectual property.

Proposed Societal Impact
Potential benefits to
              society include creation of new jobs and new regional business; involvement of
              under-represented groups in leadership positions in the economic enterprise of
              the region.



