Title       : A Partnership for Innovations in Nanocomposites Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2001  
File        : a0090536

Award Number: 0090536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaik Jeelani jeelanis@tusk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Derrick R. Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hassan Mahfuz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090536		
Jeelani		

This award is to Tuskegee University to support the
              activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners are Tuskegee University; Auburn University;
              Nanotek Instruments; Advanced Composites Technologies and Associates
              (ACTA).

Proposed Activities
Nanotek will supply nano particles and fibers.
              Auburn University will develop process technology and microstructural
              characterization of the materials.  Tuskegee University will incorporate the
              fibers and particles into composites and characterize the materials
              performance.  ACTA will assist Tuskegee and fabricate isogrid cylinders through
              filament winding.  The sole use for these cylinders at this time is for space
              applications via NASA.

Proposed Innovation
The proposed innovation is
              development and commercialization of high tech nano composites for isogrid
              cylinders for space applications.

Potential Economic Impact
The Space
              industry is the sole market at the moment. However, there are other potential
              applications if the current partners expand their vision and mix of
              partners.

Potential Societal Impact
The lead institution is a historically
              african-american institution.  Involvement in the economic enterprise would
              have a good impact, especially if the partners pursue other potential
              applications.  Increasing the number of african-american scientists and
              engineers with graduate degrees will be a major outcome.



