Title       : Polypeptide Signaling in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0090766

Award Number: 0090766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarence A. Ryan cabudryan@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Research is proposed to investigate the extent and roles of polypeptide
              
signaling in plants.  Animals and yeast utilize polypeptide signals for
              
regulating a host of physiological processes, including stress,
              
reproduction, development and defense, and many others. Until 1991, when
              
this laboratory discovered the first polypeptide signal in plants, the
              
accepted dogma was that plants did not utilize polypeptide signals, but used
              
small chemical hormones such as auxin, cytokinins, gibberillins, ethylene
              
and abscisic acid as regulators of physiological processes.  Since the first
              
isolation of a polypeptide signal in 1991, four new polypeptide signals have
              
been identified in other laboratories, and five more have been identified
              
and purified in our laboratory.  The signaling polypeptides in plants
              
reported to date are involved in defense, development, and reproduction. 
              
Thus, we expect many more to be identified in the near future.  We have
              
developed a novel, rapid assay to identify polypeptide signals in plants
              
using suspension-cultured cells, which respond to receptor-mediated
              
polypeptide signals by causing the pH of the cell culture medium to
              
increase. Using the assay to monitor the signaling polypeptides during
              
purification, we have identified five receptor-mediated polypeptide signals
              
from tobacco, tomato and alfalfa and are utilizing the assay to investigate
              
the presence of polypeptides throughout the plant kingdom. We have
              
extensively studied the first discovered polypeptide defense signal that is
              
released upon herbivore and pathogen attacks.  It is an 18 amino acid
              
polypeptide isolated from tomato, that is derived from a 200 amino acid
              
precursor.  We have published extensively on its signaling pathway in plants
              
and have identified and isolated its receptor on tomato cell membranes.  We
              
are currently isolating the receptor gene for studies of the structure and
              
function of the receptor in tomato cells.  We are also seeking the genes for
              
the new polypeptides we have isolated to determine their precursors, the
              
mode of release and action, and their localization in plants.  We will
              
continue to identify and isolate the receptors of these polypeptides and
              
begin to learn the broad fundamental principles that underlie polypeptide
              
signaling in plants.  Our studies of signaling polypeptides and their
              
receptors in plants will provide an entirely new understanding of plant
              
signaling for defense and development, with important relevance to ecology
              
and agriculture.


