Title       : Theoretical Studies of Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Molecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2000  
File        : a0090945

Award Number: 0090945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hua Guo hguo@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hua Guo of the University of New Mexico is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to develop efficient numerical methods to
              enable better understanding of molecular spectra and dynamics.  Two research
              areas, the spectroscopy and dynamics of small gas-phase molecules and
              photon/electron-stimulated surface processes, will be pursued.  First, several
              efficient numerical methods will be developed and applied for the recursive
              solution of the Schrodinger equation.  These methods take advantage of the
              sparsity and factorizability of the Hamiltonian and have minimal storage
              requirements.  They will be used to elucidate highly excited vibrational
              spectra and nuclear dynamics of several tetraatomic systems.  The second
              project is concerned with a quantum description of dissipative dynamics on
              solid surfaces by the recursive solution of the Liouville-von Neumann
              equation.

The concern of this work is understanding the spectroscopic and
              dynamical properties of large molecular systems, in the gas phase and on
              surfaces. The details of photo-induced chemistry, in general, and of
              photodissociation, in particular, depend on the interaction energies among the
              atoms in the system. However, it is not simple to correlate these to the
              identity of the reaction products and to the energy distribution over these
              products. The studies being carried out in this project will enhance the
              understanding of the relevant relationships and stimulate new experimental
              explorations. 
