Title       : Dimerization of Floral Organ Identity Proteins in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0090742

Award Number: 0090742
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357417             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Jack thomas.jack@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1118,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Considerable evidence supports the hypothesis that the gene products and
              mechanisms that control flower development in different flowering plant species
              are largely conserved.  Many plant developmental control proteins contain a
              conserved DNA binding domain called the MADS domain.  The MADS family in
              Arabidopsis consists of more than 30 genes.  MADS proteins are involved in
              diverse aspects of plant development including flowering time control, meristem
              specification, floral organ identity, and fruit development.  Despite the
              importance of these MADS proteins in plant development, little is known about
              how these proteins function and interact.  This proposal focuses on the floral
              organ identity MADS proteins APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI) in Arabidopsis
              thaliana.  AP3 and PI function to direct the development of petal and stamens
              in the Arabidopsis flower.  All MADS proteins bind to DNA either as
              heterodimers or homodimers.  Most MADS proteins in Arabidopsis are capable of
              forming both homodimers and heterodimers with a variety of partner proteins. 
              AP3 and PI, by contrast, are unable to homodimerize and form an obligate
              heterodimer.  The AP3/PI heterodimer is highly specific and is evolutionarily
              conserved as evidenced by a similar interaction between the AP3 and PI homologs
              in the distantly related plant species Antirrhinum majus.  This project is
              focused on identifying the amino acids and subdomains in the AP3 and PI
              proteins that mediate the highly specific heterodimer interaction between AP3
              and PI; this will be done both by site-specific mutagenesis and by utilizing
              "reverse" yeast two-hybrid approaches.  Through this research, we hope to be
              able to define the rules for dimerization of this importance class of plant
              developmental regulators. A second focus of this research centers on an unusual
              allele of PI called pi-5.  Unlike all other ap3 and pi mutants, pi-5- exhibits
              phenotypic defects only in a single whorl of the flower.  The PI-5 protein
              exhibits defects in protein-protein interaction with a wild-type AP3 partner
              protein.  Genetic experiments with pi-5 suggest that whorl-specific factors
              modulate the activity of PI-5.  Using both genetic and molecular approaches,
              whorl-specific factors that affect floral organ identity will be isolated and
              characterized. 

