Title       : Progression and Spacing of Heterocyst Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0090232

Award Number: 0090232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Coleman P. Wolk wolk@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In the presence of combined nitrogen, filaments of the photosynthetic bacterium
              Anabaena are comprised wholly of vegetative cells. When deprived of combined
              nitrogen, 5 to 10% of the cells, at semi-regular intervals, differentiate into
              N2-fixing heterocysts. Anaebena offers a rare opportunity to study how a
              prokaryote forms a multicellular pattern (the spacing of heterocysts), and an
              infrequent opportunity to analyze how prokaryotic cells differentiate. The
              following mechanism of pattern formation is generally agreed on: mature and
              developing heterocysts inhibit the differentiation of nearby cells into
              heterocysts by elaborating a differentiation-inhibiting substance that moves
              outward along a filament. To date, few of the genes and processes that
              contribute to spaced heterocyst differentiation are known.  The genomic
              sequence of Anabaena PCC 7120, nearly finished, provides a tool of great value
              to help elucidate the detailed mechanisms, and overall strategy, that regulate
              differentiation. That tool will be used to try to identify the estimated
              100-200 genes that are required specifically for pattern formation and cellular
              differentiation. Analysis of these genes, once they are identified, will be
              crucial for understanding the mechanisms that underlie differentiation.
              Mutagenesis and global analysis of transcript abundance by hybridization to DNA
              arrays constitute complementary approaches to identifying the desired set of
              genes. Hybridization has the potential to show increases or decreases in a
              great number of RNA transcripts simultaneously. However, because hybridization
              is correlative, it requires mutagenesis to demonstrate which genes are
              necessary for development. Also, mutagenesis can, but hybridization cannot,
              recognize the developmental importance of constitutively expressed genes that
              are required specifically for development. Mutation of genes whose products
              participate in the intercellular inhibition of differentiation could lead all
              cells to initiate differentiation. Because such mutations might prevent
              vegetative growth, they are being sought separately by conditional mutagenesis.
              Heterocysts, normally 5-10% of total cells, presumably contribute a like
              percentage of total mRNA. Measurements of hybridization normally resolve
              differences of over 2-fold in transcript abundance between two conditions.
              Therefore, unless developing heterocysts can be isolated without loss of mRNAs,
              they must produce more than 20-fold more of an mRNA than does an average
              vegetative cell for the difference to be detectable by hybridization. For these
              reasons, our primary approach will be by mutagenesis, but hybridization
              analysis will also be performed.  This project builds on the small number of
              development-specific genes already identified. In particular, available mutants
              bracket developmental stages. Focus will be on hybridization analysis on genes
              that are expressed specifically during, and so may be specifically required
              for, these stages. For example, whereas genes activated in a hetR mutant are
              candidates for involvement in non-developmental responses to nitrogen
              deprivation, genes activated in a hetC mutant but not in a hetR mutant are
              candidates for genes involved in pattern formation and the initiation of
              differentiation. Similarly, genes activated in hepK and devA mutants and in
              mutant a71 but not in a hetC mutant are candidates for involvement in all but
              the earliest stages of morphological differentiation. Derivatives of transposon
              Tn5 mutagenize Anabaena highly effectively, and without heretofore discerned
              site-specificity. Such transposons will be used to isolate mutants that can
              grow on combined nitrogen but not on N2, map them by sequencing, and test their
              sites of insertion for developmental relevance by complementing the mutations
              with mapped clones.  The developmental roles of the genes identified will be
              discerned and integrated.
