Title       : Role of the Pti4 and Pti5 Transcription Factors in Pto-Mediated Defense Gene
               Activation and Disease Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2001   
File        : a0090402

Award Number: 0090402
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory B. Martin gbm7@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	This project focuses on the molecular events that occur after a plant
              recognizes a bacterial pathogen and which result in increased expression of
              defense-related genes.  To investigate these events, resistance in tomato to
              bacterial speck disease caused by Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato is studied. 
              Resistance to speck disease occurs in a "gene-for-gene" fashion when the tomato
              plant expresses the Pto resistance gene and the bacterium expresses the avrPto
              avirulence gene.  Recognition of AvrPto protein by the product of the Pto gene,
              a serine-threonine kinase, leads to the rapid induction of many
              "pathogenesis-related" (PR) genes (among other defense responses).  With
              previous NSF support, two transcription factors, Pti4 and Pti5, were identified
              that interact with the Pto kinase and which bind a DNA regulatory element
              present in the promoter of many PR genes.  The Pti4 and Pti5 genes are induced
              in tomato leaves by Pseudomonas infection, and Pti5 expression is further
              increased during a Pseudomonas-tomato interaction involving AvrPto-Pto. 
              Furthermore, the Pti4 protein is phosphorylated by the Pto kinase and its
              binding to the GCC box is thereby enhanced.  Overexpression of Pti4 or Pti5 in
              plants leads to constitutive expression of certain PR genes.  Thus, Pti4 and
              Pti5 appear to define a molecular link between the disease resistance gene Pto
              and activation of PR genes.  Amino acids of Pti4 that are phosphorylated by Pto
              will be identified and the role of this phosphorylation in Pti4 activity will
              be determined.  Genome-wide gene expression changes that occur in tomato and
              Arabidopsis plants overexpressing Pti4 and Pti5 will be elucidated, and these
              plants will be tested for alterations in disease resistance.  To understand the
              Pto-mediated induction of Pti5, the Pseudomonas-responsive promoter elements of
              this gene will be determined and their cognate transcription factors will be
              identified.  Finally, new plant loci that are required for Pti4-mediated
              expression of PR genes will be discovered.  These studies will elucidate key
              steps in the regulation of transcription factors associated with plant disease
              resistance.


