Title       : Role of PBN Subnuclei in Oromotor Behaviors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a0090641

Award Number: 0090641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95184              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. King mking@stetson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Camille T. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stetson Univ
	      421 North Boulevard
	      Deland, FL  32720    904/734-4121

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	Taste information travels from the mouth to the brain within nerves that
              terminate in a part of the medulla oblongata called the nucleus of the solitary
              tract (NST).  The NST is interconnected with another part of the brainstem
              called the parabrachial nucleus (PBN).  Both the PBN and NST act as processing
              and distribution centers for taste information.  They send some taste
              information to higher brain centers so that the taste quality can be perceived.
               The PBN and NST also send outputs to motor centers in the brainstem that
              produce motor responses to the taste input.
	Within the PBN, there are two
              distinct regions that respond to taste input.  One of these regions (CM/VL)
              responds best to salt on the anterior tongue while the other (EM/EL) responds
              best to bitter taste on the posterior tongue.  Due to this difference in
              responses to taste input, it is hypothesized that the two PBN areas control
              different motor responses.  Specifically, it is hypothesized that CM/VL
              controls ingestive behaviors (like mouth movements and tongue protrusions)
              while EM/EL controls aversive behaviors (like gapes).  
	Undergraduate Biology
              and Psychology students and their faculty mentors, will address these
              hypotheses by stimulating discrete areas of the PBN while observing motor
              responses.  This procedure will allow the construction of a functional map of
              the PBN.  Specifically, CM/VL and EM/EL will be stimulated in separate groups
              of conscious rats using implanted electrode-cannula systems.  First, these
              areas will be electrically stimulated while oral motor behaviors are
              videotaped.  Following electrical stimulation, injection of glutamate (an
              excitatory neurotransmitter) through the cannula into the same location within
              the PBN will occur.  The combination of electrical and chemical stimulation
              will allow accurate assessment of the specific neural elements responsible for
              the behavioral effects.  The motor responses will be correlated with the
              histological localization of the stimulation sites.  As mentioned, based on
              previous findings, it is hypothesized that stimulation of CM/VL will generate
              ingestive behaviors, while stimulation of EM/EL will evoke aversive
              responses.
This study employs a straightforward strategy to define the effects
              of taste-responsive PBN regions on oral motor behaviors.  The potential impact
              of the project on the understanding of central processing of taste input and
              the function of the PBN is substantial.  Specifically, elucidation of a
              functional topography (map) within the PBN would significantly improve the
              understanding of the central mechanisms producing oral motor responses to taste
              input.


