Title       : Characterization of Negative Regulators of NPR1-Mediated Systemic Acquired
               Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0090887

Award Number: 0090887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xinnian Dong xdong@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this research is to use Arabidopsis thaliana as a
model
              system to determine the signaling events leading to systemic
              acquired
resistance (SAR). SAR is a secondary pathogen resistance which can
              be
induced after a local infection.  SAR is broad-spectrum and
              long-lasting.
Through genetic screens, NPR1 has been identified as a key
              positive
regulator of SAR; mutants of the NPR1 gene are nonresponsive to
              SAR
induction.  NPR1 encodes a novel protein with functionally
              important
protein-protein interacting domains, the BTB domain and the
              ankyrin-repeat
domain.  Recent data show that nuclear localization of NPR1 is
              essential
for its function.  In the nucleus, NPR1 may affect the activities of
              the
TGA subclass of bZIP transcription factors as well as the
              WRKY
transcription factors, which have been implicated as
              transcriptional
activators and repressors of pathogenesis-related (PR) genes,
              respectively.
A genetic screen for suppressors of npr1 has led to
              identification of sni1,
a mutation that restores systemic induction of PR
              genes in npr1.  The
wild-type SNI1 is believed to be a negative regulator of
              SAR whose
inactivation requires the function of NPR1.  It is hypothesized that
              NPR1
induces SAR by activating the TGA transcription activators and
              inactivating
WRKY transcription repressors, and relieving the negative control
              of SNI1.
In this project, molecular genetic and biochemical experiments are
              designed
to (1) determine the functional significance of the interaction
              between
NPR1 and WRKY transcription factors in SAR;  (2) determine the
              mechanism by
which SNI1 functions as a negative regulator of SAR; and  (3)
              identify
components in the NPR1-complex.  Because NPR1, SNI1, and WRKY
              transcription
factors are either novel or plant-specific proteins,
              characterization of
these components may unveil new mechanisms of signal
              transduction.
Understanding molecular mechanisms of disease resistance in
              plants will
lead to the development of technology in enhancing plants' innate
              defense
to control infection.  Such technology has the potential to reduce the
              use
of hazardous pesticides without using non-plant genes.  Therefore,
              the
study of plant-microbe interactions is of interest to advancement of
              basic
science as well as to protection of the environment and improvement
              of
human life.

