Title       : Caltech Entrepreneurial Fellows Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2001  
File        : a0090616

Award Number: 0090616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $597246             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Murray murray@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John O. Ledyard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Pickar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090616		
Murray			

This award is to California Institute of Technology to
              support the activity described below for 30 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
Partners for the partnership include California Institute
              of Technology; Art Center College of Design; State government through Business
              Technology Center incubator; private industry.

Proposed Activities
The
              activities for this award include creation of post-degree entrepreneurial
              fellowships with the goal of preparing students previously trained in science
              or design to adapt their skills to the development of commercial products in
              the start-up environment; training in entreperneurialship (business plan,
              develop engineering prototypes; financial sources, etc); industrial partner
              mentor program. 

Proposed Innovation
The innovation goals for the award
              include education of entrepreneurial leaders who have primary graduate and
              post-graduate education in science and engineering; formation of start-up high
              tech companies; development of educational modules for entrepreneurial courses
              for export to other universities.

Potential Economic Impact
The potential
              economic outcomes include teaching modules for export to other schools;
              spin-off companies; network of entrepreneurs and industry partners; graduates
              in science and technology with entrepreneurial training for leadership roles in
              the private sector.

Potential Societal Impact
The major benefit to society
              from this award will be the creation of high tech jobs and an education
              methodology for training future leaders in an innovative society.


