Title       : US-Korea Joint Workshop on Digital Libraries: Removing Barriers to International
               Collaboration on Research and Education through Digital Libraries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0090153

Award Number: 0090153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24472              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Fox fox@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 6857      SPECIAL PROJECTS (IIS)
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1086,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is to fund a US-Korea Joint Workshop on Digital Libraries.  This
              small planning workshop is the first with an Asian country.  The globalization
              of the internet and associated information infrastructure now offers the
              promise of creating international digital libraries whose resources are
              distributed  and are capable of managing content originally created in 
              multiple languages, formats, media, and social and organizational contexts.  
              The barriers to achieving progress in worldwide development of digital
              libraries are particularly difficult between nations with very different
              languages and cultures.  To achieve this "next level" of knowledge
              infrastructure requires collaborative efforts in research areas including: (1)
              multi-lingual information systems, cross-language retrieval systems, language
              translation, and language teaching software; (2) multi-national content
              development including sound, data, image, ultimedia, and software; (3) 
              interoperability and scalability technology to permit extremely large
              world-wide collections; (4)  metadata techniques and tools
The workshop has
              three primary goals.  First, it will work to identify ways to reduce the
              barriers to increased collaborative efforts between US and Korean researchers. 
              Second it will explore technical advances and research environments needed to
              facilitate US-Korea collaboration related to digital libraries research and
              educational applications.  Third, it will attempt to produce generalizable
              strategies and approaches for extending and employing digital libraries
              technologies across radically different textual and cultural materials.


