Title       : AzPATH-A Partnership for Housing Innovation in Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0090559

Award Number: 0090559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard H. Bashford howard.bashford@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil Sawhney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter E. Crouch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090559		
Bashford		

This award is to Arizona State University to support
              the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners are Arizona State University; Partnership for
              Advancing Technology in Housing; Home Building Association in Central Arizona;
              Del Webb Corporation; Pulte Homes; Eagle Homes; Trend Homes; Maracay Homes;
              Gateway Community College.

Proposed Activities
The partners are doing the
              following: identification of challenges faced by home builders where technology
              could change the process significantly; identification of technologies to
              address the challenges; research on new materials, products, and processes
              (especially where manufacturing can lower cost and increase quality); modeling
              and simulation of home construction; develop prototypes and work techniques to
              apply them; education/training of a workforce to use the new building
              technology developed.

Proposed Innovation
Housing is the industry that
              missed the innovation revolution in America.  The industry is mature and
              extremely fragmented, making innovation very difficult.  The proposed
              innovation activities include research and a management plan to incorporate new
              materials, manufacturing practice with obvious economic and quality control
              benefits, training of skilled craftsmen, energy savings, and modification of
              building codes could modernize the house construction industry with enormous
              savings for the US economy.

Potential Economic Impact
The following
              economic impacts are likely: improve durability and reduce maintenance costs
              for new homes by 50% by 2010; reduce cost of new homes by 20% by 2010; reduce
              energy costs by 50%; increased safety of construction workers.  The housing
              industry is a huge driver in the national economy.

Potential Societal
              Impact
Active recruitment of Hispanics through chamber of commerce activities
              and Gateway Community College will help provide opportunity for this group to
              participate in the program.  Affordable and maintainable housing will provide
              obvious benefits to all Americans, especially Americans who can afford custom
              homes.



