Title       : Developing Frames of Reference for Archaeological Research with Data on
               Hunter-Gatherer Technology, Social Organization and Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0090089

Award Number: 0090089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis R. Binford binstone@worldnet.att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Binford and his colleagues will address a number of basic questions
              regarding the organization of cultural systems and why they change thru time. 
              They will organize ethnographically documented information on hunter-gatherer
              material culture into data sets germane to exploring archaeologically
              patterning in the spatial and temporal distribution and association of items of
              material culture ( eg. Tools, containers ornaments, and clothing).  This work
              will provide a link between the items of material culture archaeologists
              regularly record and previous research establishing relationships between such
              properties as mobility patterns, food procurement, groups sizes and varying
              scales of leadership hierarchy and both environmental and systems states
              variability (Binford 2001).
We will use a well proven means of coding
              ethnographically described tools (Oswalt 1973, 1976) used in food procurement. 
              We will expand the data on technology to include fabrication and processing
              tools. The latter have clear archaeological implications (See Binford 2001:   
              ) and may be easily related to the already documented data on the actual
              practices of food procurement (Binford 2001). 
We will specifically research
              containers.  A  "pre-study" has already shown that when the first ceramics to
              appear in a sequence are simple bowls, the makers are invariably heavily
              dependent upon grain foods.  We know that early ceramics from many different
              places may be large pointed bottom pots (Japan, parts of North America, and
              Scandinavia), small mug like containers (Greece), small round jars or other
              forms.  We want to know why such variability occurs in the form of early
              ceramics. Therefore, we will  document the uses of all containers.  That is
              whether wooden, bark, or other containers are used and what such use is
              correlated with environmentally or culturally.  It is hoped that such a
              knowledge of non-ceramic container alternatives will be demonstrably related to
              fabrication tools as well as changing use of containers in the context of
              varying subsistence strategies. These are all exciting possibilities which
              should change the way we interpret archaeologically observed innovations in
              technology.
We will develop codes for documenting the types of clothing
              employed and the forms of body decoration employed by each ethnic group
              previously studied (Binford 2001).  We anticipate exciting results, relating
              clothing to the frequencies of stone tools used in clothing manufacture and
              both should vary with climatic variables. We expect to learn why some
              hunter-gatherers invest heavily in body decoration and personal items, which
              may end up as grave furniture, and others do not.  This is particularly
              important since the appearance of beads and body ornaments are currently
              accepted by many as the earliest evidence for fully modern behavior on the part
              of Homo-sapiens yet not all modern Homo Sapiens use beads or other
              ornaments.!Other archaeologists see grave furniture and included personalities
              as evidence for social ranking!  Among the questions this research seeks to
              answer are whether these assumptions are accurate and whether we can explain
              variability in the use of such items among hunter-gatherer peoples?  

              





