Title       : Computational Inference, Monte Carlo, and Scientific Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0090166

Award Number: 0090166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $514464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wing H. Wong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Title: Computational inference, Monte Carlo methods, and scientific
              applications

With the advent of automated, high-throughput experimental
              protocols and data collection techniques, research and discoveries in many
              areas of science and technology have become increasingly data driven and
              computation intensive. The applications motivating the research in this project
              arise from molecular biology, biotechnology and neural science. The rapid
              accumaulation of experimental data in these areas have outstriped scientists'
              ability to analyze them, and advanced statistical methods are needed to
              automate the analysis process and to exploit the complex data structure and
              extensive scientific knowledge underlying such studies. Computational inference
              refers to statistical modeling and inference procedures that rely on intensive
              computation to extract information from large scale data and knowledge-based
              models. The board, long term goal of this project is to advance the
              methodologies of computational inference and apply them towards the solution of
              several important problems in the aforementioned scientific areas. 

A
              critical step in almost all large scale computational inference procedure is
              the study of the posterior density through Monte Carlo sampling (or the related
              problem of studying the likelihood function). Successful sampling leads
              immediately to the inference of any parameter or prediction of interest to the
              investigator. Thus the first specific goal of this project is to develop Monte
              Carlo simulation methods that are effective in sampling complex, multimodal
              distributions. Advances in this core computational problem will not only
              facilitate effective computational inference, but will also be of interest to
              other scientific tasks such as simulation of molecular structures and
              combinatorial optimization. Three approaches will be investigated: a) an
              evolutionary Monte Carlo approach where a population of structures are evolved
              and individual structures, including recombinant ones, are continuously
              competing for survival in the population, b) further development of sequential
              importance sampling and dynamic importance sampling through better methods to
              handle skewed weight distributions, c) multi-level computational models. Hybrid
              algorithms combining the above approaches will also be investigated. Some of
              these methods will be used to investigate the grand-challenge problem of
              understanding the energy landscape of protein conformation. 

The second
              specific goal of this project is the development of computational inference
              tools for two further scientifc problems: i) multiple alignment and clustering
              of DNA and protein sequences based on hidden Markov models, and the use of
              these in the analysis of human genome coding regions, ii) the development of
              hierarchical computational models for low-level vision task such as texture
              recognition and primal sketching. 

If successful, the methods developed in
              this project will enable the wider application of computational inference and
              will also result in direct contributions to three problems of considerable
              importance in the current scientific frontier.
