Title       : Myxococcus Xanthus C-signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0090946

Award Number: 0090946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Shimkets   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Contact-dependent cell-cell signaling is essential for development of organisms
              from prokaryotes to humans though the mechanisms are poorly understood.  The
              objective of this project is to examine the molecular basis of C-signaling,
              which is essential for fruiting body development of Myxococcus xanthus. 
              C-signaling is initiated by contact between cells and leads to changes in gene
              expression that mediate multicellular morphogenesis.  CsgA, the only known
              protein involved in C-signal production, contains consensus motifs found in the
              short chain alcohol dehydrogenase (SCAD) family.  Serine appears to be a
              substrate for the enzyme.  It is likely that either CsgA or its enzymatic
              product is transferred between cells to initiate C-signaling, but the
              compartmentalization of the signaling components remains unclear.  The
              enzymology of CsgA will be examined with regard to the range of substrates
              utilized.  The chemical product(s) of each reaction will be assayed,
              identified, and purified.  The biological activity of the products will be
              examined to determine whether they rescue development of csgA mutants. 
              Finally, NAD+  analogs that inhibit CsgA enzyme activity in vitro will be used
              to determine whether CsgA enzyme activity is essential for C-signaling in vivo.
               The subcellular location of CsgA and its interaction with other proteins will
              be determined by biochemical and genetic approaches including inner and outer
              membrane separation, microscopy, and the use of the yeast two hybrid system to
              identify interacting proteins.  Finally, a model will be developed to explain
              C-signaling.  This project is expected to advance our knowledge in several
              important areas including prokaryotic development and contact-dependent cell
              interactions.  The project will also result in laboratory training of graduate
              and undergraduate students, some of whom will be minority and female students. 
              The results will be disseminated through presentations at meetings and
              publication in journals.  The major benefits will be an improvement in the
              scientific literacy of a segment of the population, and an improved
              understanding of prokaryotic biology and diversity.

