Title       : Theoretical Investigations in Classical and Quantum Gravity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2002  
File        : a0090091

Award Number: 0090091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $904472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhay Ashtekar ashtekar@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge A. Pullin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Penrose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A number of projects in theoretical gravitational physics will be
completed. In
              the first set, issues pertaining to black holes will be
analyzed using a new
              paradigm, introduced recently by Ashtekar's
group.  In particular, physical
              information will be extracted from
numerical simulations of black hole mergers
              in regions where gravity
is so strong that effects of Einstein's general
              relativity dominate.
In the second set, mathematical issues pertaining to the
              structure and
solutions of Einstein's general relativity will be resolved
              using
``Twistor theory'' introduced by Roger Penrose and developed by
              his
research group. The third set contains a number of projects pertaining
to
              quantum gravity, the theory that will unify general relativity with
quantum
              physics. Suitable approximation methods will be developed by
the research
              groups of Ashtekar and Pullin to better understand the
structure of a quantum
              gravity theory, that is being developed by the
PIs and others, and to make
              physical predictions which could be tested
in the near future.

These
              projects interlink several fields: general relativity,
computational physics,
              astrophysics, quantum theory and several
branches of geometry. For example,
              the first set of projects is based
on Einstein's equations of general
              relativity but the accurate
estimates of the mass and spin of the final black
              hole and of the
energy radiated in the process, obtained from them, will have
              impact
on astrophysics in general and to gravitational wave physics
              in
particular. The second set will use novel techniques from
              algebraic
geometry to solve Einstein's equations. Unification of
              general
relativity and quantum physics is perhaps the most outstanding
              open
problem in fundamental physics today. The proposed projects in the
third
              set combine sophisticated techniques from modern mathematics and
theoretical
              physics to probe the nature of space-time geometry at the
smallest scales
              conceivable today. Through his general relativity
theory, Einstein proposed
              that geometry is a physical entity.  Some of
our projects are aimed at
              elevating Einstein's vision to the quantum
world showing, in particular, that
              matter, radiation and geometry can
be converted in to one another through
              quantum processes involving
gravity.  Other projects will use astronomical
              observations of gamma
ray bursts from ongoing NASA missions to directly probe
              the
ramifications of these novel quantum effects. This will be among
              the
first systematic efforts at confronting the rather abstract
              quantum
gravity theory with concrete experiments.

