Title       : North Carolina Technology Development Initiative: A Novel Approach to Assess,
               Disseminate and Test a University/Venture Capital/Incubator Partnership Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0090595

Award Number: 0090595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $535766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russ Lea rlea@ga.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of N C Gen Admin Off
	      PO Box 2688
	      Chapel Hill, NC  275152688    919/962-4557

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090595		
Lea			

This award is to the University of North Carolina System to
              support the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners include the University of North Carolina
              System; Centennial Venture Partners Fund; Longleaf Venture Fund; NC
              Technological Development Authority; NC Biotechnology Center; Research Triangle
              Institute; NC Board of Science and Technology; NC Center for Entrepreneurship
              and Technology; NC Economic Development Regions.

Proposed Activities
This
              award has the following activities: education; invention prospecting;
              technology assessment; intellectual property management; business development
              planning and fundability assessment; license negotiations; venture capital
              networking; strategic planning for involving the entire University of North
              Carolina system.

Proposed Innovation
The proposed activities will study
              technology transfer in a multi-institutional setting to develop models for
              improved tech transfer methods.  It will involve characterization of successful
              technology transfer, develop a training program to facilitate faculty
              understanding of technology transfer, enhance innovation, develop a model to
              optimize the capability of each campus type to work with the state's science
              and technology infrastructure to manage intellectual property for the economic
              development of the state.

Potential Economic Impact
General increase in
              economic well being in North Carolina plus more involvement of the University
              of North Carolina System in the innovation process will occur.

Potential
              Societal Impact
Potential societal impacts include more economic growth for
              the region; jobs for university graduates; higher salaries for the
              underdeveloped regions of the state.



