Title       : RUI - Developmental Differences in Responses to T Cell Receptor Stimulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0090921

Award Number: 0090921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer A. Punt jpunt@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Mature CD4+CD8- and CD8+CD8- (single positive or SP) T lymphocytes develop
              from immature CD4+CD8+ (double positive or DP) thymocytes during transit
              through the thymus. The transition of cells from the DP to the SP stage is
              governed by signals generated by interactions between the T cell receptor (TCR)
              and MHC/antigen complexes encountered in the thymus. Depending on the affinity
              of the interactions, and involvement of select co-stimulatory molecules, DP
              cells will either mature or undergo cell death (apoptosis). In particular, high
              affinity signals mediated by the TCR induce the death of immature DP
              thymocytes. However, once they mature to the SP T cell stage, they respond
              quite differently to high affinity TCR stimulation. Instead of inducing
              apoptosis, SP T cells are induced to proliferate. This project reflects an
              interest in the molecular basis for this difference in response to TCR signals
              between precursors and product cell populations.
 

During the previous NSF
              funding period, a marked cellular difference in the response of immature and
              mature T cells to TCR signals was demonstrated. The investigators found that,
              unlike mature SP T cells, immature DP thymocytes failed to recruit lipid rafts
              to the site of TCR stimulation.  Lipid rafts are specialized subdomains in the
              lipid membrane that are enriched for a variety of critical signaling molecules
              and targets that can modulate quantitatively and qualitatively TCR signaling.
              The data further indicated that lipid raft recruitment required PI 3-kinase
              activity in mature SP T cells and led the investigators to advance a
              mechanistic model for raft recruitment. The investigators postulated that
              immature DP thymocytes failed to recruit lipid rafts because they failed to
              optimally activate the lipid kinase, PI-3 kinase, in response to TCR signals.
              Further, they suggested that the failure to recruit rafts increased the
              susceptibility of DP thymocytes to TCR- induced cell death by compromising the
              activation of a critical regulator of survival and proliferation, Akt/PKB.
              These hypotheses will be directly addressed by this research.

