Title       : Interactions Between Neurohormonal Systems: Studies at the Cellular Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0090730

Award Number: 0090730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Kravitz edward_kravitz@hms.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   A common behavior among animals is aggression, which can occur during
              competition for food, mates, or other limited resources.  As a consequence of
              winning or losing fights with other individuals in the same social group,
              subsequent behavioral patterns change, as winners can dominate losers.  A
              biochemical compound, the amine serotonin, is known to be important in
              aggression, but other hormonal substances also have been implicated including
              peptides and steroids, which may interact with amines.  The lobster is a social
              crustacean that shows complex stereotyped behavior, and offers the opportunity
              to examine the hormonal modulation of behavior at the level of single
              identifiable cells in the brain.  Specific sets of cells containing amines have
              been mapped, and a group of neurons containing stress-related peptides has been
              identified that interact with the amine neuron sets.  This project examines the
              cellular networks of the lobster neurons containing and responsive to serotonin
              and certain peptides and steroids.  Electrophysiological recordings and
              morphological analyses will reveal how the systems are activated, and detail
              the synaptic interactions and circuitry involved.
    Results will be
              important for behavioral neuroscience as well as neuroendocrinology, in
              clarifying cellular mechanisms underlying the hormonal regulation of
              aggression, which is an important behavior in humans as well as animals.  This
              project also will have an impact through its excellent integration of education
              and training with research, including worldwide collaborations and outreach to
              under-represented groups.


