Title       : Digital Government: Software Architectures for Microsimulation of Urban
               Development, Transportation, and Environmental Impact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0090832

Award Number: 0090832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence Brandt                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Borning borning@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Notkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Waddell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1706      DIGITAL GOVERNMENT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1387,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0090832
Alan Borning
University of Washington

TITLE:  Software
              Architectures for Microsimulation of Urban Development, Transportation and
              Environmental Impact

Patterns of land use and available transportation
              systems play critical role in determining the economic vitality, livability,
              and sustainability of urban areas.  Transportation interacts strongly with land
              use; different kinds of transportation systems induce different patterns of
              land use, while at the same time, different kinds of land use induce demands
              for different kinds of transportation systems.  Both land use and
              transportation have substantial environmental effects, in particular on
              emissions, resource consumption and open space.  Government policies and
              investments affect patterns of land use and transportation in many complex and
              sometimes unintended ways.

This proposal will develop a fully disaggregated
              Microsimulation system for modeling urban development and government
              investments and policies related to transportation, land use and environment. 
              Technical support can play a critical role in fostering informed civic
              deliberation and debate on these issues by allowing urban planners and
              stakeholders to be able to consider different scenarios-packages of possible
              policies and investments-and then, based on these alternatives, model the
              effects of these scenarios on patterns of urban growth and redevelopment, of
              transportation usage, and resource consumption, over periods of twenty or more
              years.  This proposal will concentrate on two related computer science areas;
              the software engineering issues that arise in the design and construction of
              such a large, complex model, and the human computer interaction issues that
              arise in using it.

A set of government partnerships is an integral part of
              this research.  At the federal level, there are commitments from the Federal
              Highway Administration and the Federal Transit Administration (both units in
              the Department of Transportation), and at the local level, from the Puget Sound
              Regional Council, the governmental organization charged with land use and
              transportation planning.

