Title       : Neuroanatomy of Song Perception in Female Songbirds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0090963

Award Number: 0090963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338505             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. DeVoogd tjd5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

        This proposal will study neural and behavioral correlates of
              auditory learning using song in songbirds.  Song learning occurs during a
              sensitive period early in development, and a song derived from what was learned
              is produced by male songbirds throughout adult life.  Song is a mode of
              communication, in which the receiver must be able to decode the message of the
              sender.  In many species, males sing to females. While much is known of
              conditions for song acquisition and of the neural system which supports song
              production in males, little is known of song perception in general and, in
              particular, of how the brains of females learn about, process and respond to
              song.  The experiments in this proposal use complementary behavioral,
              anatomical and functional methods to study the role of early experience in
              development of song perception and its neural substrate in females.  They also
              assess whether brain effects of abnormal early experience can be reversed by
              providing appropriate experience to older animals.
        The experiments
              will address important issues in neurobiology.  First, does learning during
              early "sensitive" periods use the same brain mechanisms as later, more
              conventional learning?  Second, which brain areas are used for complex auditory
              learning?  Related to this, are the changes in these areas more evident in
              females than in males (since the females make decisions based on this
              information that seem more precise than decisions made by males)?  Third, are
              the effects of this early learning (or lack of it) permanent, or can the
              information (and the brain areas that store it) be modified later on?  Female
              songbirds are an ideal system in which to study these issues.



