Title       : Large-Scale Distributed Cortical Networks in Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0090717

Award Number: 0090717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Bressler bressler@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mingzhou Ding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Visual processing in the mammalian brain is not done simply with several
              parallel channels leading to higher areas.  We now know that visual input
              pathways diverge into multiple processing streams, with feedback at all levels
              in each stream and crosstalk between streams.  The visual cortex can be seen in
              this view at a dynamic system of interconnected areas interacting flexibly in
              different combinations at different stages of processing.  This renewal project
              builds on technological advances and analytical tools for with high spatial,
              temporal and frequency resolution, developed from prior support.  These
              comprehensive advances make it possible to monitor multi-area functional
              interdependency patterns that arise in the cortex, and to measure and analyze
              how one cortical area can affect others.  The novel approach in the current
              project is to examine the mesoscopic scale of functional brain organization,
              offering a complementary level between the microscopic recording of single cell
              activity in a local area or layer, and the macroscopic derivation of images
              from whole brains using scanning technologies such as PET and fMRI. 
  
              Results will have an impact by providing new insights into the dynamics of
              functional interdependency in the visual cortex, and going beyond visual
              neuroscience to make available digital signal processing tools potentially
              useful for a handling large-scale neural systems in a range of cognitive
              studies, and potentially leading to designing better complex artificial neural
              networks.  This project also provides excellent cross-disciplinary training
              opportunities for students.

