Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Syntax of Prerelatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2000  
File        : a0090162

Award Number: 0090162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabine Iatridou iatridou@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Pesetsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves fieldwork on relative clauses (RCs) in two Uto-Aztecan
              languages, Hiaki (Yaqui) and O'odham (Papago), as part of a dissertation
              project on the syntax and typology of pre-nominal and post-nominal relative
              clauses.

Pre- and post-relatives differ systematically. In general, only
              postrelatives employ finite verbs, relative pronouns, and the complementizer
              used in sentential complementation. The proposed study will investigate the
              correlations between pre- and postrelatives and the correlations between them
              and other types of RCs that have been identified in the literature. Central
              questions are:

1. Why do these correlations exist?

2. What criteria
              determine the choice of prerelative versus postrelative across languages?

Of
              special interest is the existence of languages whose RCs do not fit neatly into
              the typology that seems adequate for the majority of languages studied to date,
              languages whose RCs show properties characteristic of both pre- and
              postrelatives. The analysis of these languages will help to understand the true
              shape of the typology, and the reasons the facts are what they are.

Hiaki
              and O'odham are 'mixed' languages in this sense. O'odham uses both pre- and
              postrelatives. Hiaki employs postrelatives with all the properties typical of
              prerelatives. The proposed project will investigate the RCs of both languages
              by conducting fieldwork and analyzing native texts. The results of this
              research are necessary prerequisites for the theoretical objective of the
              project.

Hiaki and O'odham are endangered languages. The description of
              their RC-constructions gained by fieldwork and text-analysis will also be used
              to develop teaching materials. All fieldwork data will be recorded digitally.
              They will also be used as data for the webbased dictionary-project on O'odham,
              Navajo, and Hiaki that is currently underway at the University of Arizona.
