Title       : CAREER: Ecology of Chlororespiring Bacterial Populations and Biochemical Studies
               of the Dehalogenating Enzyme Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0090496

Award Number: 0090496
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank E. Loeffler frank.loeffler@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1228,1305,9169,9177,9178,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Most living beings we observe in nature breathe oxygen, a prerequisite for the
              existence of aerobic organisms, including humans.  In many lake and river
              sediments or waterlogged soils oxygen is not available, yet many bacteria
              thrive in such oxygen-depleted (anaerobic) environments.  Instead of oxygen,
              anaerobic bacteria use other compounds to drive respiration, compounds such as
              nitrate, sulfate, or, as recent discoveries have demonstrated, chlorinated
              chemicals.  Respiration using chlorinated compounds destroys those chlorinated
              chemicals, and hence, diminishes toxicity to humans.  

This project will
              elucidate distribution, abundance, diversity, physiology, and ecological
              function of bacterial populations that respire with chlorinated compounds.  The
              PI will characterize the enzymes involved, explore the diversity of
              dechlorinating enzyme systems in these bacteria, and explore the evolution of
              these systems.  Samples from a variety of geographically distinct locations
              (including Antarctica, Siberian permafrost, the deep subsurface, hydrothermal
              vents, and hot springs) will be examined, and bacterial populations of interest
              will be studied in detail.  State-of-the-art nucleic acid-based tools will be
              used and improved to detect, monitor, and quantify these organisms.  Because
              man-made chlorinated compounds (e.g. pesticides, solvents, etc.) are major
              environmental pollutants, this project, aimed at understanding the basic
              biology and ecology of chlororespiring bacteria, can provide a basis for
              exploring how these specialized organisms can be exploited to assist in
              clean-up efforts at contaminated sites.

This is a CAREER award, integrating
              research and educational activities.  Undergraduate and graduate students will
              be involved in this research project. To improve minority participation and
              faculty interaction, a Visiting Student Researcher Development (VSRD) program
              with the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez will be initiated.  In addition,
              high school teachers (and their students) will be given an opportunity to
              experience new technologies by participating in a summer program of scientific
              inquiry.

