Title       : Molecular Characterization of Novel Rp1 Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0090883

Award Number: 0090883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scot H. Hulbert shulbrt@plantpath.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rp1 is a complex disease resistance locus of maize that has been extensively
              characterized genetically.  The Rp1 haplotypes in different maize lines are
              composed of variable numbers of members of an NBS-LRR gene family.  This class
              of gene is thought to function by recognizing ligands from pathogens and then
              activating defense responses.  Recent genetic studies have indicated the
              different rp1 family members mispair and recombine frequently in meiosis, and
              the crossover events are typically intragenic and occur throughout the genes. 
              A large collection of novel rp1 haplotypes has now been generated which confer
              a variety of novel phenotypes.  These phenotypes include new race
              specificities, presumably by the ability to recognize novel pathogen ligands. 
              They also include nonspecific resistance to multiple rust species, lesion mimic
              and necrotic phenotypes.  Progress has been made in characterizing these
              variant haplotypes and recombinant genes have been isolated from haplotypes
              conferring lesion mimic phenotypes or modified resistance.  Recombinant genes
              will now be expressed in transgenic plants to verify they confer the novel
              phenotypes.  Recombinant genes from haplotypes with novel race specificities
              and necrotic phenotypes will be isolated and compared to their parental genes
              to examine the mechanism by which they arose.  These experiments will elucidate
              the mechanisms in which complex resistance loci like rp1 evolve and provide a
              framework for how these genes might be manipulated to engineer effective and
              durable disease resistance. 


