Title       : C Signal-Dependent Gene Expression in Myxococcus xanthus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0090478

Award Number: 0090478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee R. Kroos kroos@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In nature, bacteria exist as members of complex communities. Cells interact in
              these communities, sending signals to each other and changing their behavior in
              response. These groups of bacteria play a vital role in recycling carbon,
              nitrogen, and other elements in the global ecosystem.  Often, the mixed
              population of bacteria is on or in another living organism, and interacts with
              its host.  Understanding how bacteria interact with each other and with their
              hosts is a fundamental challenge in biology.  Myxococcus xanthus provides a
              very attractive experimental system to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of
              interactions between bacterial cells.  Swarms of these bacteria glide over
              solid surfaces, secreting substances that kill and digest prey bacteria.  When
              starved, M. xanthus cells move to aggregation centers and construct a nascent
              fruiting body. Within the fruiting body, rod-shaped cells differentiate into
              spherical, dormant spores.  This spectacular developmental process is regulated
              by cell-cell interactions.   M. xanthus is very amenable to genetic and
              biochemical analyses at the molecular level.  In contrast, molecular analysis
              of cell-cell interactions in mixed populations of bacteria is extremely
              difficult.  As methods to study complex communities improve, research to
              understand their mechanisms of signaling and response will be facilitated by
              the paradigms learned from model organisms like M. xanthus.  Studies of C
              signaling during M. xanthus development are establishing a new paradigm for how
              bacterial cells can interact.  C signaling involves CsgA, a protein produced in
              the developing cells that becomes associated with the cell surface.  CsgA
              appears to have enzymatic activity, but the substrate is unknown. It has been
              proposed that either CsgA itself or the product of its enzymatic activity is
              exchanged upon end-to-end contact between cells. C signaling induces several
              responses in recipient cells. It appears to maintain the stringent response,
              preventing cells from resuming growth on amino acids that are produced early in
              development, so these amino acids are instead used for macromolecular synthesis
              during development.  C signaling also regulates cell movements, allowing
              macroscopic patterns called ripples and aggregates to form, and it regulates
              developmental gene expression and sporulation.  Intriguingly, the different
              responses to C signaling require different levels of CsgA, and the level of
              CsgA rises during development because C signaling stimulates CsgA production.
              Extensive end-to-end contacts between cells in the nascent fruiting body have
              been proposed to allow efficient C signaling. The high level of CsgA that
              results within the fruiting body may trigger sporulation.  This research aims
              to determine the molecular mechanisms of developmental gene expression in
              response to C signaling.  Preliminary studies have characterized the DNA
              regulatory regions of two loci that depend partially on C signaling for
              expression and one that depends absolutely on C signaling.  All three regions
              have one or more sequences matching the consensus CAYYCCY (called the C box; Y
              means pyrimidine) near the transcriptional start site.  The one that depends
              absolutely on C signaling also has an upstream repeat sequence that is needed
              for expression. Mutational analyses will be used to define the sequence
              features of the C box and the upstream repeat that are important for
              expression.  To identify proteins directly involved in the regulation of C
              signal-dependent genes, several approaches will be used.  Preliminary results
              showing that the FruA protein binds to promoter regions of  C signal-dependent
              genes will be extended in collaboration with L. Sogaard-Andersen, using in
              vitro footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The technique of
              in vivo cross-linking and immunoprecipitation will be adapted for use in
              bacteria to examine FruA binding to promoter regions.  Yeast one-hybrid screens
              will be performed to identify proteins that bind specifically to DNA sequences
              shown by mutational analyses to be important for expression. Transcription of a
              C signal-dependent  gene will be reconstituted in vitro to identify the form of
              RNA polymerase involved and its associated sigma factor.   Insights gained from
              research in this area should find application in environmental cleanup,
              industrial and agricultural practices.
