Title       : RCN: "Deep Time": A Comprehensive Phylogenetic Tree of Living and Fossil
               Angiosperms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0090283

Award Number: 0090283
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499351             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Soltis dsoltis@botany.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Dilcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela S. Soltis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1664,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0090283
Dr. Douglas E. Soltis

The flowering plants, consisting of
              approximately 300,000 species, are by far the largest group of land plants, yet
              their origin and early diversification have long been problematic.  However,
              extensive collaborations among plant scientists using molecular tools are
              clarifying the major lineages of flowering plants and their relationships.  At
              the same time, numerous breakthroughs have also occurred in the field of
              paleobotany, and views of early angiosperm diversity have greatly improved
              through the recent description of numerous fossils.   Integrating these fossils
              into the tree of living taxa remains essential for understanding both the
              origin of living flowering plants and the origins of morphological features. 
              Such attempts at integration have been rare for any group of organism; there
              has been surprisingly little communication between paleontologists and plant
              scientists who study the relationships of living organisms (i.e.,
              systematists).  
	This RCN grant will facilitate, coordinate, and stimulate
              research at the interface of paleobotany, geology, and
              systematics/phylogenetics.  Scientists in the network will explore the ways in
              which flowering plant fossils can be appropriately integrated into the tree of
              life that is now available for living organisms, with the ultimate goal of
              forming a comprehensive "family tree of relationships" for both living and
              fossil flowering plants.  They envision five components for discussion:  (1)
              Careful evaluation of the fossil record, including the establishment of a
              priority list of the best fossils for detailed study; (2) Critical appraisal of
              the age of fossils; (3) Construction of a morphological data set for fossils
              and extant flowering plants; (4) Integration of fossils into the flowering
              plant tree; and (5) Calibration of the times at which major groups of flowering
              plants diverged.  The group will implement annual meetings, workshops, student
              travel awards, student research training awards, and website development.  With
              the recent developments in both paleobotany and the study of relationships
              among living flowering plants, the timing is appropriate for integration of
              these fields.  The theory and methodology developed will be applicable to the
              integration of paleontology and living organisms on a broader scale.
