Title       : Research Coordination Networks in Biological Sciences: A Phylogeny for Kingdom
               Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0090301

Award Number: 0090301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meredith Blackwell mblackwell@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Spatafora  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1664,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0090301
Blackwell, Spatafora, Taylor
	Mycologists embraced molecular
              phylogenetics early, and some of the techniques pioneered for use with fungi
              have proved equally useful in other organisms, including plants, such as the
              nuclear ribosomal Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) regions. During the last
              decade great progress has been made toward constructing a single phylogenetic
              classification of fungi, but the current data sets rely upon DNA sequences from
              only 800 or so fungal taxa, out of an estimated 80,000 described species of
              fungi, or about 1% representation. Furthermore, some mycologists have argued
              that there may be over a million species of fungi still to describe, especially
              from tropical and other regions of the world poorly surveyed for microbial and
              fungal diversity. This Research Coordination Network (RCN) award will
              facilitate expanded interactions among current workers in the field and help to
              attract new researchers to the effort, to construct a phylogeny of the Kingdom
              Fungi, in turn to facilitate the discovery, identification, and incorporation
              into a taxonomic framework of novel fungal taxa across all four major phyla of
              fungi, Chytridiomycetes, Zygomycetes, Basidiomycetes, and Ascomycetes (and
              their asexual and lichenized relatives). 
	A non-exclusive, gender (10 women
              of 31 named participants) and age (27-80 years) diverse group of mycologists
              will create the research and education network, to execute three goals: (1)
              promote fungal phylogenetics; (2) make available identification aids for fungi;
              and (3) provide a phylogeny and educational materials to mycologists and
              teachers. Participants will meet at least twice a year in each of the five
              years of funding to develop a set of exemplar taxa for phylogenetic analysis,
              choose morphological and molecular characters for study, discuss analytical
              methods appropriate to these characters, foster cooperation and collaboration
              for collection and vouchering of large data sets (including with European
              colleagues in the FungalNet consortium), and coordinate educational
              initiatives. Efforts are underway to bring increased numbers of postdoctoral
              associates, graduate students, and undergraduates into the enterprise, along
              with foreign colleagues. Rapid communication will be accomplished by electronic
              means and through public access to a web site established for the RCN activity.
              Phylogenetic research on fungi will benefit numerous fields like biomedical and
              pharmaceutical research, animal and plant pathology, food science,
              bioprospecting, and environmental analysis and monitoring. 

