Title       : Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of Plant Mitochondrial Transcription
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0090658

Award Number: 0090658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Stern ds28@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mitochondrial function is essential for plant metabolism and male fertility, yet
              little is known of the mechanisms regulating mitochondrial gene expression, in
              particular the role of the nucleus.  Because mitochondria contain few genes,
              the vast majority of its proteins are nucleus encoded, including all factors
              required for the first committed step in gene expression, transcription
              initiation.  This project addresses the role of nuclear gene products in
              mitochondrial transcription and by extension, the role of mitochondrial gene
              expression during vegetative and reproductive stages. The organism chosen for
              this work is maize, an important crop species for which appropriate genetic and
              molecular resources are available.
The project was initiated using in vitro
              transcription to define promoter regulatory elements. Subsequently, a gene
              encoding the core subunit of the RNA polymerase was identified and the product,
              RpoTm, was found to be related to those of phages such as T3 and T7. Because
              RpoTm alone cannot recognize mitochondrial promoters, a search for possible
              transcription specificity factors was carried out, and four candidates were
              obtained. These include three genes that encode DNA binding proteins, and an
              ortholog of bacterial sigma-70.  One possibility is that each of these proteins
              lends a particular specificity to the polymerase and if so, this would allow a
              fine-tuning of mitochondrial function during development and gametogenesis.
              This need for flexibility could explain why plant mitochondrial transcription
              would be more complex that the cognate systems in fungi and animals.  To
              determine the form(s) and composition of mitochondrial RNA polymerase, and the
              role of each of these in plant function, experiments will be conducted that use
              reverse genetic and biochemical approaches. Reverse genetics will entail the
              phenotypic and biochemical characterization of Mutator transposon insertion
              loss-of-function alleles of rpoTm and one or more of the possible transcription
              factors. If technology permits, an antisense approach will be used to obtain
              results more rapidly. Mutant plants have already been obtained for RpoTm and
              will be analyzed first. In addition to direct measurements of transcription
              products, there may be specific developmental responses to the mutations. For
              example, the loss-of-function allele of rpoTm may reduce pollen vigor and the
              frequency of embryo development, but has no apparent effect on the viability of
              female gametophytes.  Therefore, pollen morphology and competitiveness will be
              examined in segregating plants, as well as embryo structure. To analyze effects
              in vegetative tissues, mosaic plants will be constructed that will develop
              mutant sectors in an otherwise wild-type background. A second and parallel
              objective is to reconstitute the RNA polymerase using the proteins described
              above, following expression in bacterial or insect cells.  This will lead to a
              greater understanding of the mechanism of promoter recognition, and aid in
              interpreting the mutant
phenotypes. The concomitant use of genetic and
              biochemical techniques will provide broad training to those involved in the
              project.  In addition, undergraduate students will be involved in the genetic
              aspects, giving them early exposure to plant biology that may encourage them in
              this career path, or at least dramatically improve their scientific literacy.

