Title       : Prototeomics of the Thylakoids from Arabidopsis Thaliana; Protein Identification
               and Interactions, Post-Translational Modifications and Differential Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0090942

Award Number: 0090942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaas VanWijk kv35@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1132,1145,1158,1168,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The chloroplasts in green algae and higher plants are predicted to contain
              around 2500-3000 different proteins, corresponding to 10-12% of the total plant
              proteome. Chloroplasts possess thylakoid membranes with four multi-subunit
              protein complexes, comprising together at least 66 different proteins and
              carrying out the photosynthetic reactions. Assembly of these complexes involves
              targeting, insertion, processing as well as ligation of cofactors, and requires
              regulation at transcriptional, translational and post-translational levels. At
              least 100 proteins involved in such biogenesis related processes should be
              present in the thylakoid membrane, but only a few have been identified so far.
              With the completion of the Arabidopsis thaliana genome and the improvement of
              2-dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry (MS), a systematic
              characterization of the thylakoid proteome has become feasible.  The objective
              of this project is to systematically characterize the thylakoid proteome of
              Arabidopsis thaliana. This characterization includes a global identification of
              most thylakoid proteins and their protein-protein interactions. Highly
              reproducible 2-dimensional electrophoresis, non-denaturing biochemical
              separation techniques, and state of the art mass spectrometers will be employed
              to obtain this characterization in a time-effective manner. On-line MS will be
              carried out for the notoriously difficult identification of small proteins or
              very hydrophobic integral membrane proteins. Together this will give a unique
              overview of the thylakoid proteome. In addition, it will also enable more
              rational design (reverse) genetic strategies for studies of thylakoid
              biogenesis and maintenance. A successful realization of the project could serve
              also to deepen our general understanding of organelle biogenesis, as well as
              inner membrane biogenesis of prokaryotes. In summary, the objectives of this
              project are:I. Systematic identification of soluble and peripheral thylakoid
              proteins by mass spectrometry from gel-separated proteins from 1-dimensional
              and 2-dimensional gels.  II. Identification of integral thylakoid membrane
              proteins by fractionation in organic solvents and on-line tandem mass
              spectrometry (reverse phase HPLC).  III. Selected identification of (low
              abundant) thylakoid protein complexes and protein-protein interactions by
              non-denaturing purification methods and mass spectrometry.  IV. Analysis of
              chloroplast targeting signals and feedback to prediction programs and analysis
              of putative discrepancies between predicted protein sequences (from cDNA or
              genomic DNA) and experimental determined protein sequences.  V. Development of
              a professional custom built proteomics LIM (laboratory information management)
              system, including a web interface.
