Title       : The Norm of Reaction and Phenotypic Plasticity: A Philosophical and Historical
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0090036

Award Number: 0090036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sahotra Sarkar sarkar@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Abstract:  
SES 00-90036
Sahotra Sarkar 
The Norm of Reaction and
              Phenotypic Plasticity: A Philosophical and Historical Analysis


The concept
              of a norm of reaction was introduced in 1909 by Richard Woltereck as both a
              theoretical concept and a visual depiction to capture phenotypic plasticity: 
              the variability of the phenotypic response of genetically identical organisms
              subjected to different environmental regimes.  The new concept was also
              supposed to reconcile Mendelian variation with Darwinian selection and help
              resolve a sometimes virulent dispute about the nature of evolution. The norm of
              reaction largely disappeared from Western genetics for the next thirty years,
              though its use flourished in the Soviet Union until the suppression of genetics
              there during the Lysenko era. Repatriated to the West by Theodosius Dobzhansky
              in 1937, the norm of reaction began to be used sporadically in the West after
              1950 and until the 1970s, when its evolutionary etiology emerged as a locus of
              significant theoretical research and controversy. In the 1990s molecular
              techniques began to be deployed to resolve the question whether reaction norms
              arose as a result of direct selection for genes for plasticity or whether they
              arose as a result of selection on other traits. Meanwhile, the precise
              conceptualization of the term norm of reaction went through at least three
              significant shifts. 

The main objective of this project is to trace the
              history of the norm of reaction from 1909 to 1999, and to investigate why its
              use flourished or disappeared in different intellectual and social contexts,
              why its meanings shifted, and what methodological lessons can be gleaned from
              the controversy over its evolutionary etiology. The key questions include: (i)
              whether the ambient conceptual framework of genetics in different research
              traditions (especially in the case of Soviet evolutionary genetics) can explain
              these changes; (ii) if so, what intellectual and other factors (for instance,
              dialectical materialism) may be responsible for these ambient frameworks; (iii)
              whether the choice of model organisms (especially animal models instead of
              plants) can explain some of the mentioned changes in the popularity of the use
              of reaction norms; (iv) to what extent the disputes over the evolution of
              phenotypic plasticity and reaction norms were over substantive issues and to
              what extent they were methodological; (v) why specific modeling strategies
              (such as optimization and quantitative genetic techniques as well as explicit
              genetic models) were introduced, and sometimes rejected, while exploring the
              evolutionary etiology of reaction norms; and (vi) whether molecularization is
              similarly leading to shifts in the meaning and scope of the term.

Besides
              one paper by Raphael Falk (Hebrew University of Jerusalem) and Dr. Sarkar's
              preliminary work, there is almost no historical or philosophical analysis of
              the norm of reaction. This project seeks to remove this lacuna in the history
              of genetics and evolutionary biology. Dr. Sarkar intends to produce a number of
              historical and philosophical papers, and the results eventually will be
              synthesized into a book-length monograph.

