Title       : Redox Control in the Development and Evolution of Colonial Hydroids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0090580

Award Number: 0090580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil W. Blackstone neilb@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In contrast to the short-lived model organisms most frequently studied by
              biologists (e.g., worms, flies, and mice), clonal colonial animals are
              relatively persistent and long-lived, occupying a given habitat for long
              periods of time.  Such longevity presents environmental challenges not faced by
              more ephemeral organisms.  Food supply, for instance, may vary in space and
              time in such habitats, and adjusting the timing and spacing of feeding
              structures (polyps) and gastrovascular connections may represent a major
              challenge for animals such as colonial hydroids.  Signaling by redox state
              (e.g., the relative oxidation or reduction of mitochondrial electron carriers
              and of the NAD+/NADH pool) is a reliable mechanism by which such an
              environmental signal can be transduced into pattern-forming gene activity.  For
              instance, if a growing hydroid colony encounters an area locally rich in food,
              polyps in the food-rich area will experience a surfeit of nutrients.  These
              nutrients will trigger contractions of polyp epitheliomuscular cells and
              resulting gastrovascular flow, and the colony's local redox state may be
              altered relative to that outside the food-rich area.  If such a metabolic
              gradient can differentially affect the timing of polyp and stolon tip
              development, adaptive changes in the local pattern of colony development can
              result.

Using image analysis to assess colony development, polarographic
              measures to quantify oxygen uptake, fluorescent microscopy of NAD(P)H to
              measure redox state, fluorescent microscopy of 2', 7'-dichlorofluorescin
              diacetate to visualize reactive oxygen species, and video microscopy to
              quantify gastrovascular flow, this proposal will elucidate the role of redox
              control in adaptive development of colonial hydroids. 
  
This work promises
              a clearer understanding of redox signaling and animal diversity.  Generally,
              the animal "model systems" of modern biology are short-lived, sexually
              reproducing, and aclonal.  Such organisms are unlikely to use redox signals to
              iterate and pattern themselves in the fashion described here.  Thus this work
              on simple, primitive, colonial animals can provide insight into redox signaling
              when it does occur in more derived animals, as for instance in the human
              vascular system.

