Title       : Defect Mediated Thin Film Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  2002   
File        : a0090079

Award Number: 0090079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl Sieradzki Karl.Sieradzki@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Demitris A. Kouris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0090079
Sieradzki

New approaches are employed to electrodeposit atomically
              flat heteroepitaxial overlayers of quality similar to that obtained by ultra
              high vacuum techniques at elevated temperature.  An important issue covered in
              this grant is the generality of these new electrodeposition techniques. A
              number of heteroepitaxial metal/metal and metal/semiconductor systems are
              examined to address issues related to substrate orientation and electrolyte
              composition.  A sensitive in situ stress monitoring technique is employed to
              study stress relaxation during growth.  Using data from in situ measurements of
              stress evolution, important thermodynamic parameters are determined such as
              interface stresses that characterize overlayer/substrate systems. A special
              high speed (25 images per second with image sizes of at 300 x 300 pixels)
              scanning tunneling microscope (STM) is used to investigate details of the
              atomic scale kinetic processes that allow defect and surfactant mediate growth
              to operate. Theoretical work uses Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) techniques that
              incorporate elastic interactions to model growth and the defect-surfactant
              mediated growth. The results obtained from harmonic and atomic models and
              experimental kinetic results (high speed STM) are integrated into the KMC
              modeling. The role of elastic interactions in determining the evolution of
              superstructures during metal/metal adsorption processes is examined. The
              lateral interaction energies of adatoms in superstructures are accurately
              extracted from experimental adsorption isotherms using Monte Carlo techniques.
              These results are compared to elastic models of superstructures in order to
              determine whether the experimentally determined magnitudes of lateral
              interaction energies are consistent with elastic interactions. 
%%%
This work
              could lead to new approaches of electrodeposition that produce atomically flat
              heteroepitaxial overlayers of quality similar to that obtained by ultra high
              vacuum techniques at elevated temperature.  In one approach the metal of
              interest is co-deposited with a reversibly deposited mediator metal. The
              mediator is periodically deposited and stripped from the surface and each cycle
              creates new nuclei leading to layer-by layer growth. In another approach, a
              prescribed fraction of a monolayer of surfactant is used that floats on the
              surface of the depositing metal. The surfactant promotes an interlayer terrace
              exchange of the depositing metal that minimizes intralayer adatom diffusion.
              This serves to significantly increase the nucleation density of the adlayer,
              leading to flat two-dimensional growth.
***

