Title       : Sigma Factor Exchange During Bacillus Subtilis Sporulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0090325

Award Number: 0090325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Haldenwang Haldenwang@UTHSCSA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC San Antonio
	      7703 Floyd Curl Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782293900    210/567-2333

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Endospore formation in bacillus bacteria represents a simple differentiation in
              which the bacterium undergoes a series of physiological and morphological
              changes to generate a dormant cell form.  At an early state in sporulation,
              Bacillus subtilis partitions itself into two unequal compartments, which are
              destined for unique developmental fates. The smaller forespore compartment
              becomes the spore. The larger mother cell compartment engulfs and nurtures the
              forespore, then lyses to release the mature spore to the environment. Each
              compartment's program of gene expression is controlled by the sequential 
              appearance of unique transcription factors. SigmaE is the first of the mother
              cell-specific transcription factors. SigmaE is synthesized in the predivisional
              cell as an inactive proprotein (pro-sigmaE ), but becomes active only in the
              mother cell compartment. The mother cell specificity of sigmaE is likely due to
              two complementary mechanisms: the sequestration of pro-sigmaE to the mother
              cell side of the sporulation septum and the degradation of residual sigmaE in
              the forespore. This project will examine the sequestration element of this
              process.  Mutational analyses will be used to identify the regions of
              pro-sigmaE and its processing enzyme which target them to the forespore septum.
              Once identified, these regions will be used as biochemical and/or genetic
              probes to identify the septal components responsible for sequestration to this
              site.  Regulation of cellular processes by the spatial distribution of proteins
              is emerging as an important feature of prokaryotic biology. The Bacillus
              sporulation system is a well studied and tractable model which can be exploited
              to determine the mechanisms that underlie this phenomenon.
