Title       : RCN: Communications Media for Mineralized Tissue Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0090234

Award Number: 0090234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2010    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Cowin scccc@cunyvm.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1664,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This grant will provide the resources to establish three communications media to
              foster the progress of bone research. The three communication/interaction media
              structures proposed are (a) a monthly Seminar Series at a site across the
              street from the Empire State Building, very near the major transportation hubs
              in New York City, (b) an Annual Workshop on a topic related to the
              mechanosensory system in bone and (c) the development of a Website that
              supports and sponsors a Bulletin Board, Cyberspace Bone Journal Club,
              Cyberspace Bone Seminar Series and other types of networking communications.
              The impact of the proposed monthly Seminar Series and the Website will be very
              broad in the spectrum of people they reach, from undergraduate to senior
              research professor. The Annual Workshop, on the other hand, is more focused on
              the active researcher, but students who are active researchers will make
              presentations as they have done in the past in these workshops. Thus, these
              three media structures are layered in levels of specialization corresponding to
              level of professional training. Moreover, the impact desired is different at
              the different ends of this people spectrum. The impact desired with the younger
              of our participants is to develop in them a lifelong interest in the subject,
              although they may not make research in this area a livelihood. The impact
              desired with the already committed researcher (both national and international)
              is to have these media become a part of his/her daily research life, like
              listening to the weather report. 

The primary objective of this proposed
              communication activity is to create interest, a sense of community, and
              enhanced understanding in bone research amongst all the participants,
              especially the involved graduate and undergraduate students. This will be
              achieved by assimilating information and making this information accessible and
              useful to participants, researchers farther afield, and the public at large.
              With respect to the people doing research, the objective is not to dictate
              research directions, but to stimulate research thinking by posing well-framed
              research questions. Thus, each year certain research questions will be
              formulated by the core participants and these research questions will be
              carefully developed in the communications media. 

The core participants are
              Adele Boskey (Head of the Mineralized Tissue Section at the Hospital for
              Special Surgery and Professor of Biochemistry at the Weill Medical College of
              Cornell University), Timothy Bromage (Director of the Hard Tissue Research Unit
              and Professor of Anthropology at Hunter College of CUNY), Stephen C. Cowin (PI,
              Director of the New York Center for Biomedical Engineering (NYCBE) and
              Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the City College of the City University
              of New York (CUNY)), Susannah P. Fritton (Director of the Tissue Mechanics
              Laboratory, New York Center for Biomedical Engineering and Assistant Professor
              of Mechanical Engineering at the City College of CUNY), X. Edward Guo (Director
              of the Bone Bioengineering Laboratory and Assistant Professor of Bioengineering
              at Columbia University), Clinton T. Rubin (Director of the Musculo-Skeletal
              Research Laboratory and Professor in the Departments of Orthopedics and
              Mechanical Engineering at SUNY Stony Brook) and Mitchell B. Schaffler (Director
              of Orthopaedic Research and Professor of Orthopedics, Cell Biology and Anatomy
              at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine). Each of these people represents a
              community consisting of senior bone research people, graduate students and, in
              most cases, undergraduate students.

