Title       : Role of Septins in Developmental Regulation of Membrane Dynamics in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0090359

Award Number: 0090359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224742             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron Neiman Aaron.Neiman@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Septins are a conserved family of cytoskeletal proteins. Proteins of this
              family are
required for cytokinesis in both fungal and animal cells. During
              cytokinesis, and in post-mitotic cells, septins are often located near regions
              of active membrane extension. However, the molecular role of
septins in
              membrane growth remains obscure.
     The prospore membrane is an
              intracellular membrane formed during sporulation
in the yeast Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae, which packages the haploid nuclei produced by
meiosis into spores.
              Septin behavior during prospore membrane formation resembles that
of septins
              in higher cells; septins follow the leading edge of the membrane as it
              grows.
This project focuses on illuminating the function of septins during
              formation of the
prospore membrane.
     A combination of cell biological,
              genetic, and biochemical methods will be used
to investigate this problem. The
              possible co-localization of septins with the protein
phosphatase, Gip1p/Glc7p,
              as well as with proteins required for vesicle fusion will be
examined.
              Additionally, proteins that can bind to both septins and the Gip1p subunit
              of
the phosphatase will be sought.
     These experiments will shed light on
              the molecular function of septins in
promoting the growth of the prospore
              membrane and the development of spores.
Because of the evolutionary
              conservation of septins, insights gained into the function of
these proteins
              in sporulating yeast cells may provide insight into septin function in
              higher
cells.
