Title       : Farm and Ornamental Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  2000 
File        : a0090635

Award Number: 0090635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $564709             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Hatch crhatch@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald W. Hardy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest L. Brannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Madison S. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090635	
Hatch		

This award is to the University of Idaho to support the
              activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners include the University of Idaho; Clear Springs
              Food; Rangan Feeds; SeaPac; Fish Breeders of Idaho; Tribal Fish Commission; US
              Fish and Wildlife Service; Idaho Department of Fish and Game; Washington
              Department of Fish and Wildlife; Boise State University; Idaho State
              University; Washington State University; University of Idaho at
              Hagerman.

Proposed Activities
The activities include research on
              aquaculture; development of broodstock for specific aquaculture needs;
              development of feeds that meet requirements of environmental protection and
              aquaculture; technology transfer; education and training in biology, nutrition,
              genetics.

Proposed Innovation
The collaborating representatives involving
              scientists from universities, native American tribes, industry, and government
              all associated independently with different aquaculture affiliated programs or
              products will bring the components that supply, produce manage, regulate, and
              market fish, fish feeds, and recreation to resolve the problems facing
              aquaculture to create an expanded industry.

Potential Economic Impact
Fish
              products account for $11B in the US trade deficit (the US imports 65% of the
              annual fish food consumption).  The world supply of fish products is limited,
              requiring aquaculture to meet the growing demand.  Environmental concerns over
              wastes from current aquaculture will be costly and will need addressing.  Sport
              fishing and fish for aquarium hobbyists also have a large economic base that
              can benefit from the results of this innovation activity.

Potential Societal
              Impact
Increased capacity to provide fish as a foodstuff will require
              aquaculture for an increasing societal demand.  Clean water from the "waste"
              products from the aquaculture industry will have environmental impact.  Sport
              fishing for recreation is another societal benefit.


