Title       : Prosody in Language Comprehension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0090674

Award Number: 0090674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Clifton CEC@PSYCH.UMASS.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lyn Frazier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In order to understand a sentence or discourse, readers and listeners must use
              their implicit knowledge of the grammar of their language to put the meanings
              of its words together.  A great deal has been learned about how this process
              takes place during reading, but less is known about the aspects of the process
              that are specific to listening.  This research will explore how a listener uses
              the prosody of a sentence (informally speaking, its rhythmic and melodic
              structure) to determine its message.  The specific goals of the research are to
              work toward identifying precisely what aspects of the prosody of a sentence
              affect a listener's comprehension and to examine the cognitive processes that
              enable a listener to use prosody.  Broader goals include working toward the
              development of a theory of spoken language comprehension that specifies how
              prosodic descriptions are arrived at and how they interact with other sources
              of information about language; this could potentially enable technological
              improvements in communication, for instance in human-computer spoken
              interaction.  The research will explore just which aspects of a sentence's
              prosody listeners use in identifying its structure and meaning.  It will
              evaluate the thesis that a listener constructs a global prosodic representation
              of a sentence, rather than simply relying on local prosodic cues.  This thesis
              makes it crucial to address the question of what in the global prosodic
              representation is actually effective in guiding sentence comprehension.  Some
              of the experiments will examine how ambiguous phrases can be attached to
              different points in the phrases that precede them.  For instance, in a sentence
              like "Sammy learned that Bill telephoned after John visited," the adjunct
              phrase "after John visited" could modify either "learn" or "telephone."  Such a
              phrase should be more likely to attach "high" (early in the sentence),
              modifying the main clause verb "learn," if it is preceded by an intonational
              boundary that is signaled by pitch movement and temporal changes.  The
              experiments will investigate whether different types of intonational boundaries
              have different effects and evaluate the claim that only an "informative"
              boundary will affect interpretation.  They will evaluate a definition of
              "informative" that claims a boundary is informative if it is phonologically
              larger than certain structurally-defined earlier boundaries.  The experiments
              will provide several different tests, using several different grammatical
              constructions, of whether prosodic boundaries that are informative under this
              definition encourage high attachment of ambiguous phrases.  Other experiments
              will address the hypothesis that listeners take unusual ("marked") prosody to
              indicate an unusual interpretation of a sentence.  This "markedness strategy"
              has been proposed a number of times, and several pieces of experimental
              evidence seem to be consistent with it.  However, the markedness strategy may
              be only a crude approximation to reality.  The experiments, which will study
              the interpretation of pronouns, reflexives, and quantified noun phrases, will
              attempt to determine whether the phenomena described by the markedness
              hypothesis actually reflect simpler, more general prosodic principles of focus
              and accent.
