Title       : LTREB: Ecology and Evolution of Cooperative Breeding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0090807

Award Number: 0090807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243784             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter D. Koenig wicker@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1196,9198,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              LTREB: Ecology and evolution of cooperative breeding

PI: Walter D. Koenig
              

The acorn woodpecker (Melanerpes formicivorus) is a common bird in
              California that exhibits some of the most complex social behavior of any
              vertebrate. Group composition consists of anything from a simple breeding pair
              to groups containing up to 7 males sharing breeding status (cobreeders), 3
              females laying eggs in the same nest cavity (joint-nesters), and a variable
              number of nonbreeding helpers that are offspring of the breeders from prior
              years. Prior work has revealed that up to 3 males and 3 females may contribute
              genetically to a single nest. The degree to which one of these individuals
              monopolizes parentage within a group, known as "reproductive skew", is low
              among joint-nesting females but high among cobreeder males. That is, within a
              nest, one male usually sires all or nearly all the young. This high degree of
              reproductive skew among cobreeder males is predicted by current theory given
              the apparent advantages to living in groups and the difficulty of leaving a
              group and going off on one's own. By comparing paternity in first and second
              nests of groups with 2 cobreeder males, the proposal will test the alternative
              hypothesis that cobreeder males have equal chance of siring young, but that
              paternity of individual young within a brood is an "all or none" phenomenon
              rather than independently determined for each nestling. If so, this would imply
              that females, rather than one of the cobreeder males, are in control of
              paternity, counter to a major assumption of reproductive skew theory. The
              proposal will also extend prior results by examining behavior and paternity in
              groups containing 3 or more cobreeder males and in groups with both cobreeder
              males and joint-nesting females. 

