Title       : Nucleotide-Dependent Energy Transduction in Nitrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0090187

Award Number: 0090187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance C. Seefeldt seefeldt@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this project is to define the mechanism of energy coupling
              (e.g., ATP hydrolysis) to N2 reduction in the metalloenzyme complex
              nitrogenase.  The availability of fixed forms of nitrogen (e.g., ammonia) is
              essential to all living organisms, where it is used to make proteins, DNA, and
              a range of other biomolecules.  The reduction of N2 from air to ammonia
              represents the largest input of bioavailable nitrogen in the biosphere, with
              biological nitrogen fixation accounting for most of the N2 reduction. 
              Biological nitrogen fixation occurs in a large number of microorganisms that
              can be called diazotrophs, being catalyzed by a highly conserved metalloenzyme
              called nitrogenase.  The specific objective of this research program is to
              address one of the significant unknowns about the nitrogenase mechanism, namely
              understanding how MgATP binding and hydrolysis are coupled to N2 reduction. 
              Progress over recent years has revealed that nucleotide binding and hydrolysis
              control several steps in the nitrogenase mechanism including electron transfer
              from the Fe protein component to the MoFe protein component, substrate
              reduction on the MoFe protein, and dissociation of the two component proteins
              following each electron transfer event.  Importantly, it is clear that
              nucleotides exert their influence at a distance through long-range protein
              conformational changes.  In this project, three outstanding questions about how
              nucleotides participate in the nitrogenase mechanism will be considered: 1)
              What are the contributions of two peptide stretches within the Fe protein
              (termed switches I and II) in communicating from the nucleotide binding sites
              to influence the MoFe protein?  2) How do nucleotides regulate electron
              transfer from the Fe protein to the MoFe protein?  3) What are the individual
              contributions of two MgATP binding and hydrolysis events to the overall
              nitrogenase mechanism?  A multidisciplinary approach will be used that utilizes
              x-ray structural information, in conjunction with site-directed mutagenesis and
              biochemical and spectroscopic methods, to unravel details of the nucleotide
              mechanisms.  It is expected that the results from this project will contribute
              to a detailed understanding of the functions of nucleotides in the nitrogenase
              mechanism and will have broader implications in understanding the mechanisms of
              other nucleotide-coupled energy transduction proteins. 


