Title       : Collaborative Research: Investigations of the Plant Photoreceptor Kinase Family
               of Phototropins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0090837

Award Number: 0090837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto A. Bogomolni bogo@chemistry.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0090837
Bogomolni
Plant photoreceptors mediate a broad spectrum of responses
              to light, ranging  from the physiological through to the biochemical and
              molecular levels, and are present throughout plant development from seed
              germination through virtually all phases of vegetative growth to flowering and
              senescence. Currently well-known photoreceptors are phytochromes,
              cryptochromes, and phototropins. Phototropins represent a new and previously
              uncharacterized class of photoreceptors. These dual chromophoric
              photoreceptors, binding two molecules of FMN, are unlike any of the known
              classes of photoreceptors , and operate through an initial photochemistry that
              is unique and leads to autophosphorylation. 

The present project is focused
              on the chromoprotein phototropin (nph1) and the various nph1-like proteins
              described to date. These proteins are expressed in heterologous systems as the
              chromophore-binding domains and as the full length proteins. The expressed
              proteins both the native constructs and those with site-specific mutations are
              in the photoactive form. We plan to undertake a limited biochemical and
              detailed biophysical characterization of the various isolated
              chromophore-binding domains and of the full-length protein. The biochemical
              studies will emphasize the use of mutant constructs to probe the initial
              photochemistry. The latter will focus on studies probing the molecular
              mechanism by which light activates the photochemistry and its consequences at
              the protein level. These studies will involve time-resolved optical and
              vibrational spectroscopy. The chromophore-binding domains are closely related
              to domains (so-called PAS domains) in a diverse range of proteins from archaea
              through mammals, and should provide a new dimension to our understanding of the
              functions of these domains. 

