Title       : Mechanisms of Calcium Release and Egg Activation in Chaetopterus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0090108

Award Number: 0090108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384244             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Eckberg weckberg@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research will identify intracellular mechanisms involved in the initiation
              of development after fertilization by determining the mechanisms responsible
              for Ca 2+ oscillations in fertilized eggs.  Eggs of the marine invertebrate,
              Chaetopterus, will be used as a model to study ligand-gated Ca 2+ release
              mechanisms and to perform correlated in vivo and in vitro studies to identify
              which is/are responsible for Ca 2+ oscillations in fertilized and
              parthenogenetically- activated eggs. Synthesis of the endogenous ligands for
              these channels will also be studied. The results of these studies may have
              great significance for the control of fertility because they will contribute
              important information to our understanding of mechanisms by which sperm
              initiate the development of the egg. They will directly test hypotheses
              concerning the mechanisms by which Ca 2+ becomes available to activate eggs and
              other cells in response to extracellular signals. Since the organism to be
              studied is evolutionarily very distant from frogs and sea urchins, the results
              will provide important data as to the general applicability of mechanisms of
              egg activation. These eggs undergo Ca 2+ oscillations upon fertilization as do
              those of mammals and many, possibly most, other organisms with the exceptions
              of frogs and sea urchins.
Therefore, these data are more likely to inform us
              of mechanisms of fertilization in other organisms, including mammals, than
              would data obtained from sea urchin and frog eggs. Lastly, since these Ca 2+
              release mechanisms are also involved in other cells in response to other
              signals, these results will also have broad relevance to mechanisms by which
              other cells respond to extracellular signals.
The hypotheses to be tested are:
              1) that inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate is responsible for Ca2+ oscillations and
              egg activation at fertilization, and 2) that other small ligands such as cyclic
              ADP-ribose or nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate also contribute to
              these oscillations.
The procedures to be used will include: 1) fluorescence
              spectrometry to assay Ca2+ release and sequestration in vitro, 2) fluorescence
              and confocal microscopy to examine the movements of Ca 2+ within eggs as a
              function of activation by sperm or parthenogenetic agents, 3)
              immunofluorescence microscopy to localize endogenous ligand-gated Ca2+ release
              channels in the eggs, 4) western blotting to identify the proteins that make up
              these channels, and 5) light microscopy as a means to determine the extent of
              egg activation and development.
This study will also integrate research and
              education as well as broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities
              (African-Americans) in scientific research. The applicant institution is a
              historically Black university, and the supported graduate student will be
              African-American. This individual's training will be enhanced by exposure to
              the environment of the Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA. 
