Title       : Rapid Product Development in International Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0090582

Award Number: 0090582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $589216             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Villarreal VILLAJR@PANAM.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jen-Gwo Chen  (Principal Investigator former)
              Miguel A. Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Pan American
	      1201 West University Dr
	      Edinburg, TX  785412999    956/381-2011

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090582		
Chen		

This award is to the University of Texas Pan American to
              support the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners for this award include the University of Texas
              Pan American; Michigan State University; Instituto Technologico Y De Estudios
              Superiores de Monterrey; General Electric Engine Services; Bissell; TRW;
              Automation Tooling Systems; Alpine Electronics.

Proposed Activities
The
              activities for this award include a University/Industry/Economic Development
              Partnership to facilitate the process of taking academic research into product
              design and development. The target region is the US/Mexico border near
              Brownsville, Texas (predominantly Hispanic population with high unemployment-up
              to 20%), which is rapidly evolving from agriculture to industry.  The program
              provides internship for students in industry for design projects, virtual
              international design teams, technical support for small and medium businesses,
              experience and expertise in rapid product development, interdisciplinary teams
              (computer science, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, and
              manufacturing engineering), and experience for students in a global
              environment.  Another goal is promotion of economic development in an
              impoverished region with a large under-represented minority
              population.

Proposed Innovation
The innovation goals for this award include
              integration of university research and education to provide technical
              assistance for small and medium industry, education of a technologically
              literate workforce at the university level to enable innovation, creation of
              new industries, creation of new jobs, providing economic well-being in an
              impoverished region

Potential Economic Impact
The potential economic
              outcomes include producing graduate engineers with experience in rapid product
              development in an international setting; creation of new industries and new
              jobs; providing technical assistance to small and medium
              companies.

Potential Societal Impact
This activity has the following
              potential benefits to society: economic wealth, jobs and workforce training to
              increase wages in an impoverished region, increased participation of Hispanic
              persons in the economic enterprise.



