Title       : Synergistic Electronic Commerce (SynreCom) Partnership for Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0090959

Award Number: 0090959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598347             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary F. Sera   (Principal Investigator current)
              G K. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Eng Extension Serv
	      
	      College Station, TX  778438000    409/845-7225

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090959		
Sera			

This award is to Texas A&M University to support the
              activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).


Partners
The partners for this award include Texas A&M Engineering
              Extension Service; Edgewood ISD, San Antonio School District; Our Lady of the
              Lake University; TEKSA Innovations Corporation; San Antonio Day Care
              Providers.

Proposed Activities
The award supports the following activities:
               formation of minority-lead entrepreneurial teams to form and assist small
              businesses; provide e-commerce capability for small business; job training
              (computer training) for at-risk students; provide business management tools,
              including incubation support, to small minority-owned small
              businesses.

Proposed Innovation
The innovation goals of this award include
              formation of minority-led entrepreneurial teams to assist formation and growth
              of small business in the San Antonio area; enablement of economic growth by
              providing e-commerce capability of small businesses, especially minority owned
              businesses; providing incubator services where needed; providing workforce
              training for at-risk under-represented groups and providing job opportunities
              for them in small companies.

Potential Economic Impact
The potential
              economic benefits from this award includes a wide range of outcomes, such as
              job training and job placement for under-represented, at-risk of poverty groups
              by creation of new business and new jobs.

Potential Societal Impact
The
              potential benefits to society include education and training for at-risk
              under-represented minorities; creation of business opportunities for
              minority-owned small businesses; creation of new employment opportunities for
              minorities.  


