Title       : Co-Evolution of Human Societies and Landscapes in the Capital Territory of Late
               Shang State (Phase II)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0090179

Award Number: 0090179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115108             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Rapp   (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhichun Jing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation an American and Chinese team
              led by George Rapp and Zhichun Jing  from the American side and Wang Wei and
              Tang Jigen from the Chinese side will continue archaeological research at Late
              Shang site of Anyang in the Chinese Province of Henan. This multidisciplinary
              research focuses on the co-evolution of human societies and landscapes in the
              capital territory of the Late Shang state. With prior NSF support the project
              located and is excavating  a major new site, now called Huanbei Shang City
              [Huanbei means 'north of the Huan River'], that fills in an important
              chronological gap in our knowledge of the Shang peoples. This site bridges the
              critical gap between the Zhengzhou phase of the Early Shang and the Yinxu phase
              of the Late Shang. This site was discovered by systematic geoarchaeological
              core drilling that was undertaken to determine the third [vertical] dimension
              and nature of the archaeological deposits in the central region of the Late
              Shang Dynasty. The team will now continue its excavation of Huanbei Shang City,
              its archaeological and geoarchaeological surveys, and its studies of
              environmental change in relation to the operation and final collapse of the
              Late Shang state.  Further excavation at Huanbei Shang City should clarify its
              political status, including the question of its possible status as the capital
              during the reign of Pan Geng and two succeeding kings.

Complex societies
              developed in many parts of the world apparently independently and roughly at
              the same time. Given similarities among individual cases, researchers believe
              that the emergence of civilization results not from historical accident but
              from an underlying developmental process which is amenable to scientific
              description. To gain insight, use of a comparative approach allows individual
              cases in different parts of the world to be examined for common features and
              trends. Given intensive archaeological research over many decades a great deal
              is known about  cradles of civilization in Middle and South American and the
              Near East. Unfortunately the prehistory of China is less well understood and
              the work of Dr. Rapp and colleagues will help to fill a major gap in the
              Central Chinese sequence. 



