Title       : Growth Proteins and Synaptic Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0090723

Award Number: 0090723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372366             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aryeh Routtenberg aryeh@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for Lay Audience -Routtenberg

       Perhaps the most  unnerving
              experiences in our intellectual lives is 
the frustration of forgetting.  It
              is the over-arching view of the proposed 
research that 'why we forget' has to
              do with the faulty  chemistry of the 
brain connections that form the memory
              network.   Indeed we have recently 
discovered using a model system of brain
              memory that we can prevent memory 
storage and its retrieval.  Then, by giving
              a drug that activates a 
signalling pathway that our laboratory described, we
              can reactivate the 
memory.  Put another way, the key that turns on memory and
              its retrieval 
may be like that used in the car's ignition.  What we have done
              is moved to 
the next stage and 'hot-wired' memory processes, by-passing the
              initial 
switch.  This pathway is thus critical to memory formation and
              retrieval.
      Our studies employ gene targeting methods in transgenic mice
              to 
modify the switches and signalling mechanisms (gene products or proteins,
              
one and all) that regulate both the chemistry of the brain connections and
              
as a consequence the memory storage process.  We study the most widely used
              
physiological model of memory, long-term potentiation, which monitors the
              
events that occur at the synapse at the time when model memories are being
              
stored.  We complement the gene targeting with pharmacological tools that
              
allow us to confirm with converging lines of evidence the identified
              
sequence of events involved in the storage of information.  Since gene
              
manipulation is not feasible in humans, this complimentary approach
              
provides the basis for drug discovery in the context of current molecular
              
biological technologies and suggest novel strategies in the war against
              
cognitive and memory disorders.

