Title       : Reduced Cost Blood Factor Production - Model Molecule, Protein C
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0090749

Award Number: 0090749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182545             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duane F. Bruley bruley@umbc2.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Marie Ralston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

REDUCED COST BLOOD FACTOR PRODUCTION -MODEL MOLECULE, PROTEIN
              C


Duane F. Bruley 
University of Maryland Baltimore County
NSF Proposal
              Number 0090749
    

This research is a joint effort between The American
              Red Cross(ARC) and the University of Maryland Baltimore County(UMBC)  to study
              Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography(IMAC) as an alternative process to
              replace Immuno Affinity Chromatography for the separation of
              high-molecular-weight, homologous blood factors. The source material of
              interest is blood plasma Cohn Fraction 1V-1, which is a complex mixture of
              blood proteins including the Vitamin K Dependent Proteins (VKD) that are
              essential to insure blood hemostasis. Initial studies via an NSF-SGER grant
              verified that IMAC is a highly selective separation technology that might be
              able to achieve the desired separations on a preparative scale. The mechanism
              of IMAC includes the use of appropriate metal ion/chelating agent combinations
              that have affinity for specific amino acids that occur in blood. Evidence shows
              that matching the IMAC substrate with the number and the placement of
              biomolecule histidine units can lead to efficient separations when the
              appropriate buffers are used. This research project includes investigations of
              the surface histidine concentration on some of the critical VKD blood proteins,
              the determination of  equilibrium isotherms for Protein C on selected IMAC
              columns,  and the use of experimental-design techniques to determine optimal
              chromatographic operating conditions that will allow the separation of 
              milligram quantities of Protein C for post-award animal studies.

There is an
              urgent need for the production of a variety of human blood factors in large
              quantities at low cost for therapeutic applications . The blood factors are
              linked together in a very complex way so that under normal conditions the blood
              will clot to stop bleeding. When an imbalance of coagulants and anti-coagulants
              occurs, two pathologic states can develop: (a) the patient is a hemophilic, or
              (b) the patient is a clotter.
Our model blood factor is Protein C, which is
              the pivotal anti-coagulant in the human coagulation cascade. Protein C
              deficiency can result in deep vein thrombosis (DVT) with the possibility of
              pulmonary embolus ,which is a life-threatening complication for the patient. It
              should be noted that abnormal clotting disorders are the leading cause of
              death, over AIDS and cancer. Present treatments with Heparin or Coumadin are
              effective but with dangerous side effects possible. High-volume, low-cost
              Protein C products  could provide inexpensive, safe treatment for patients with
              Protein C deficiency. 

