Title       : DNA Binding-Independent Transcriptional Regulation by Runt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0090956

Award Number: 0090956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Gergen pgergen@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It is widely assumed that the regulation of gene expression by sequence specific
              DNA-binding proteins involves interactions between these proteins and cognate
              cis-regulatory sequences of their downstream target genes.  However, DNA
              binding-independent regulatory activities have now been described for a number
              of different transcription factors.  This project uses a combination of
              molecular and genetic approaches to investigate a novel, DNA-binding
              independent pathway of repression by Runt, the founding member of the Runt
              domain family of transcriptional regulators.  Quantitation of the in vivo
              potency of a DNA-binding defective form of Runt reveals differential
              requirements for DNA-binding in the regulation of different downstream target
              genes.  DNA-binding is not required for repression of the odd-numbered stripes
              of the segment polarity gene engrailed, but does contribute to Runt's role as a
              regulator of sloppy-paired another downstream target gene in the pathway of
              segmentation.  DNA elements that are responsible for generating the
              odd-numbered engrailed stripes will be identified by examining the in vivo
              expression of reporter genes containing different segments of engrailed
              cis-regulatory DNA. Reporter gene constructs that express the odd-numbered
              engrailed stripes will be examined for their ability to respond to
              Runt-dependent repression.  Functional dissection of minimal elements that
              mediate the response to Runt will provide a platform for further studies at the
              molecular level.  

Regions of the Runt protein that are specifically
              required for repression of engrailed will be identified and Runt deletion
              derivatives will be examined for their regulatory activities in transgenic
              Drosophila embryos. This approach is based on previous observations on the
              modular organization of the conserved regions of Runt.  A comparison of the
              relative potency of different deletion derivatives on engrailed and other
              target genes will reveal if specific regulatory properties can be attributed to
              the different conserved regions of the Runt protein.  Finally, genetic screens
              will be carried out to identify other factors that participate in the DNA
              binding-independent repression of engrailed by Runt.  Preliminary genetic
              screens have identified a maternally-expressed DNA-binding protein encoded by
              the tramtrack locus that cooperates with runt to repress engrailed..  The
              extension of the genetic screens for runt-interacting factors will provide a
              rigorous framework for future studies on the molecular mechanism of DNA
              binding-independent regulation by the Runt protein.  These studies will provide
              new information on the context-dependent activities of Runt domain proteins and
              may provide fundamental insights into the regulation of gene transcription in
              eukaryotic systems.

