Title       : Structural Reorganization of Nuclear Proteins During Mitosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0090877

Award Number: 0090877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359805             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristen M. Johansen kristen@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jorgen Johansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term objective of this study is to determine how nuclear morphology is
              regulated during the cell cycle and what role nuclear components may play in
              establishment of the mitotic spindle. Towards this end, the investigators have
              identified a novel nuclear protein in Drosophila, Skeletor, which reorganizes
              from chromosomally associated structure at interphase to a spindle-like
              structure at metaphase. Double and triple labelings of Skeletor, tubulin, and
              DNA indicate that the Skeletor spindle may precede the establishment of the
              microtubule spindle. When this structure is perturbed by anti-Skeletor antibody
              injection, the investigators observe deterioration of nuclear morphology and a
              significant decrease in nuclear division. Thus, the investigators hypothesize
              that there exists a nuclear structure that reorganizes during the cell cycle
              which plays an essential role in mitotic spindle assembly and/or function yet
              is distinct from the microtubule spindle. This hypothesis is strengthened by
              the observation that embryonic preparations treated briefly with nocodazole and
              which are void of microtubules still show an intact albeit somewhat deformed
              Skeletor spindle.
The investigators plan to test this hypothesis by performing
              a number of experiments designed to answer the following key questions: 1) Do
              anti-Skeletor antibodies identify a previously undescribed nuclear structure?
              2) How does this structure reorganize during the cell cycle and does it provide
              a guide for establishment of the mitotic spindle? 3) Is Skeletor an integral or
              associated component of this nuclear structure? 4) Does Skeletor function in
              signaling or effecting the nuclear reorganization events during the cell cycle?
              5) What is the effect of perturbing this structure genetically or by other
              means? 6) What other components interact with or regulate this structure? The
              information obtained from these experiments will provide major new insights
              into nuclear architectural remodeling during the cell cycle and microtubule
              spindle assembly and function during mitosis.

