Title       : Using Simulations to Explore Genetic Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0090835

Award Number: 0090835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Garrett M. Odell odellgm@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project continues development of computer methods for translating
              experimentally charted maps of genetic interactions into realistic, detailed,
              formal mathematical models that allow biologists to explore whether and how
              genes, interacting in regulatory networks, lay down striped
spatial patterns
              of proteins which prefigure the segmented body plan that later develops. 
              Approximately 1200 person-years of experimental research, in many labs
              worldwide, have culminated in a detailed understanding of how the so-called
              segment polarity genes cross regulate each other in early fruit fly embryos.
              This project synthesizes those data into a systems-level model that quantifies
              how the interactions between these genes, characterized principally in fruit
              flies, but thought to be shared by all higher animals, act synergistically to
              endow this network with astonishing robustness. That is, the systems level
              model predicts that the network can continue to
perform its task correctly
              even when the strengths of all the interactions between its genes change
              greatly. The project entails refinement of that case study, and creation of a
              new model of another gene network (the neurogenic network). The project will
              ascertain whether this robustness,
found in the first network so modeled
              occurs also in other experimentally well studied networks. It will use computer
              modeling to ascertain how such robustness could have evolved. The research will
              include experiments on real fruit fly embryos to find out whether the
              robustness, which the computer
model predicts the gene network could have,
              actually exists in real embryos. Do, and how do, gene networks in living
              embryos contend with genetic and environmental variation?  Do embryos actually
              experience significant amounts of "developmental noise", and if so, how do
              developmental mechanisms either exploit or insulate themselves from such
              variation? This cross-disciplinary
project will try to answer such questions
              using a blend of experimental developmental biology, computer-implemented 3-D
              analysis of laser scanning confocal micrographic data, implementation of
              detailed realistic mathematical models, computer algorithms for solving
              differential equation
systems and searching/visualizing their associated
              high-dimensional parameter spaces.

