Title       : The Structure and Reaction Dynamics of Three Catalytic RNAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0090994

Award Number: 0090994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Scott wgscott@hydrogen.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The primary focus of this project is upon the problem of how the functions of
              biological macromolecules are governed by their structures. The research plan
              focuses upon this problem in the context of RNA enzymes (or ribozymes), with
              the hope of discovering the properties of biological catalysis that are so
              fundamental that they are shared by all enzymes, whether composed of RNA or
              protein. The overall goal of this proposal is to develop a fundamental
              understanding of how biological catalysts function, be they proteins or
              RNA.

Two catalytic RNA systems will be investigated using both static and
              time-resolved X-ray crystallography to elucidate their structural properties
              and reaction mechanisms. These, in order of increasing complexity, include the
              hairpin ribozyme, and RNase P. The hammerhead ribozyme structure has been
              solved and time-resolved crystallographic experiments have been initiated.  The
              more complex ribozymes have been crystallized and will be used in static and
              time-resolved crystallography in an effort to elucidate their reaction
              mechanisms. The principle objectives of this research are: (1) to determine the
              three-dimensional structure of the hairpin ribozyme, and to initiate
              determination of the structures of reaction intermediates of hairpin ribozyme
              cleavage and ligation using the techniques developed for the hammerhead
              ribozyme; and (2) to initiate determination of the three-dimensional structure
              of RNase P.. 

The primary goal of this research is to develop a fundamental
              understanding of the principles of catalysis that enable RNA molecules to be
              enzymes. This knowledge will lead to the understanding of how the
              three-dimensional structure of an RNA enzyme determines its catalytic
              properties. By learning how RNA enzymes work, this project will discover what
              properties are so fundamental to biological catalysts that they are invariant
              with respect to both RNA and protein enzymes.

