Title       : Experimental Hydrodynamics and Evolution: Locomotor Design and Function of
               Pectoral Fins in Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a0090896

Award Number: 0090896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158826             (Estimated)
Investigator: George V. Lauder glauder@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A hallmark of the enormous diversity of vertebrate animals is extensive
              variation in the structure and function of the pectoral appendage, which is
              fin-like in fishes and forms the upper limb in land vertebrates. How does this
              key feature of vertebrate design function, and what have been the major
              evolutionary pathways that lead to the forelimb that characterizes mammals?
              This proposal is designed to address these questions by directly measuring the
              function of pectoral appendages in water. Although pectoral function has been
              the subject of speculation for over 100 years, and nearly every textbook in
              comparative anatomy and paleontology discusses hypotheses of pectoral function,
              the difficulty of quantifying the effect of pectoral motion in water has
              prevented any direct experimental tests of these ideas. This grant will apply a
              novel engineering technique (Digital Particle Image Velocimetry) which allows
              the reconstruction of three dimensional flow patterns and direct measurement of
              the force that limbs exert on the water. For the first time we can quantify the
              function of structures working in fluids, and test long-standing hypotheses
              about how animals control their movement in water.  

This research will
              demonstrate the utility of applying novel engineering approaches to the study
              of vertebrate structure and function. The planned experiments will test old
              hypotheses and generate new ideas on which to base interpretations of
              evolutionary and functional patterns in the vertebrate forelimb.  

