Title       : A Kirkwood-Buff Approach to Improved Cosolvent Force Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a0090483

Award Number: 0090483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Smith pesmith@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Smith, Paul E.
MCB-0090483

Cosolvents can have dramatic effects on the
              properties of peptides and proteins in solution. They are often used to enhance
              the stability of proteins or to denature them in order to study protein
              folding. Exactly how cosolvents affect peptides and proteins is unknown. An
              understanding of these effects will greatly improve our current ideas
              concerning the nature of the denatured state of proteins. In turn, this will
              help to clarify the protein folding process by providing a well defined initial
              state from which one can rationalize the effects of temperature or denaturants.
              Experimental studies of the denatured states of proteins are limited due to the
              many conformations available to the protein, and an inability of techniques to
              determine the interactions between proteins and cosolvent molecules with atomic
              level resolution. 

In principle, computer simulations can provide atomic
              level resolution of denatured proteins and their interactions with cosolvents.
              However, computer simulation experiments
are only as reliable as the force
              fields which describe the interactions between the different species. In this
              proposal, it is shown that current cosolvent force fields need to be
              improved
in order to quantitatively reproduce the experimental properties of
              cosolvent mixtures with water. A combination of molecular dynamics simulation
              and the Kirkwood-Buff theory of mixtures will be used to provide sufficient
              data for comparison with experiment, and to ensure the quality of the force
              field. Both effective pair potentials and polarizable models will be
              investigated for sodium chloride, guanidinium chloride, urea, and 2,2,2
              trifluoroethanol; which represent common cosolvents displaying a range of
              effects on peptides and proteins. The improved force fields will then be used
              to fully characterize, with atomic detail, the properties of these solutions.
              This is the first step in determining their different effects on proteins, and
              is absolutely essential if one is to have any confidence in computer simulation
              results for these systems.


