Title       : Animal Culture - Vocal Signal Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0090400

Award Number: 0090400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59947              (Estimated)
Investigator: Myron C. Baker MCBAKER@LAMAR.COLOSTATE.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Title: Animal Culture - Vocal Signal Function
PI: Dr. Myron C. Baker

Dr.
              Baker will conduct research on the cultural evolution of a songbird
              vocalization to obtain an understanding of the key features of social evolution
              in animals that exhibit cultural traits. In songbirds, culture is manifest in
              vocal signals used in communication. These learned vocal signals are inherited
              across generations by young birds copying the vocalizations of adults, similar
              to the way speech patterns are transmitted in human populations. A general
              theory of cultural evolution broadly applicable to both man and animals will
              derive from studies that explain the diversity, maintenance, and change of
              cultural traits, studies such as those planned in this research program. In the
              proposed research, several questions about the process and consequences of
              vocal learning in a model species of songbird are addressed. This species, the
              black-capped chickadee, exhibits population dialects in one of its common
              vocalizations, a vocal signal used in aggressive interactions with other
              individuals. The properties of this vocalization, and its use in behavioral
              interactions, will be studied both in the natural context of wild populations
              as well as in experimental settings in the laboratory. Questions to be
              addressed are: (1) In what ways do the properties of this vocalization differ
              between populations? (2) What is the rate of change in vocal dialects over
              time? (3) What behavioral processes lead to the adoption of the local dialect
              by young birds and immigrants? (4) What are the benefits of adopting, and the
              costs of not adopting, the characteristic vocalizations of the local
              population? (5) How does the use of this vocalization influence the outcome of
              aggressive encounters?  Answers to these and related questions will contribute
              fundamental building blocks to a general theory of cultural evolution.


