Title       : The Role of Tic Components in Protein Import into Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0090727

Award Number: 0090727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny J. Schnell dschnell@biochem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Organelle identity and development rely on a complex set of
              intracellular protein trafficking systems that mediate the specific targeting
              of nuclear-encoded proteins to their proper subcellular compartment. Although
              protein targeting systems have been described for all organelles, the
              mechanisms of signal recognition and protein translocation at boundary
              membranes remain major topics of investigation in cell biology. The long-term
              goal of the research is to understand the mechanism of protein import into
              plant chloroplasts as a model for protein targeting and organelle biogenesis in
              eukaryotic cells. Chloroplasts are subdivided by three non-contiguous membrane
              systems into at least six suborganellar compartments that serve to segregate
              and organize a number of essential metabolic functions, most notably the
              reactions of photosynthesis, and aspects of fatty acid and amino acid
              metabolism. Although the chloroplast contains its own small genome, the vast
              majority of its protein components are encoded by nuclear genes and must be
              imported into the organelle after translation in the cytoplasm. As a
              consequence, protein import plays a central role in the differentiation and
              maintenance of chloroplasts during plant growth and development. The import of
              the majority of nuclear-encoded proteins is directed by an intrinsic,
              N-terminal transit sequence, and is mediated by the coordinate action of
              protein translocon complexes in the outer (Toc apparatus) and inner (Tic
              apparatus) envelope membranes of the chloroplast. This project focuses on the
              roles of the Tic machinery in preprotein translocation at the inner envelope
              membrane. The Tic apparatus performs three key functions. First, it physically
              associates with the Toc apparatus to facilitate the direct translocation of
              preproteins from the cytoplasm to the stroma. Second, it forms a selectively
              permeable protein-conducting channel across the inner membrane. Third, it
              coordinates the association of soluble stromal factors (e.g. molecular
              chaperones) with the translocon to facilitate the processing and folding of
              newly imported proteins.  Three inner membrane proteins (Tic20, Tic22, and
              Tic110) have been identified which directly or indirectly associate  with
              preproteins during import across the envelope. Tic22 is a peripheral membrane
              protein that is bound to the outer face of the inner membrane. Tic22 can be
              chemically cross-linked to preproteins as they emerge from the outer membrane
              translocon and thus might coordinate the association of the Toc and Tic
              machinery by guiding the preprotein to the Tic machinery. The availability of
              Arabidopsis mutants in which expression of Tic22 is disrupted permits direct
              testing of this hypothesis in vivo, with isolated chloroplasts and at the
              biochemical level.  Similar approaches will determine whether Tic20, an
              integral inner membrane protein is a component of the protein conducting
              channel of the inner membrane.  In addition, oligomeric complexes containing
              Tic20 from pea chloroplast envelope membranes will be purified and analyzed
              with the goal of identifying additional components of the Tic machinery. The
              third Tic component, Tic110, is an integral inner membrane protein with a large
              (~90 kDa) stromal domain. Potential roles of this protein in concentrating the
              ATP-dependent chaperone ClpC at import sites in the stroma and in stabilizing
              the insertion of preproteins across the inner membrane will be tested through
              in vitro binding studies of Tic110 to preproteins and ClpC. In addition, the
              preprotein and ClpC binding domains of Tic110 will be mapped using deletion
              analysis.  As with the other proteins, the function of Tic110 will also be
              examined in vivo through characterization of plants in which its expression has
              been blocked.  Overall, the synergistic use of biochemical and genetic
              approaches in this project should provide new insights into how cells assemble
              their organelles.
