Title       : TRDB: A Multi-genome Database of Tandem Repeats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0090789

Award Number: 0090789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1178856            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Benson benson@camelot.biomath.mssm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A tandem repeat is an occurrence of two or more adjacent, often approximate
              copies of a sequence of nucleotides.  Tandem repeats have known functional
              roles, including coding with loss of function, switching, and acting as
              modifiers of gene expression. Tandem repeats are primary components of
              chromosomal structures.  They are useful for genetic linkage analysis,
              bacterial strain typing, DNA fingerprinting and studies of changes in DNA over
              short time scales.

Identification of tandem repeats has been made easier by
              new software that processes the entire genome.  The rapid analysis permits
              identification and annotation of repeats, clustering into families for further
              study.  A multi-genome Tandem Repeats Database will bring together information
              about repeats as well as serving as the platform for development of new tools. 
              These include algorithms to compare and cluster repeats, as well as for
              identifying predictive criteria for copy number polymorphisms.  This will
              further enable annotation of repeats and of repeat families, including genomic
              environment, copy number polymorphisms, whole genome properties and family
              properties. All of this will be available through a web site with integrated
              data visualization and data model specification for transfer to other formats.
              

