Title       : Advanced Materials for PEM-based Fuel Cell Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0090556

Award Number: 0090556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. McGrath jmcgrath@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Reifsnider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090556		
McGrath	

This award is to Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
              University to support the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal
              was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
              Solicitation (NSF 0082).

Partners
The partners are Virginia Polytechnic
              Institute and State University; Virginia Commonwealth University; Newport News
              Shipbuilding (NNS); Acadia Elastomers; United Technologies; ChemFab; Dais
              Analytic; BPAmoco; Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL); Grambling University;
              Hampton University.

Proposed Activities
The activities in this award are
              systems engineering analysis of membrane electrode assembly of fuel cell
              stacks; predictive modeling of materials durability; synthesis and
              characterization of new polymers for electrodes; summer intern education
              programs; modeling and reliability testing; scale-up from materials, models,
              processing to prototype; technology transfer to industrial partners;
              commercialization.

Proposed Innovation
Fuel cells have been in existence
              for over one hundred years, but they are not economical or reliable enough for
              commercialization.  Materials that operate at higher temperatures and increased
              efficiency for thousands of hours are needed.  Reliability modeling and
              lifetime prediction models are being investigated.  This will allow expansion
              of the technology to other systems.  Once fuel cells become economically
              competitive, the potential commercialization is enormous.  Quiet, clean,
              reliable, mobile power generation will have a huge range of applications with a
              large potential economic market.

Potential Economic Impact
Fuel cells have
              potential for clean generation of electrical power, but the materials available
              currently are not adequate for reliable, long-life high temperature economic
              operation.  Inclusion of under-represented minorities in graduate programs is
              important.  Long-term sustainability is assured if economic, reliable fuel
              cells can be made. 

Potential Societal Impact
Two of the partners are
              historically african-american colleges.  An increase in the number of
              african-american scientists and engineers with graduate degrees would be a
              major outcome.  Clean generation of electrical power would be a major societal
              impact.


