Title       : Authentication Technologies and Their Privacy Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0090219

Award Number: 0090219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjory S. Blumenthal mblument@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   In response to a request to CSTB from the United States Government's Chief
              Counselor for Privacy, CSTB has framed an assessment of emerging approaches to
              authentication in computing and communications systems that focuses on the
              implications of authentication technologies for privacy.  This assessment of
              authentication technologies would examine the state of the art and relevant
              trends.  It would put the technology into a larger context:  it would consider
              technical and nontechnical trends, addressing both the nature of capabilities
              and their implementation, and the nature of procedural and other nontechnical
              protections and their enforceability.  It would examine differences in concerns
              associated with public sector versus private sector uses of authentication
              technologies.  Attention would be paid to the likelihood of different mixes of
              options (e.g., diverse techniques to accommodate, a diverse population and set
              of needs versus narrower standardization for economic reasons.
     A report
              will be produced by the committee and subject to NRC approval.  It will
              describe authentication technologies, the interplay of technical and
              nontechnical aspects of authentication, and the implications of alternative
              approaches for privacy; it will make recommendations about fostering relevant
              research and shaping appropriate policy.  It will be distributred to the
              computer science and privacy communities, associated organizations, consumer
              organizations, and government agencies and the congress.  Web distribution,
              briefings, discussions at key conferences and in relevant National Academies
              venues, and articles and announcements in journals and newsletters would be
              important to getting the word out and furthering discussion.  The dissemination
              process would be launched by a public briefing about the report.
