Title       : Using Pyramided Resistant Cotton Isolines to Identify Genes Active in Defense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0090920

Award Number: 0090920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282427             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret K. Essenberg margess@biochem.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret L. Pierce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The project goal is to identify genes whose induction is necessary for
              an
effective hypersensitive disease resistance response in cotton. 
              Two
valuable plant resources are available for this work:  Im216, an
              Upland
cotton line whose level and breadth of resistance to bacterial blight
              are
exceptional, and a set of near-isogenic cotton lines (isolines)
              possessing
three individual, race-specific B genes for bacterial blight
              resistance in
combinations of 0, 1, 2, and 3 genes (a gene pyramid).  Also, a
              subtracted,
normalized cDNA library enriched in sequences that are induced
              during the
hypersensitive response of Im216 to Xanthomonas campestris pv.
              malvacearum
(Xcm) has been prepared.  The first objective is to prepare a
              similar cDNA
library from the pyramided isoline with 3 B genes and to isolate
              from the
two libraries a set of 500-1000 distinct clones of genes that are
              induced
by Xcm race 1, which has at least one avirulence gene that is
              recognized by
each of the B genes in these lines.  The second objective is to
              array the
chosen cDNAs and screen them with RNA-derived probes prepared
              from
inoculated plants to identify genes that are induced during
              the
hypersensitive responses elicited by Xcm race 1.  Since Im216 and
              the
pyramided isoline each have two B genes that are absent from the
              other
line, results will show whether there are genes whose induction
              is
regulated by specific B genes.  Results will also identify genes
              whose
induction is triggered by all three individual B genes of the
              isoline
pyramid and genes whose quickness of induction correlates with the
              number
of B genes in a given cotton line.  The third objective is to isolate
              and
sequence full-length cDNA clones of genes that meet one or more of
              the
following criteria:  (i) induced by all B genes, (ii) quickness
              of
expression correlates with level of resistance, (iii) deduced
              protein
sequence and time of induction suggest they code for enzymes of
              phytoalexin
biosynthesis.  This set of genes will be available as a resource
              to the
scientific community.  Inducible resistance responses are the
              most
economical defense that is known against plant disease.  They require
              no
application of agrichemicals.  They cost the plant little energy, since
              the
responses are produced only when and where an infection occurs.  They
              are
relatively safe, since anti-microbial substances accumulate mainly
              near
infection sites and are non-persistent.

