Title       : Innovation Networks: A Strategy of the Regional Technology Alliance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0090521

Award Number: 0090521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $596310             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick W. Byron byron@resgs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shaw Ling Hsu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Holland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome J. Schaufeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090521		
Byron			

This award is to the University of Massachusetts at
              Amherst to support the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal
              was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
              Solicitation (NSF 0082).

Partners
The partners for this award include the
              University of Massachusetts at Amherst; Massachusetts Ventures Corporation;
              Springfield Technical Community College; Economic Development Council of
              Western Massachusetts; Kollmorgen Aerospace and Defense Group; Rexam Image
              Products; Western Massachusetts Electric Company; Western  Massachusetts
              Software Company; Mass Ventures Equity Fund; National Collegiate Innovators and
              Inventors Association.

Proposed Activities
The activities for this award
              include: establishment of enabling innovation networks; technology exchange;
              entrepreneurship activities; commercialization; workforce development;
              capitalization on the strengths in research in polymer science, computer
              science, chemical engineering, environmental technology, and electrical
              engineering at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst to integrate research
              and education and transfer technology.

Proposed Innovation
The innovation
              goals for the award are to capitalize on the strong intellectual output from
              the University of Massachusetts to start new economic activities in western
              Massachusetts, which has not benefited from the economic well being of the
              eastern part of the state and to establish new businesses in
              telecommunications, and manufacturing.

Potential Economic Impact
The
              potential economic outcome includes formation and fostering of early stage
              companies; to establish a collaborative infrastructure to help isolated
              companies; to increase public and private investment in targeted
              areas.

Potential Societal Impact
The potential benefits to society include
              creation of new wealth through creation of new companies and new jobs, training
              of a technologically literate workforce with higher paying job
              opportunities.



