Title       : Muscle Function During Avian Flight
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0090265

Award Number: 0090265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Biewener abiewener@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to understand how muscles function to power the flight of
              birds.  Changes in muscle power requirements are expected over a range of
              speeds based on aerodynamic theory.  By studying how muscles are activated to
              develop force and shorten under the dynamic conditions of flight, the
              predictions of flight performance based on aerodynamic models can be tested. 
              These measurements will be obtained from ring-neck doves (Streptopelia
              risoria), cockatiels (Nymphicus hallandicus) and crows (Corvusbrachyrynchos)
              that have been trained to fly over a range of steady speeds (1 to 20
              meters/second)  in a low turbulence wind tunnel.  The results obtained from
              these experiments will be used to evaluate whether the requirements for muscle
              performance are greatest during slow- and very fast-speed flight, compared with
              the lower costs predicted by aerodynamic theory at intermediate flight speeds. 
              Comparisons among the different species will also allow the effects of
              differences in wing shape and body weight to be evaluated in relation to muscle
              function and flight performance.  In addition to studies of the function of
              bird flight muscles, the project will also involve obtaining detailed
              recordings of the three-dimensional movements and shape changes of the wings
              (kinematics)  during the wing beat cycle.  These recordings will be obtained
              using three high-speed (250 frames per second) digital video cameras . 
              Movements of the wings and changes in their shape and orientation will be
              examined over a range of flight speeds in the wind tunnel to evaluate whether
              the birds use distinct aerodynamic gaits to fly at slow versus fast speeds,
              similar to the change in gait that a human uses when increasing speed from a
              walk to a run.  By correlating movements of the wing with the recordings of
              flight muscle function, the nature of neuromuscular control of wing motion and
              its resulting importance to the aerodynamics of lift force production for
              weight support and thrust can be better understood.  The results from these
              studies will be important for assessing the flight costs of birds under natural
              field conditions, for understanding muscle design in relation to the high
              mechanical power output required for flapping flight, and for determining
              whether novel lift generating mechanisms operate in birds which favor their
              ability to maneuver and modulate flight behavior in ways that are not possible
              for fixed-wing, human-engineered aircraft.
