Title       : Isolation of Auxin Signal Transduction Mutants in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0090996

Award Number: 0090996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Murfett murfettj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The plant hormone auxin is involved in many aspects of growth and development,
              yet little is known about exactly how this hormone causes changes within plant
              cells.  It is known that when plant cells are exposed to auxin, certain genes
              are activated: without auxin, they are not expressed (i.e., their protein
              products are not made), and with auxin they rapidly become expressed at high
              levels.  It is also known that specific DNA sequences within the promoters of
              these genes (i.e, the parts of the genes that control when and where the genes
              are expressed) are needed for this response to auxin.  An unknown number of
              molecules are involved in recognizing auxin after it enters the plant cell, and
              causing these genes to be activated.  The goal of this project is to identify
              some of the molecules involved in this "auxin signal transduction" process. 
              The genetic approach taken in this project involves making mutants in the model
              plant Arabidopsis that show aberrant expression of auxin-responsive genes. 
              Towards this end, transgenic plants were generated that carried engineered
              selectable marker genes controlled by auxin responsive promoters.  The
              transgenic plants were mutagenized, then seeds from these plants were grown
              under conditions that allowed for the selection of plants that showed aberrant
              expression of the selectable marker genes.  One of the selectable markers used
              was a gene that confers resistance to the antibiotic hygromycin.  Non-mutant,
              transgenic plants were killed by the antibiotic, because they did not contain
              enough auxin to switch on the resistance gene.  However, a few mutant plants
              were able to grow, because the resistance gene was expressed more highly in
              them than in non-mutant plants.  The other selectable marker used was a gene
              encoding the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH).  ADH converts allyl alcohol to
              a toxic substance, acrolein.  Non-mutant transgenic plants that were treated
              first with auxin, then with allyl alcohol, were killed because the ADH gene was
              switched on by the auxin treatment.  However a few mutant plants survived the
              treatments because the ADH gene was expressed at lower levels in them.  One
              hypothesis is that these mutant lines contain alterations in the molecules
              involved in responding to auxin.  For some of the mutants, this hypothesis has
              been tested by seeing if other auxin responsive genes, in addition to the
              selectable marker genes, show altered expression in the mutants.  One goal of
              thsi project is to continue identifying new mutants that show altered
              expression of auxin-responsive genes.  A few of these mutants will be analyzed
              in detail, and the mutant genes will be cloned in order to discover what
              molecules they encode.  This work has great potential to enhance our
              understanding of both plant hormone biology, and signal transduction processes
              in plants. 


