Title       : Accessible Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0090070

Award Number: 0090070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Powlik                            
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cornelia C. Tierney cornelia_tierney@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy Storeygard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent research shows that children with disabilities benefit greatly from deep
              involvement in mathematical thinking. Major mathematics education committees
              such as the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the National
              Council of Teachers of Mathematics, and the National Research Council have
              emphasized the importance of high level mathematical thinking and reasoning for
              all students, especially those  students with special needs who have not had
              access to this kind of mathematics. This project is based on the assumption
              that when students with disabilities engage in a variety of NCTM
              Standards-based activities that support their strengths, they can learn to
              think mathematically. Children with disabilities will learn to think about,
              strategize, and solve mathematical problems in the manner recommended by the
              NCTM Standards. To explore ways in which students with disabilities can be
              supported to successfully develop mathematical thinking, researchers at TERC
              will work collaboratively with a group of 12-16 teacher-researchers who are
              implementing an NCTM standards-based curriculum, grades 1-5. The teachers will
              be chosen in pairs of one mainstream classroom teacher and one special
              education teacher who work with the same students as they engage with
              standards-based mathematics curricula. The teacher pairs will work together to
              look closely at and find ways to improve the mathematical thinking of students
              with disabilities. All of the teachers will meet regularly in an action
              research group with TERC researchers during two years of the project. They will
              present and discuss episodes from their classrooms about teaching mathematics
              to children with disabilities, plan next steps in their investigations of
              students' learning, and document and disseminate the strategies that are
              successful in developing the mathematical understanding of students who have
              disabilities. In the last year of the project, teachers and TERC researchers
              together will write articles to disseminate their findings to other teachers.
              They will describe the ways in which the special education and classroom
              teachers work together to improve the mathematics learning of children with
              disabilities and will document successful strategies that other teachers can
              use. These research findings will be useful to teachers because they will be
              grounded in classroom practice. The work of this project will include: 
1. 
              Implementation of a teacher research group of classroom and special education
              teachers to develop their      skills in planning and implementing classroom
              research and to report on and receive feedback on their own  research.
2. 
              Research by the teacher pairs to learn how particular students with
              disabilities learn mathematics best, and what is needed to support their
              learning.
3.  Communication of this classroom-based body of research through
              publications, existing websites, and presentations to others-especially to
              other practitioners-in a way that helps others see more deeply into students'
              mathematical thinking.  
4. Documentation and description of the collaboration
              among the special education and classroom teacher pairs  in their schools to
              suggest approaches that can be used by others.


