Title       : Advanced MEMS Sensors for Civil Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0090099

Award Number: 0090099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73826              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Glaser glaser@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Sitar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1636,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This action is for a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) to support the
              acquisition of a state-of-the-art MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems)
              sensor system, and to integrate it into a real-time natural hazards monitoring
              system.  MEMS is the integration of mechanical elements, sensors, actuators,
              and electronics on a common silicon substrate through the utilization of
              microfabrication technology.  While the electronics are fabricated using
              integrated circuit (IC) process sequences, the micromechanical components are
              fabricated using compatible "micromachining" processes that selectively etch
              away parts of the silicon wafer or add new structural layers to form the
              mechanical and electromechanical devices.

The opportunity exists to buy into
              a prototype run of MEMS high fidelity digital accelerometers being developed by
              Integrated Micro Instruments Inc. (IMI), a small start-up company developing
              MEMS devices under research contracts with DARPA (Defense Advanced Research
              Projects Agency)and AFOSR (Air Force Office of Scientific Research).  This
              device provides an extremely linear, sensitive, and rugged 3-dimensional
              accelerometer in a single chip package.  Since the output data stream is
              digitized inside the chip, there are no attendant signal processing issues or
              costs.  Professors Steven Glaser and Nicholas Sitar have access to these chips
              in the prototype stage.

This project is exploring just one of many potential
              applications of MEMS-based sensors to research and practice in civil and
              mechanical engineering.  It is a novel application to directly integrate the
              micromechanisms and electronics directly into the monitoring needs of civil and
              mechanical engineers. There is a special synergy since Professor Glaser is
              directly involved in the design and construction of the Macro-Mote being
              developed at the NSF-sponsored Berkeley Sensor and Actuator Center (BSAC), and
              the Berkeley Wireless Research Center (BWRC).

Specifically, this project
              involves:The acquisition of 10 sensor devices left over from an AFOSR-sponsored
              research project;
The acquisition of 50 improved DXL05HR devices from a
              fabrication run currently being sponsored by DARPA; Demonstrating a large-scale
              wireless MEMS dynamic monitoring system with dense instrumentation of
              large-scale test structures with 50 accelerometer devices.

