Title       : Calcium Signalling in the Regulation of Flagellar Beating in Sperm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a0090950

Award Number: 0090950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan S. Suarez sss7@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Calcium Signalling in the Regulation of Flagellar Beating in Sperm
In mammals,
              fertilization takes place deep within the female reproductive tract, in
              the
ampulla of the oviduct. When sperm are recovered from the ampulla and
              observed swimming
on microscope slides, they swim vigorously in circles. This
              swimming pattern is termed
hyperactivation. In the environment of the oviduct,
              hyperactivation is not so useless as it might
seem; in fact, it assists sperm
              in reaching the oocyte and in penetrating the cumulus matrix and
zona
              pellucida. Hyperactivation is switched on by an increase in Ca 2+ at the
              flagellar axoneme in
the core of the flagellum. The goal of this project is to
              determine how Ca 2+ reaches the axoneme
to switch on hyperactivation.
              Pharmacological agents that induce release of Ca 2+ from intracellular
stores
              (thapsigargin, thimerosal, and caffeine) were found to initiate hyperactivation
              in bull sperm.
There are two families of Ca 2+ stores in cells, the inositol
              1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor stores (IP3 R)
and the ryanodine receptor stores
              (RyR). Antibodies against IP3 R revealed the presence of a store
in the
              flagellum. This store may be the redundant nuclear envelope (RNE), an organelle
              located at
the base of the flagellum. The RNE arises during spermiogenesis,
              when condensation of the
nucleus of the spermatid leaves behind excess nuclear
              envelope. Rather than being discarded, as
are all other superfluous cytoplasm
              and organelles, the RNE is retained and packaged neatly as a
scroll of
              membranes at the base of the flagellum. It is proposed that the RNE is retained
              to serve
as a Ca 2+ store. In addition to providing Ca 2+ to the base of the
              axoneme, the RNE could release
Ca 2+ to mitochondria to stimulate ATP
              production. The RNE is quite closely associated with
mitochondria at the base
              of the flagellum. These mitochondria are terminal members of the
              tightly-wrapped
helix of mitochondria that surrounds the axoneme in the
              flagellar midpiece. The helix
forms a barrier in the midpiece between the
              plasma membrane and axoneme; therefore, the
mitochondria are also in a
              position to regulate Ca 2+ in the axoneme.
Given this unique organization of
              RNE and mitochondria with respect to the axoneme, the
following 4 hypotheses
              were developed to test how these organelles play a role in
              initiating
hyperactivation. Bull sperm (Bos taurus) will be used to test the
              hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1: The intracellular store that provides Ca 2+ for
              hyperactivation is gated by both IP3
and ryanodine receptors. Our preliminary
              evidence implicates both types of receptors in releasing
Ca 2+ to initiate
              hyperactivation. Highly specific agonists of the receptors will be used to
              confirm
these findings. If the hypothesis is correct, it would mean that the
              amount of Ca 2+ released can
occur at two or three levels, depending upon
              which receptor is activated: IP3 R alone, RyR alone, or
the two in
              combination. Such a mechanism can control the intensity of hyperactivation,
              such as to
increase flagellar bending during penetration of the zona
              pellucida.
Hypothesis 2: The intracellular Ca 2+ store in the flagellum is the
              RNE. It is proposed that this
unique structure, which has been ignored in the
              past, is responsible for providing Ca 2+ for
hyperactivation. Localization of
              the IP3 R and/or RyR to the RNE should tell us whether this
hypothesis is
              correct.
Hypothesis 3: A Ca 2+ rise in mitochondria is involved in switching
              on hyperactivation. The
picture of Ca 2+ signalling that has been emerging for
              other cells is that mitochondria pick up Ca 2+
released from intracellular
              stores and respond by increasing ATP production. ATP levels are
doubled in
              hyperactivated guinea pig sperm. Therefore, experiments are proposed to test
              whether
release of Ca 2+ from intracellular stores results in increased levels
              of Ca 2+ , NADH, and ATP in
flagellar mitochondria.
Hypothesis 4:
              Mitochondria regulate flagellar Ca 2+ and hyperactivation. The tight wrap
              of
mitochondria around the flagellar axoneme separates it from the plasma
              membrane; therefore,
mitochondria are in a position to affect Ca 2+ levels at
              the axoneme in the site where the flagellar
bend develops. Blockers of
              mitochondrial release of Ca 2+ will be applied to sperm before
              using
pharmacological initiators of hyperactivation to determine whether
              hyperactivation can be prevented.
The testing of these 4 hypotheses should
              provide a picture of how Ca 2+ turns on this
movement pattern that is
              essential to fertilization.

