Title       : The Role of Parts in the Visual Perception of Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0090833

Award Number: 0090833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387219             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald D. Hoffman ddhoff@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the role of parts in the visual perception of
              objects.  Roughly half of the cortex of the human brain is engaged in visual
              perception, and much of this cortex is devoted to constructing objects and
              their properties.  The importance of objects extends beyond visual perception,
              because objects are central in human thought and language.  Substantial
              evidence suggests that human vision represents many objects in terms of parts
              and structural descriptions.  These parts are computed early in the stream of
              visual processing, and they dictate or influence the perception of figure and
              ground, the appearance of transparency, the judgment of shape similarity, the
              perception of symmetry and repetition, the classification and recognition of
              objects, and the learning of names for objects and their parts.  This project
              will build on prior work to study several questions:  How exactly does human
              vision divide objects into parts?  How does it represent the qualitative and
              metrical structure of each part?  How does it use parts to determine
              transparency, shape similarity, and object identity?  Are different parts and
              part representations used for 2D silhouettes than for 3D objects?  Are parts
              used for recognizing faces?  How do parts influence language learning?  Does
              object recognition employ viewpoint-dependent or viewpoint-invariant
              representations?  The approach taken will be broad-based and multidisciplinary.
               Precise differential-geometric definitions of parts will be tested in
              psychophysical experiments with human observers.  The psychophysical
              experiments will use both objective and subjective methods to assess the human
              perception of objects and parts.  The resulting data will be used to create
              mathematical and information-processing models and to inform neural-network
              models.  The information-processing models will be implemented in computer
              programs whose performance can then be compared against that of human
              observers, allowing further empirical testing of the models and refinement of
              the theories.  This research will enhance understanding of a central aspect of
              human visual cognition.  It will contribute valuable models and algorithms
              toward the construction of automated robotic vision systems that can see and
              recognize objects.  It will constrain neural models and inform physiological
              experiments which explore the neural basis of biological vision.
