Title       : SGER: Application of Communication-Theoretic Principles to Nano Interconnect
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a0090012

Award Number: 0090012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C.J. Richard Shi cjshi@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sumit Roy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Allstot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Interconnect has been recognized one of ten hardest problems in nano
              technologies. A basic observation underlying this project is that
              nano-interconnect issues are much similar to that in real-world communication.
              Much research has been conducted to ensure the reliable, fast and secure
              communication over a noisy and stochastic environment. Therefore, the research
              is exploiting communication-theoretic principles and developing innovative
              signaling concepts in solving the stochastic nature of nano interconnect. The
              primary focus is on nano silicon technologies in CMOS with feature sizes below
              100nm, and the goal is to explore ways to achieve reliable and fast signaling
              over the noisy and stochastically limited nano-interconnect environment. The
              specific objectives are
1.	to develop realistic-yet-simple communication
              models for various nano interconnect scenarios,
2.	To study fundamental
              signaling limits dictated by communication theory (estimates of achievable
              rates indicate up to Tbits/sec.),
3.	to demonstrate interconnect design
              techniques for nano-signaling that can potentially approach the theoretical
              signaling limits
This is being made possible by a combination of several
              innovations that include (i) multi-wire (differential) full-duplex signaling,
              (ii) signal modulation, coding and equalization, and (iii) utilization, instead
              of avoiding, very-deep-submicron (VDSM) effects such as wave transmission for
              potential signaling.

