Title       : Regulation of Inflorescence and Pedicel Development in Tomato.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a0090417

Award Number: 0090417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erin E. Irish erin-irish@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene J. Szymkowiak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	The shoot meristem of flowering plants is a multicellular organ that provides
              the capacity for indeterminate growth of the shoot.  The research team will
              investigate how the cells in the shoot meristem and its derivative organs are
              coordinated during development by continuing our study of the jointless-1
              mutation of tomato.  In jointless-1 mutants, the inflorescences revert to
              vegetative growth after forming only one or two flowers and terminate with a
              vigorous, leafy shoot. jointless-1 mutants also form flower pedicels that
              completely lack an abscission zone.  Thus, the JOINTLESS-1 gene of tomato is
              involved in two important developmental processes, the maintenance of the
              inflorescence meristem state and the formation of the pedicel abscission zone. 
              
	By analyzing periclinal chimeras it was found that internal (L3) cells of
              the meristem control both inflorescence meristem determinacy and pedicel
              abscission zone formation.  Cloning of JOINTLESS-1 revealed that it is a MADS
              box gene. The investigations of coordination of cells during the processes of
              maintaining the inflorescence meristem and development of pedicel abscission
              zones will be continued.  1. In situ hybridization will be performed using
              JOINTLESS-1 probes on wild-type and jointless-1 mutants and on the six
              periclinal chimeras to learn more about the nature of the cell coordination
              that occurs during inflorescence development and abscission zone formation.  2.
               Patterns of JOINTLESS-1 expression will be examined in various mutants that we
              have found to show genetic interactions with jointless-1 from double mutant
              analysis.  Such studies will provide a clearer understanding of the
              interactions of these genes that result in different types of meristem
              activity. 3. Sets of periclinal chimeras will be constructed between wild-type
              plants and macrocalyx, another mutation that affects both abscission zone
              development and inflorescence meristem maintenance, and between macrocalyx and
              jointless-1.  The  hypothesis that macrocalyx is involved in the reception of
              the signal produced by L3 cells that are wild-type for the JOINTLESS -1 gene
              will be tested.  4.  A lineage analysis will be identified for the developing
              pedicel to determine the patterns of cell divisions that give rise to the
              various regions of this organ (proximal pedicel, abscission zone, and distal
              pedicel) in wild-type and jointless-1 mutant plants.  With these experiments
              more should be learned about the cellular and genetic interactions regulating
              abscission zone formation and inflorescence development to elucidate the
              relationship between these two developmentally interesting and agriculturally
              important processes.

