Title       : Object Perception and Representation by Echolocating Dolphins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a0090744

Award Number: 0090744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis M. Herman lherman@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Object Perception and Representation by Echolocating Dolphins

Principal
              Investigator: Louis M. Herman Ph.D.


This research continues the
              investigation by this laboratory of the ability of the bottlenosed dolphin
              (Tursiops truncatus) to perceive the shape of objects through its echolocation
              sense.   How does the dolphin represent objects it inspects through
              echolocation?  Does it perceive only the raw echoes returning from ensonified
              objects or, like vision, does it directly perceive the shape of the object?  
              The prior-published studies used a cross-modal matching-to-sample procedure to
              demonstrate that a dolphin could spontaneously recognize objects across the
              senses of echolocation and vision.  The results suggested that object shape is
              directly perceived though the echolocation sense, and that the representations
              of objects obtained through echolocation are coordinated with or closely
              integrated with the representations obtained through vision.   These
              conclusions strongly revise previous views of dolphin echolocation that
              postulated that discriminations among different objects were based on learning
              to associate the raw acoustic cues of returning echoes (e.g., amplitude,
              highlight structure, or spectral composition) with things seen or with reward
              received.  The continuing investigations now ask how faithfully the dolphin's
              representations preserve the spatial structure of the object being ensonified,
              and what mechanisms can support the construction of a shape percept through
              echolocation.  Other questions include whether the dolphin's perception of
              shape though echolocation is invariant with changes in the orientation of the
              object, with changes in material composition of the object, and with changes in
              object size.  In each manipulation, object shape will remain constant, but the
              sound reflection properties of the object will vary.  The cross-modal matching
              technique will continue to be used, as well as intra-modal techniques in which
              object recognition performance is examined within the senses of echolocation
              and vision rather than across the senses.  The issues considered in these
              studies and the findings obtained establish links with issues and findings in
              object-based perception and in intersensory perception in infant and adult
              humans, and in nonhumans.  The studies also make contact with general issues in
              memory and representation in human and nonhuman animals.

