Title       : Behavioral Functions of Vocal Imitation in Parrots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0090620

Award Number: 0090620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georg F. Striedter gstriedt@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy T. Burley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Behavioral Functions of Vocal Imitation in Parrots

PI:  Georg F.
              Striedter
co-PI: Nancy T. Burley

Why do some animals imitate complex
              sounds?  This question has most frequently been addressed in songbirds, which
              learn their songs primarily to defend a territory and/or attract a mate.  These
              explanations may not hold for the parrots, however, because parrots have
              evolved their remarkable imitative abilities independently of the songbirds. 
              So, why do parrots imitate sounds?  Recent data from the Striedter laboratory
              suggest that parrot vocal learning plays a role in pairbond formation. 
              Specifically, when male and female budgerigars are placed in pairs, the males
              consistently imitate the contact calls of the females with whom they are
              paired, while the females retain their original calls.  This sexual asymmetry
              in imitative behavior suggests that males imitate females in order to influence
              female mate choice.  If this hypothesis is correct, then three predictions
              should hold:  1)  Sexual selection should have led to an asymmetry in the vocal
              learning abilities of male and female budgerigars.  This hypothesis will be
              tested by comparing how quickly all-male and all-female groups of budgerigars
              develop shared contact calls.  If males are "better" at vocal learning, then
              vocal convergence should occur more quickly among males than among females.  2)
               Males should preferentially imitate females whom they are courting.  This
              hypothesis will be tested by determining whether the time it takes for a male
              to learn a female's call is inversely correlated with his interest in this
              female, as measured by the frequency of other, well-known courtship behaviors. 
              The female's attractiveness will be manipulated by painting her cere, which is
              brown in mature females but pale blue in immature females.  3)  Female
              budgerigars should associate preferentially with males that have learned to
              imitate them.  This hypothesis will be tested by determining whether females
              give more courtship displays towards unfamiliar males that already know their
              call (because they were tutored by another female that shares the test female's
              call) than towards males that do not yet know the test female's call.  In a
              complementary experiment, some male budgerigars will be rendered
              imitation-impaired by selectively severing the connection between their
              auditory and vocal motor systems.  The proposed experiments could significantly
              impact the field of "sexual selection" and "female choice" because most prior
              studies focused on female choice for overt physical traits - not learning
              ability.  The proposed experiments also pave the way for a more mechanistic
              analysis of why male budgerigars imitate female calls. 

