Title       : Self-Organization in Limb Pattern Formation--Test of a Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0090499

Award Number: 0090499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Newman newman@nymc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York Medical College
	      
	      Valhalla, NY  10595    914/594-4480

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0090499
Newman

The objective of this project is to test a hypothesis for how
              the cells of the vertebrate limb bud generate the quasi-periodic array of
              cartilage rods and nodules that serve as the primordia of the limb skeleton in
              all such species. The hypothesis is that the "self-organizing" properties of
              limb mesenchymal cells that lead them to generate spatiotemporally arranged
              precartilage condensations and cartilage nodules in vitro are also utilized in
              vivo in the generation of the limb skeletal pattern. To test this idea key gene
              regulatory processes will be identified that are intrinsic to limb bud
              mesenchyme which provide the basis for its ability to generate precartilage
              condensations in a spatiotemporally-controlled fashion. Because the
              extracellular matrix protein fibronectin is a major mediator of precartilage
              cell condensation both in vitro and in vivo, DNA constructs will be designed to
              contain the chicken fibronectin gene promoter linked to a readily visualized
              reporter molecule, Green Fluorescent Protein. The length of normal promoter
              sequence that directs authentic condensation-associated gene expression in
              vitro and then mutate the minimal promoter to determine which cis-acting sites
              are essential for this activity will be identified.  This will permit the
              delineation of candidate sites for action of developmentally relevant
              transcription factors such as Fast-1.  The response of these constructs to
              added growth and differentiation factors such as TGF-B2, and FGF-2, -4 and -8
              will be used to help identify endogenous factors that regulate fibronectin
              expression.  Once the relevant determinants have been characterized in vitro,
              they will be introduced into embryonic limbs by electroporation or
              detergent-mediated transfection to ascertain whether or not the establishment
              of fibronectin "prepatterns" for the skeletal primordia in vivo employ the same
              fibronectin regulatory pathways utilized in the self-organizing processes
              responsible for the generation of these patterns in vitro.
