Title       : The Kansas City Regional Innovation Alliance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2000 
File        : a0090578

Award Number: 0090578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. MacQuarrie rmacquarrie@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Bodde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Sharpe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090578		
MacQuarrie		

This award is to the University of Missouri Kansas
              City to support the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was
              submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation
              (NSF 0082).

Partners
The partners include the University of Missouri Kansas
              City; University of Kansas Medical Center Research Institute; Kansas City Life
              Sciences Institute; University of Missouri Columbia; Midwest Research
              Institute; Center for Business innovation.

Proposed Activities
The
              activities in this award include training scientists, business people and
              graduate students in technology-based entrepreneurship; developing and
              implementing a system for identifying and evaluating new discoveries and
              technologies that may have commercial value; developing a supporting
              infrastructure to foster and sustain innovation; commercialization.

Proposed
              Innovation
The innovation goals include education of scientists,
              businesspeople, and graduate students in technology-based entrepreneurship and
              creation of a regional partnership for innovation that enables transformation
              of knowledge in life sciences into innovations that create new wealth.  A
              system to identify ideas that have commercial potential will be developed.  A
              supporting infrastructure to foster and sustain innovation to commercialization
              will also be developed.

Potential Economic Impact
Education of personnel
              plus technology transfer that might lead to economic activity will have
              significant economic impacts.

Proposed Societal Impact
Innovations that
              benefit health care will result.  Training of personnel for high tech jobs in
              the health care industry and new jobs in the health care industry will
              result.



