Title       : Regulation of Cellular Ceramide Levels by p53-Activated Pathways in the
               Apoptotic Stress Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0090859

Award Number: 0090859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155269             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ghassan S. Dbaibo gdbaibo@aub.edu.lb  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Univ of Beirut
	      
	      Beirut, LE  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              SUMMARY:
Both the tumor suppressor p53 and ceramide have been implicated in the
              cellular response to stress, and specifically, the regulation of apoptosis.
              Whereas, the ceramide pathway has been shown to be conserved in the yeast
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae, neither p53 nor any genetic homologs are. This
              implies that the ceramide stress response evolved at an earlier stage compared
              to p53. The stress response pathways regulated by these two molecules have
              common features. These include the ability of both pathways to induce cell
              cycle arrest, senescence, and apoptosis in response to adverse stimuli.
              Additionally, these two pathways share some downstream targets that are key
              regulators of the cell cycle and apoptosis (e.g. the retinoblastoma protein and
              caspase-3). It was recently demonstrated that p53 functions "upstream" of
              ceran-tide in the genotoxic stress response leading to apoptosis. It was found
              that p53 up-regulation in response to y-irradiation led to the gradual
              accumulation of cellular ceramide occurring over several hours. It was also
              shown that ceramide can function in a p53-independent manner where it can
              induce apoptosis even in the absence of p53. Importantly, we recently found
              that the majority of the accumulated ceramide following p53 up-regulation
              occurs in a caspase-dependent manner. The work in this proposal aims at
              investigating the signaling pathways and the molecular events by which p53
              up-regulation results in ceramide accumulation. First, p53-activated apoptotic
              pathways will be investigated in two cell models of p53- dependent function.
              Based on the preliminary data, the focus will be on those pathways that either
              directly or indirectly involve caspase activation. p53 functions as a
              transcription factor in the induction or repression of a large number of genes.
              Thus, the expression and activity of a number of key modulators of apoptosis in
              response to p53 up-regulation will be examined. These will include caspases,
              death receptors (which couple to caspases via adapter proteins), and several
              p53-induced genes that were recently shown to induce apoptosis when
              overexpressed (Bax, Noxa, PERP, and PIG3). Second, the order by which the
              different genes become expressed, or their proteins activated, in response to
              p53 and in relation to ceramide accumulation will be studied. Candidate
              regulators of downstream ceramide accumulation will be identified by virtue of
              their modulated expression or function prior to ceramide accumulation. The
              functional relationship between p53-activation of specific pathways and
              ceramide accumulation will be explored. Specific apoptotic modulators that are
              candidate regulators of ceramide will be individually examined with regard to
              their ability to induce ceramide accumulation. The essentiality of these
              candidates with respect to ceramide accumulation and apoptosis will be explored
              by using various approaches to inhibit their function and examining the effects
              on ceramide accumulation. Third, the biochemical pathways that are activated to
              generate ceramide in response to p53 up-regulation will be investigated.
              Specifically, the contribution of sphingomyelinase activation, which generates
              ceramide from hydrolysis of membrane sphingomyelin, and de novo synthesis of
              ceramide by activation of ceramide synthase will be studied. The specific
              metabolic pathways leading to ceramide accumulation will then be linked to
              specific apoptotic modulators that are activated by p53. These studies will
              help us understand the molecular network by which p53 exerts it pro-apoptotic
              function and may shed some light on how these two major stress response
              pathways (p53 up-regulation and ceramide accumulation) became linked during
              evolution.

