Title       : Molecular Dissection of a Specialized Peroxisomal Vesicle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0090908

Award Number: 0090908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nam-Hai Chua chua@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Jedd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Filamentous fungi grow as a cellular syncytium where individual cells
              are
interconnected by perforate crosswalls. Cell lysis in these systems
              triggers a rapid
mechanism of septal pore sealing that is mediated by a
              dense-core vesicle known as the
Woronin body. The Woronin body has been
              observed in over 50 species but its origin in
the peroxisome and function
              associated with the cellular response to cell lysis have only
recently been
              defined at the molecular level (Jedd and Chua, 2000). In the model
              system
Neurospora crassa, the Woronin-body core is comprised of Hex1, a
              protein that is both
necessary and sufficient for Woronin-body core formation.
              Deletion of the HEX1 gene
eliminates the Woronin body from the cytoplasm and
              produces hyphae that bleed
cytoplasm following cell lysis. Thus, Hex1 defines
              a novel peroxisomal vesicle that
functions in the cellular response to cell
              lysis.
The goal of this research is to understand basic mechanisms of Woronin
              body
biogenesis and function. As part of this effort, the following specific
              aims will be
addressed. i) Woronin-body associated proteins will be
              identified. The Woronin body
will be biochemically purified and associated
              proteins identified by amino acid
sequencing. Corresponding genes will then be
              cloned and analyzed to assess their role in
the biogenesis and function of the
              Woronin body using genetic, biochemical and cell
biological techniques. ii)
              The conservation of Woronin body structure and function will
be determined by
              analyzing HEX1 and recently identified HEX1 alternative-splicing
variants in
              several model ascomycetes using genetic and cell biological techniques. iii)
              A
mechanism of Woronin body formation will be determined by analyzing the
              phenotype of
Woronin-body-associated protein deletion strains and by
              reconstituting Woronin body
formation in yeast cells using heterologous
              expression of Hex1 and protein interactants. In
addition, the crystal
              structure of Hex1 will be determined and used to identify amino acid
residues
              that mediate Hex1 self-assembly. Mutations in these residues will then be used
              to
determine how Hex1 self-assembly influences Woronin body biogenesis. iv)
              The
importance of the Woronin body for the pathogenicity of disease-causing
              fungi will be
determined by deleting HEX1 from the genome of the rice blast
              fungus Magnaporthe
grisea. The deletion strain will then be examined with
              respect to infection-related
morphogenesis and host colonization.
Results
              from this study will enhance our understanding of basic mechanisms
governing
              vesicle formation and define a previously unrecognized pathway for
              protein
sorting in the peroxisome. In addition, the possibility that the
              Woronin body functions as
a pathogenicity factor in disease-causing fungi may
              define new strategies for combating
fungal pathogens in both plants and
              humans.
