Title       : "Room temperature infrared lasers based on rare earth doped CaGa2Se4"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0090526

Award Number: 0090526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Poole rpoole@dubois.fisk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arnold Burger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fisk University
	      1000 Seventeenth Avenue North
	      Nashville, TN  372083051    615/329-8500

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

0090526	
Poole		

This award is to Fisk University to support the
              activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
Fisk University; Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
              (LLNL); Coherent Technologies Incorporated (CTI)

Proposed Activities
Fisk
              University will grow crystals; LLNL will evaluate the crystals; CTI will build
              the laser systems.

Proposed Innovation
The primary application for these
              laser devices is as transmitters for eyesafe active remote sensors.  These
              sensors are used for a variety of commercial applications including pollution
              monitoring, atmospheric trace gas monitoring and meteorological studies and
              wind sensing (lidar systems for aircraft to detect clear air turbulence).  CTI
              has a proposed plan to obtain funding for development of markets for future
              developments with these laser materials.

Potential Economic Impact
The
              proposal does not assess the economic impact, although the potential
              applications and companies that could participate in the marketing of the
              products are identified.  The primary applications for these lasers is as
              transmitters for eyesafe active remote sensors used for pollution monitoring,
              atmospheric trace gas monitoring, meteorological studies, and wind sensing
              (clear air turbulence).  The potential applications range from aircraft safety
              to air quality and pollution monitoring and control.  Education of African
              American students, especially in engineering is another strong benefit to
              society.

Potential Societal Impact
The technology will contribute to public
              safety, air pollution monitoring etc.  In addition, the number of African
              Americans with both undergraduate and graduate degrees will increase.  The
              strength of the research and education of this institution will be
              increased.






