Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Political Entrepreneurs and the Dynamics of Privatization
               among the Samburu of Kenya-An Analysis Using Experimental Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0090320

Award Number: 0090320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fiona Marshall fmarshal@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Institutions are defined as the "rules of the game" that govern interaction
              among players in a social structure.  Successful economic development relies on
              appropriate institutions and beneficial institutional change.  This
              dissertation research by an anthropology student from Washington University-St.
              Louis will study institutional change among Kenyan pastoralists and farmers in
              two locations of Samburu district, Siambu and Mbaringon.  Using traditional
              ethnographic participant observation and sample surveys as well as newer
              techniques of experimental economics, the student will examine the changes in
              cooperation and self-serving behavior associated with changing land tenure.
              Commonly managed land is being converted into privately owned and managed land
              at the same time that the authority of the traditional elders is being
              challenged. Hypotheses will be tested about the relative use of ideology and
              persuasion, social capital from existing social networks, and selective
              incentives as motivators of political support for changing social and economic
              institutions.  The process is well underway in Siambu and barely begun in
              Mbaringon so the comparison will shed light on the process. This research will
              advance our understanding of economic development, the welfare effects of
              privatization, and the impacts of privatization on individual behavior and
              adherence to social norms. At the same time it advances our knowledge of this
              important area of the world and contributes to the training of a young social
              scientist. 
