Title       : Regulation of Ureotely in Batrachoidid Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0090355

Award Number: 0090355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369590             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Walsh pwalsh@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Until recently, it has commonly been accepted knowledge that fish and other
              aquatic species excrete ammonia as the waste product following a meal. Ammonia
              is ultimately toxic, primarily to the brain, so fish and other aquatic species
              rid their bodies of ammonia as soon as it is produced, and its harmful effects
              are immediately diluted by the "infinite" sink of the surrounding water.
              However, when animals evolved to live on land, and did not have the diluting
              effects of a surrounding water environment, they needed to adopt alternate
              means of ridding their bodies of this toxin. So, terrestrial animals excrete
              alternative waste products (urea and uric acid) which they can store in their
              bodies at higher concentrations without harmful effect until they are able to
              consume enough water with which to excrete them. However, in recent years, the
              PIs have discovered that a common fish in the Southeastern US, the gulf
              toadfish (Opsanus beta) is an exception to this rule, excreting urea instead of
              ammonia under certain stressful circumstances. Thus the goals of this research
              project are to understand how this fish species is able to make and excrete
              urea, and to understand the ecological and evolutionary reasons for why it does
              so. The ability to make urea and uric acid requires a great deal of energy,
              which would otherwise be spent on predator avoidance, reproduction, etc., so it
              is reasonable to assume that the ability to make and excrete urea is
              selectively advantageous, and contributes to the fish's ability to survive and
              propagate.

The investigators will take three approaches to understanding the
              mechanisms and significance of urea excretion in fish. One portion of the study
              will employ biochemical and molecular biology techniques to understand how the
              fish shifts from making ammonia to making urea, focusing on enzymes of the
              liver.  A second part of the study will focus on physiological studies of how
              urea is excreted at the gill. A third part of the study, will focus on field
              experiments that test the hypotheses that urea production is important to the
              survival of the fish because the fish lives in an environment with high ammonia
              concentration, and/or that urea excretion helps the fish to be better at
              chemically camouflaging itself from predators. This research will elucidate how
              rapidly aquatic organisms are able to adapt to changing environments on both an
              individual and an evolutionary time scale. This type of information becomes
              more and more valuable as our environment changes due to man's influence.
              Furthermore, since ammonia is one of the most important byproducts in
              aquaculture that must be removed, results of these studies may have
              implications for fish production.

