Title       : Geometric Morphometric Methods for Functional Morphological Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0090445

Award Number: 0090445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. James Rohlf rohlf@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis E. Slice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project has four objectives related to the application of geometric
              morphometric methods. These methods are concerned with new mathematical and
              statistical methods for analyzing variation in the shapes of biological
              structures and their covariation with other variables (such as size,
              environmental variables, etc.). This approach allows one to treat the shape of
              an entire configuration of landmarks and/or a set of outlines as a single
              mathematical object that can be analyzed statistically. The specific objectives
              are as follows: (1) A study of the comparative method (statistical methods that
              take into account an expected lack of independence of observations due to
              phylogenic relatedness). The generalized least-squares technique will be used
              to extend several types of standard multivariate statistical analyses (e.g.,
              two-block partial least-squares and principal components analysis) and the
              application to reticulate evolution. The phylogenetic autocorrelation method
              will also be studied. (2) Because morphometric data is sometimes incomplete,
              methods for the imputation of missing coordinate data will be investigated.
              These will include mean-value substitution, regression estimation, spline
              relaxation, and hot-decking. (3) Work will start on building a database on the
              morphometric diversity of Near Eastern human populations. These data will be
              useful for the two objectives described above. (4) New methods (described
              above) that we find most useful will be implemented in the tps series and the
              morpheus software so that these techniques will be freely available to others.
              Software for phylogenetic autocorrelation analysis will also be developed.
