Title       : Mechanisms of Cyclic Plastic Deformation in Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0090080

Award Number: 0090080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Kassner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant examines cyclic deformation, or fatigue, at a fundamental level.
              Metal fatigue is poorly understood, partly because the dislocation dynamics and
              internal stress-states during reversed deformation have not been characterized.
               The details of dislocation motion and interaction and the internal
              stress-state are critical to this process.  In this research a detailed
              description of cyclic deformation, including the Bauschinger effect, the
              substantial reversible strains with reversal of the direction of deformation,
              and the eventual saturation of the flow stress, will be accomplished, using
              advanced experimental techniques. Conventional dark- field (DF) transmission
              electron microscopy (TEM) will be used on Cu single crystals to assess
              dislocation dipole spacings and distributions, which will allow a determination
              of the local stress-state during cyclic plasticity. Experiments will include
              convergent beam electron diffraction (CBED) in the TEM that can probe small
              (20-nm diameter beam) areas to assess changes in the lattice parameter in
              unloaded foils as well as in-situ, or under load. This will allow direct
              assessment of the local internal stress with relatively high accuracy. The
              dislocation dynamics will be studied by in-situ deformation in the high voltage
              transmission electron microscope (HVEM). The role of screw dislocations will be
              investigated, including the existence of pile-ups and cross-slip. The details
              of dislocations associated with anelasticity on unloading will also be studied.
              Specially oriented foils will complement earlier reversed deformation
              experiments in the HVEM to especially determine the nature of screw dislocation
              dynamics during fatigue. 
%%%
In the past there has been only limited success
              with direct observation of dislocations during cyclic deformation, such as with
              in-situ cyclic or reversed plastic deformation tests such as in the
              transmission electron microscope. Also the internal stress-state has not been
              adequately determined. Internal stresses are widely suggested to exist in the
              vicinity of dislocation heterogeneities in cyclically (as well as
              monotonically) deformed microstructures. The heterogeneities include edge
              dislocation dipole bundles (veins) and the edge dipole walls of persistent slip
              bands (PSBs).  The understanding developed from this project will aid in the
              design of thin film devices that undergo cyclic stresses.
***



