Title       : Next-Generation Research Program Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0090303

Award Number: 0090303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Cozzens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will link the U.S. research assessment community to world
              discussions of the
problems and prospects of new ways of viewing the
              management of research. The
indicator systems that are currently in use for
              research programs around the world will
not yield much useful information in
              the end, because they are too closely tied to current
management information
              systems and therefore to input, process, and output measures.
The next
              generation of assessments must get a better handle on outcomes in order to
              meet
the demands of legislatures for broader public accountability. This
              project will bring
together those who are beginning to develop a new
              generation of measures and
approaches. The project will first work on
              identifying world resources in this area and
make that information available
              on a Web site. The centerpiece of the project is a three-day
retreat,
              envisioned for spring 2001, that will involve the key crafters of
              new
approaches to research assessment, from both the U.S. and other countries.
              Leading up to
the workshop, the project will re-establish network connections
              among researchers and
agency assessment staff in the United States, through a
              series of network meetings in
Washington. The main products will be a research
              agenda for the area; a U.S.-based
network, with international connections,
              bringing together academic researchers from
different fields with agency
              staff; and elements of training for a new generation of
assessment
              professionals.

