Title       : Plant Cyclic Nucleotide Gated Ion Channels; Structure: Function Analysis of a
               Newly Identified and Unique Family of Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0090675

Award Number: 0090675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary A. Toranzos                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387219             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald A. Berkowitz gerald.berkowitz@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Gaxiola  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

This laboratory has recently cloned and  undertaken the first functional
              characterization of Arabidopsis thaliana cyclic nucleotide (cNMP) gated
              K-conducting ion channel ('AtCNGC2').  Cyclic nucleotide gated (nonselective)
              cation channels (cngc's) (in animals) are ligand-gated, conduct K, Na, and Ca,
              and are regulated by cytosolic levels of Ca, calmodulin, and cyclic
              nucleotides.  Cngc's typically function in signal transduction pathways,
              providing a mechanism by which external signal perception invokes signaling
              cascades that in turn alter cellular functions.  The role that cAMP and cGMP
              play in specific signal transduction systems in animals is well known. 
              However, their involvement in specific signal transduction systems in plants is
              not well understood.  AtCNGC2 is apparently a member of a large gene family in
              plants: Database searches have identified 10 sequences in the A. thaliana
              genome which encode putative cngc's.  The deduced amino acid sequences of these
              plant cngc's differ from the animal cngc sequences in regions that are critical
              for function.  The electrophysiological properties of this plant class of ion
              channels have not been elucidated.  AtCNGC2 and other plant cngc's will be
              expressed in heterologous systems amenable to patch/voltage clamp analysis
              (Xenopus laevis oocytes, and/or HEK293 cell cultures).  Some of the AtCNGC2
              homologs will be expressed in oocytes for functional characterization.  The
              primary objective of this work will be an electrophysiological
              structure-function analysis of AtCNGC2 and homologs, focusing firstly on the
              selectivity filter of the pore and secondly on the cyclic nucleotide binding
              domains of these channels.  These studies will include site-directed
              mutagenesis of AtCNGC2, followed by voltage clamp analysis of oocytes
              expressing the mutated channels.  A detailed analysis will be undertaken of
              differences in ion selectivity profiles of these channels, and also differences
              in affinity for cAMP and cGMP.  This research objective should allow for a
              comparison of how differences in the primary protein structure of members of
              this plant channel family correlate with differences in function and
              regulation.  As other members of this large gene family are cloned, Northern
              analyses using coding sequences as a probe will be undertaken to monitor
              expression patterns of different members of this gene family in Arabidopsis. 
              This research project will generate new information about one of the most
              intensively studied areas of ion channel characterization: The molecular basis
              of ion selectivity.  A landmark study by others led to the first X-ray
              crystallographic analysis of a K-selective ion channel.  This pioneering work
              confirmed that a triplet of amino acids ('GYG') in the pore selectivity filter
              of K channels is absolutely required for channel conductance to favor K over
              Na.  Modeling of the AtCNGC2 pore selectivity filter indicates that the amino
              acid triplet 'AND' is associated with this unique channel's ability to conduct
              K and specifically select against Na, indicating that AtCNGC2 selects for K
              over Na conductance in a manner heretofore unknown in biology!  This finding
              suggests that current understanding of the molecular basis for ion selectivity
              profiles of channels should be reappraised.  The significance of this project
              is supported by the following:  a) the primary sequence differences amongst
              this channel family in functional domains suggests different channel
              properties;  b) the availability of a large family of cloned plant channels for
              study at the molecular level is unprecedented;  c) the channel properties (e.g.
              K and Ca conductance, but not Na) may be a unique biological paradigm that may
              provide valuable insights into how protein architecture affects channel
              properties; and  d) this family of proteins requires cAMP and cGMP for
              activation and these studies may provide insights into how cyclic nucleotides
              regulate ion channels in plant cells.

