Title       : RCN: Plant Cell Wall Biosynthesis Research Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0090281

Award Number: 0090281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $559866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Keegstra Keegstra@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra Mohnen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,1168,1664,9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY

A "Plant Cell Wall Biosynthesis Research Network"
              (WallBioNet) will be established.  The goals of WallBioNet are to: (1) Create
              and maintain a web site to serve as an information resource for researchers
              studying plant cell wall biosynthesis. (2) Coordinate and partially support the
              acquisition of substrates needed for polysaccharide biosynthesis as well as for
              other enzymes involved in the overall process of plant cell wall biosynthesis.
              (3) Develop a mechanism for the exchange of graduate students and postdoctoral
              researchers between laboratories that use different techniques to study plant
              cell wall biosynthesis. (4) Organize and provide partial support for small
              workshop-symposia to develop and define the goals and direction for wall
              biosynthesis research for the next decade. (5) Establish a group that will
              suggest nomenclature rules for the naming of authentic plant cell wall
              biosynthetic genes and mutants.  The WallBioNet web site will be coordinated
              and managed by the PI at Michigan State University.  The production and
              distribution of donor and acceptor substrates will be coordinated and managed
              by the Co-PI at the Complex Carbohdyrate Research Center.  Decisions regarding
              the content and format of the WallBioNet web site, the allocation of funds,
              nomination of a nomenclature committee, and organization of the WallBioNet
              workshop-symposium will be made by a Steering Committee whose members represent
              diverse areas of cell wall biosynthesis.  The WallBioNet will encourage
              researchers from diverse disciplines to work together to identify wall
              biosynthetic genes and to understand how the multiple enzymes work together to
              synthesize the plant cell wall.

Core Participants:

Daniel Cosgrove, Penn
              State Univ; reorganization of the wall matrix by expansins
Deborah Delmer,
              University of California, Davis; cellulose biosynthesis
Kenneth Keegstra,
              Michigan State Univ; xyloglucan biosynthesis
Debra Mohnen, Univ of Georgia;
              pectin biosynthesis
Chris Somerville, Carnegie Institute of Washington;
              genetic and genomic approaches Mary Tierney, University of Vermont;
              biosynthesis of wall structural proteins








0090281


