Title       : Models for Better Academic-Industrial Partnerships to Create Value from Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0090523

Award Number: 0090523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599344             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim B. Kohn kohn@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Seneca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bozena Michniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0090523		
Kohn			

This award is to Rutgers University to support the
              activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners are Rutgers University; University of Medicine
              and Dentistry of New Jersey, New Jersey Institute of Technology; New Jersey
              Center for Biomaterials, which includes 15 industrial members.

Proposed
              Activities
The activities in this award include implementation and evaluation
              of better models for academic-industrial partnerships; improved business
              assessment and planning tools for the innovation process; development of
              marketable technology from underutilized intellectual property within the
              industrial sector; engage faculty from business school entrepreneurship
              programs and public policy departments; education of graduate students in
              innovation and entrepreneurship.

Proposed Innovation
The innovation goals
              are the implementation and evaluation of better models for innovation including
              Technology Enablement Partnership (TEP) and Virtual Research Organization
              (VRO).  TEP model is for more efficient utilization of underdeveloped
              intellectual property within the academic sector by improved business
              assessment and planning.  VRO is for development of marketable technology from
              underutilized intellectual property within the industrial sector by novel
              interactions with academia.  Business schools and public policy departments are
              participating, as well as scientific and engineering departments from academia.
               Business and government agencies complete the partnerships with their
              traditional strengths.  The models and their evaluations will be disseminated
              through normal channels plus a public Innovation Workshop.

Potential
              Economic Impact
Workforce needs for innovation in the form of graduate student
              education will provide the infrastructure to enable innovation in the
              biomaterials sector.  The models will be evaluated and the results will be
              disseminated.  Any business enterprises from the commercialization activities
              will also have economic impact.

Potential Societal Impact
Biomaterials have
              many applications that will be important to medicine and public health.  In
              addition, new jobs in the technology sector will be a benefit in New
              Jersey.


