Title       : Regulation of the SCF(Met30p) Ubiquitin Ligase Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0090403

Award Number: 0090403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal Mathias pmathi@lsuhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LSU Health Scs Cntr-Shreve
	      1501 Kings Highway
	      Shreveport, LA  71130    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An important means of regulating a protein's activity is to regulate its
              abundance.   A family of multi-protein complexes, called SCF complexes, target
              protein substrates for degradation.   The substrate recognition component of an
              SCF complex is called the F-box protein.   Different F-box proteins are present
              in a cell, and form distinct SCF complexes that will recognize different
              protein substrates. SCF complexes are evolutionarily conserved, being found in
              a wide range of organisms, and play key roles in diverse biological pathways,
              such as cell division and metabolism.   Although SCF complexes play a crucial
              role in biology, little is known about how their activity is regulated.   F-box
              proteins are  substrates for degradation, suggesting that their abundance
              regulates the activity of their respective SCF complex.   Indeed, the abundance
              of the F-box protein Met30p appears to regulate the activity of the SCFMet30p
              complex.   This research project is directed towards understanding how the
              abundance of Met30p is controlled  . The SCFMet30p complex regulates the
              process of sulfur uptake and metabolism.   Sulfur is found in many molecules
              essential for life, such as the amino acid methionine.   Fungi such as yeast
              have the ability to take up elemental sulfur and, through a series of metabolic
              steps, convert it to methionine. Through this process of sulfur fixation, 
              methionine  and other sulfur-containing molecules can be synthesized.   The
              SCFMet30p complex negatively regulates the process of sulfur fixation.  In the
              presence of methionine, the SCFMet30p complex inhibits sulfur uptake and
              metabolism.   Preliminary data support the hypothesis that methionine
              availability plays a role in regulating Met30p abundance in yeast  . An
              immediate goal of this project is to monitor the abundance of Met30p, SCFMet30p
              substrates and the activity of genes involved in sulfur metabolism as cells
              make the transition from an environment containing methionine to an environment
              lacking methionine.   This work will test the hypothesis that SCFMet30p complex
              activity is regulated by Met30p abundance, which is in turn regulated by
              methionine availability.   Furthermore, this work will describe the process
              regulating sulfur uptake and methionine synthesis.   Additional aims of this
              research project are to: i) identify genes that are involved in regulating
              Met30p abundance and ii) identify amino acid residues within Met30p that target
              it for degradation.   This work will describe how changes in environmental
              conditions are sensed and permit the modulation of Met30p abundance in order to
              regulate SCFMet30p complex activity.   SCF complexes, present in fungi and in
              other multi-cellular organisms, coordinate cellular responses to a diverse
              range of environmental signals.   The abundance of the F-box proteins
              associated with these SCF complexes appear to be regulated.   This research
              program will improve the understanding of a process that may be fundamental to
              all cells.
