Title       : Theoretical Studies in Gravitation and Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0090310

Award Number: 0090310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart L. Shapiro shapiro@astro.physics.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The PI will address several problems involving general relativity,
the
              generation of gravitational radiation, relativistic
hydrodynamics, radiative
              transport, and stellar dynamics.
A common thread uniting the different
              theoretical topics 
is the crucial role of gravitation, especially
              relativistic
gravitation as described by Einstein's field equations
              of
general relativity. Compact objects (black holes and neutron stars) 
will
              provide the principal forum, and the understanding 
the dynamics of matter in
              a strong gravitational field 
will be a major theme. Some of the topics that
              will be 
investigated include the inspiral and coalescence of binary 
neutron
              stars and black holes, the generation of gravitational 
waves from binaries
              and other promising astrophysical sources 
of gravitational radiation,
              gravitational collapse, the 
stability of rotating neutron stars and
              supermassive stars 
and the final fate of unstable stars, and the formation of
              
supermassive black holes in the cores of galaxies and quasars. 

Most of
              the topics that will be addressed represent 
long-standing, fundamental
              problems in theoretical
physics requiring large-scale computation for
              solution. 
Hence the approach will involve to a significant
              degree
large-scale computations on parallel machines, 
as well as analytical
              modeling. Many of the numerical 
calculations will be carried out using the 
              computational 
resources of the UIUC's National Center for Supercomputing
              
Applications (NCSA). Utilizing and developing new algorithms 
for these
              computers and visualization tools will help advance
state-of-the art computing
              in the US.  The results of the 
calculations will have an important bearing on
              forthcoming 
astronomical observations, including those planned for
              
gravitational wave interferometers, such as LIGO and LISA. 
The theoretical
              modeling of gravitational waveforms which 
will be performed by Shapiro and
              his group will provide
essential input for the identification of sources
              of
gravitational radiation  by these instruments.
