Title       : Development Of A Propulsion Laboratory Using A Small Turbojet Engine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1993       
File        : a9352755

Award Number: 9352755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin W. Whitaker kwhitaker@coe.eng.ua.eng  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The College of Engineering at the University of Alabama has a                  
              student population which is more than 19% minority and just                    
              under 20% female students.  The Department of Aerospace                        
              Engineering has a curriculum designed to provide students with                 
              a broad-based practical education.  Accordingly, almost all of                 
              the aerospace engineering courses are complemented with                        
              experimental facilities. The one subject area which is not                     
              complemented by a laboratory is that of propulsion. This                       
              proposal hopes to obtain support for a laboratory at the                       
              University of Alabama which is unique to undergraduate                         
              propulsion education, not only due to the equipment, but also                  
              in the way in which the subject matter is taught. The                          
              laboratory will be based on a small, fully-operational turbojet                
              engine, its accompanying test chamber, and a data acquisition                  
              and control computer. The exciting, new pedagogical approach to                
              be taken to teach propulsion utilizing the proposed laboratory                 
              was originally developed by researchers in the field of                        
              secondary school science education. The structure of the new                   
              propulsion systems course will follow what is called a learning                
              cycle strategy. This teaching approach represents a major                      
              departure from that used for traditional engineering courses.                  
              In particular, the laboratory component will have a different                  
              focus; by using the learning cycle, laboratory experiences                     
              precede lecture material. The propulsion laboratory based on                   
              this proposed equipment would primarily support the                            
              undergraduate course in propulsion systems. However, one other                 
              exciting use of the equipment would be in support of a new                     
              undergraduate course being taught in the Department of                         
              Aerospace Engineering. The new course will be taught to                        
              sophomore and junior level education majors, introducing them                  
              to aerospace related science and technology concepts. A                        
              propulsion laboratory, such as the one proposed, will highly                   
              complement this new science course and will expose many                        
              students outside of the College of Engineering to the operation                
              of a gas turbine engine.
