Title       : Thermal Science and Control Systems Laboratory Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1993     
File        : a9352267

Award Number: 9352267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14433              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Mertens john.mertens@trincoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Taikang Ning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      300 Summit Street
	      Hartford, CT  061063100    203/527-3151

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                     The primary objective of the proposed project is to                    
              provide a laboratory experience for undergraduate engineering                  
              students in two new courses: ECS 312 Feedback Control Theory,                  
              and ECS 344 Thermal Systems. (These courses are required of all                
              engineering majors at Trinity College.) This is being                          
              accomplished using a state-of-the-art remotely controlled 6-                   
              Pass Heat Exchanger and LabVIEW software with A/D interfacing.                 
              Students in Feedback Control Theory are developing a closed                    
              loop control system with a Macintosh Microcomputer that is                     
              already on hand and available for use. Students in Thermal                     
              Systems are using the equipment to study basic concepts                        
              involved in heat transfer and thermodynamics. The proposed                     
              equipment is also exposing the students to basic transducers                   
              and electronics, as well as computer controlled data                           
              acquisition. Currently, there is no engineering laboratory                     
              equipment at Trinity that would be appropriate for use in these                
              new courses. This is a severe shortcoming of the engineering                   
              program that must be redressed.The project is also providing                   
              students with independent research and senior design projects,                 
              required of all engineering majors. It is providing unique                     
              collaborative opportunities for mechanical and electrical                      
              engineering students, such as the development of data                          
              acquisition and control software and its use in the analysis of                
              heat exchanger performance.The proposed equipment is also being                
              used to introduce non-engineering students to the basic                        
              principles of heat transfer, thermodynamics, and computer                      
              controlled equipment in two recently developed introductory                    
              technology courses. These courses are aimed at encouraging                     
              students to pursue science and engineering careers and to                      
              develop a quantitative understanding of technology.The                         
              equipment is also being used to attract Greater Hartford Area                  
              minority middle and high school students to engineering through                
              the Connecticut Pre-Engineering Program (CPEP). Trinity College                
              has participated in CPEP for the past 6 1/2 years by sponsoring                
              Saturday and summer science courses for these students.
