Title       : Gas Exchange as a Primary Component of a Research-Oriented Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9352793

Award Number: 9352793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18448              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Mansfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albertson College of Idaho
	      2112 Cleveland Blvd.
	      Caldwell, ID  836054494    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Gas Exchange as a Primary Component of a Research-Oriented                     
              Biology Curriculum                                                             
              A new biology curriculum integrates project-oriented                           
              laboratories in all four years of the major to empower students                
              with experience, confidence, and skills necessary to undertake                 
              independent research.  A series of laboratory activities leads                 
              students through progressively more significant research                       
              experiences from introduction of biological concepts through                   
              guided design of their own experiments to development of                       
              research protocols. This series develops throughout three                      
              sequential courses: Frontiers in Biology, Organismal Biology,                  
              and Plant Physiology and prepares students for independent                     
              research projects involving organismal metabolism and gas                      
              exchange. Infrared gas analysis systems engage Frontiers in                    
              Biology students in the development of concepts in                             
              photosynthesis and respiration. Students in Organismal Biology                 
              use a diffusion phorometer and a portable photosynthesis system                
              to investigate mechanisms of control of transpiration, factors                 
              that limit photosynthesis, and the effects of mineral nutrition                
              on photosynthesis and transpiration. In Plant Physiology,                      
              students apply gas exchange techniques used in prerequisite                    
              courses to develop research protocols for investigating water                  
              use efficiency of desert shrubs, fruit ripening in native                      
              plants, and mechanisms of senescence in leaves.
