Title       : Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Undergraduate Instruction in Thin Film Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9352786

Award Number: 9352786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie H. Allen l-allen9@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Cahill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              The "Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Undergraduate                           
              Instruction in Thin Film Science" project is proposed to                       
              enhance the undergraduate Electronic Thin Film laboratory for                  
              seniors in the Materials Science and Engineering Department.                   
              Because surface thermodynamics and kinetics play a key role in                 
              the growth and processing of thin film electronic materials, we                
              seek to expand the topics for our laboratory to include surface                
              atomic structure and surface thermodynamics and kinetics. The                  
              invention of the STM allows undergraduate students the                         
              opportunity to actually observe not only atoms individually but                
              also to measure fundamental properties of materials on the most                
              basic level. It will be used in our laboratory to observe the                  
              dynamics of the interactions between the atoms on the surface                  
              which is key to understanding the basic materials processes                    
              such as diffusion, coalescence and grain growth. Drawing on our                
              personal experience with STM and the input of colleagues we                    
              have assembled set of experiments to be investigated for their                 
              suitability for undergraduate instruction. Experiments include                 
              tunneling phenomena, structure and microstructure                              
              characterization including atomic resolution of individual                     
              organic adsorbates and the 2-D ordering of polymers. However                   
              the majority of the development of this work will be focused                   
              toward designing experiments which emphasis core concepts in                   
              materials science: Nucleation and Growth. A report which                       
              details these experiments will be written as a laboratory                      
              manual.
