Title       : Novel Laboratory Instruction in Undergraduate Statistics Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1993      
File        : a9352312

Award Number: 9352312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90221              (Estimated)
Investigator: Panickos N. Palettas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter R. Pirie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9352312  Palettas  The Statistics Focus Group, sponsored by the Mathematical 
              Association of America's Curriculum Action Project, has  recently raised two
              very important issues concerning  undergraduate statistics education. First,
              traditional  lecturing is proving ineffective to convey the basic concepts 
              from probability and statistics. Second, dogmatic teaching of  older
              theoretical frames becomes increasingly less relevant as  the advancement in
              power and sophistication of modern computing  leads to fundamental changes in
              statistical practice.  This project is developing a novel mode of instruction
              which is  addressing both of the above concerns. Specifically, the  project is
              fostering active learning by means of laboratory  instruction which employs
              calculation and plotting as means for  exploration and learning. At the same
              time, the project is  enriching the scientific content of undergraduate
              statistics  curricula with respect to advances in statistical/mathematical 
              computing and state-of-the-art computer intensive statistical  methodology.  In
              summary, Virginia Tech is developing a foundational course  to set up the
              framework to promote the use of structured,  partially supervised laboratory
              instruction. For that purpose,  the course is  designed to provide the students
              with a broad  introduction to numerical, graphical and symbolic computation, 
              which will be the tools employed by laboratory instruction, as  well as with
              guidance and direction to help them develop the  skills which is promoting
              active learning via the use of  calculation and plotting. The laboratories
              being developed  under this project are initiating the change from lecturing to
               laboratory-instruction along the lines described above. The  project is
              tailored to the needs of the Statistics Majors  Program at Virginia Tech, but
              it is an innovative pilot project  with high potential to provide national
              models of continuing  impact.  ***
