Title       : A Mathematics Computer Laboratory For Liberal Arts And Science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1995      
File        : a9352663

Award Number: 9352663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23890              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Streid streid@math.miu.edu        ext. 3504  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric W. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Gorini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret A. Dow  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Maharishi Univ of Manageme
	      
	      Fairfield, IA  52556    515/472-5031

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The mathematics department at Maharishi International                          
              University is implementing a plan to improve its undergraduate                 
              mathematics program. The primary goals are: (1) to develop in                  
              every undergraduate student through a process of exploration                   
              and discovery the understanding that the essence of mathematics                
              is the precise quantification of patterns and relationships,                   
              and (2) to develop in our mathematics and science students                     
              better problem solving skills so that they may successfully                    
              apply mathematical concepts to model and solve practical                       
              problems.Steps being taken to implement these goals include (1)                
              a revised course content in the mathematics core course taken                  
              by all undergraduate students, (2) the development of a general                
              education geometry course aimed at humanities majors, and (3)                  
              restructuring of the calculus sequence, including the adoption                 
              of the Harvard Consortium Calculus textbook.The computer                       
              laboratory includes Macintosh computers running Mathematica and                
              Geometer's Sketchpad. Three primary uses of the computers are                  
              (1) to generate examples from which students may observe                       
              patterns and make conjectures, (2) to apply graphical,                         
              numerical, and symbolic approaches to develop a                                
              deeperunderstanding of the important concepts of mathematics                   
              and (3) to use technology to more realistically apply these                    
              concepts in real-world situations. Mathematica notebooks to                    
              accompany the Harvard Consortium Calculus text are also being                  
              developed.
