Title       : Instrumentation for a Tissue Culture/Light Microscopy Instructional Core
               Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9352721

Award Number: 9352721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43125              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Frankis   (Principal Investigator current)
              G D. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Helen T. Nivison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College/Univ of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Over the past six years, the Biology Department at the College                 
              of Charleston has strengthened the quality of instruction in                   
              the area of Cellular and Molecular Biology. This initiative has                
              included the procurement of modern equipment, the hiring of new                
              faculty, and an expansion of course offerings. Consistent with                 
              this ongoing effort to modernize our Cell and Molecular Biology                
              curriculum, this proposal focuses on a request for microscopic                 
              and tissue culture equipment which would be used to enhance the                
              quality of laboratory instruction at the whole cell level. This                
              equipment will be used in several new or restructured courses                  
              including Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, Developmental                       
              Biology and Plant Physiology. The incubators and sterile                       
              transfer hoods requested in this proposal, make possible the                   
              culture of a wide variety of plant and animal cells and                        
              tissues. The light microscopic, video, and image analysis                      
              equipment will be used to investigate cell proliferation,                      
              migration, and adhesion, as well as to perform chromosomal                     
              analysis, and tumor induction studies on cultured cells and                    
              tissues. The laboratories incorporating these techniques are                   
              research-oriented, and are designed to help students develop                   
              critical thinking and data analysis skills, as well as to give                 
              students hands on experience with research quality equipment.
