Title       : Modernization of the Douglas College Physics Instruction Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1993       
File        : a9352140

Award Number: 9352140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Molnar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joe H. Pifer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9352140  Molnar  We are modernizing and improving the undergraduate General 
              Physics Lab taught at Douglass College, the nation's largest  women's college,
              which is located at Rutgers University.  The  female students who take General
              Physics I and II at Douglass  College primarily plan to major in math, science,
              and  engineering.  A substantial number of them are minority  students. The
              General Physics Lab has been taught separately  from the lecture course with a
              weak connection in topics.  It  has emphasized tedious data-taking and
              quantitative  verification of physical laws.  In order to provide greater 
              instructional support for these students, who do more poorly in  General
              Physics than students on other campuses, we have  completely modernized the
              General Physics Lab sections taught  at Douglass College, in addition to
              tightly coupling the  experiments to the material covered in lecture each week.
               The  modernization encompasses the introduction of computer-aided  experiments
              along with replacing outmoded apparatus.  We have  obtained a dozen Macintosh
              microcomputers with lab interfaces  and sensors to run Microprocessor Based
              Laboratory experiments.   We have also replaced of our air tracks, optics, and 
              electrostatics experiments.  Our objective is to build in our  students an
              intuitive feeling for physical concepts through  hands-on experience in the
              laboratory.  The new experiments are  based upon our success with minilabs in
              other courses, which  focuses on understanding physics principles as they are 
              concurrently discussed in lecture. We feel it is particularly  apt to celebrate
              the 75th anniversary of Douglass College by  changing our way of teaching
              physics at Douglass so that  physics is no longer a major hurdle in a woman's
              path to a  scientific career, and thus, to career equality.  ***
