Title       : A Threaded Integration of Hardware and Software Concepts in Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1993        
File        : a9352596

Award Number: 9352596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald N. Schroeder rschroed@sct.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fred Hartfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice McPherson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Col Technology
	      1100 South Marietta Parkway
	      Marietta, GA  30060    404/424-7230

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is the result of two years of planning to                        
              integrate a hardware concepts experience within the software                   
              oriented coursework in computer science. Too often students are                
              given the impression that software development is associated                   
              with data handling that leads only to calculations, reports,                   
              and printouts or visual displays of one form or another, with                  
              little or no appreciation for the fact that computers must                     
              often monitor and control physical processes as well. We are                   
              therefore proposing an integration of external devices and                     
              embedded software into instruction in a range of courses rather                
              than just those that would normally include this. The general                  
              theme is to create multiple experiences with the integration of                
              hardware and software concepts throughout a number of the                      
              courses in the undergraduate curriculum (all of which are                      
              either required or advanced technical electives in the major).                 
              The plan is to acquire the hardware for this project, set it up                
              and test it with respect to inclusion in our target classes,                   
              then implement and refine this infusion of conceptual/practical                
              material into our classes with significant gains in depth and                  
              understanding as the thread is followed through the classes                    
              from one level to the next. Each of the investigators has                      
              special contributions to make to the overall project, including                
              an enormous amount of quality instructional experience. They                   
              form an effective support component to ensure that the range of                
              activities planned are completed. The team is compatible,                      
              enthusiastic, and motivated. The hardware systems for the                      
              project have been carefully selected for potential use in the                  
              broadest range of classes from beginning programming principles                
              to advanced system software and real-time systems.
