Title       : HVAC Research and Development Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9352731

Award Number: 9352731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72045              (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Sehi gsehi@sinclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Watton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell K. Marcks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sinclair Cmty College
	      444 West Third Street
	      Dayton, OH  454021421    513/226-2500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9255,
Abstract    :
              This project is directed at the design and development of a                    
              coordinated group of instructional laboratory apparatus to be                  
              used in student-conducted experiments to demonstrate and                       
              measure the operating characteristics, both steady-state and                   
              dynamic, of various types of heating, ventilating, and air                     
              conditioning control units and systems used in the HVAC systems                
              of commercial buildings, auditoriums, schools, and other large-                
              scale installations.                                                           
              This project is an extension to an initial effort, under local                 
              funding and industry support over the past two years, to                       
              develop a laboratory set-up for a student-conducted experiment                 
              to demonstrate and measure the steady-state and dynamic                        
              behavior of a typical single-loop control system controlling                   
              static air pressure in an air duct.  This effort will allow                    
              completing the design of the single-loop control system for air                
              including adding a microprocessor-type control unit and the                    
              extension of the same approach to two other HVAC systems,                      
              specifically (a) A single loop control system for a hot-water                  
              coil and (b) A single-zone economizer cycle. This project                      
              should result in the attainment of a capability to challenge                   
              HVAC design students at the undergraduate level to apply basic                 
              control theory to the measurement and analysis of system                       
              behavior, using closed- and open-loop tests in both the time-                  
              and frequency-domains.  An advisory board comprised of                         
              educators, members of appropriate technical societies, and                     
              industrial representatives will guide the conduct of the                       
              project and actively participate in its evaluation.  The                       
              results of the proposed project will be the subject of a two-                  
              day workshop on improved instruction in HVAC design,                           
              particularly with respect to control theory, to be hosted by                   
              the project management team.  Publication of project results                   
              will be made at annual meetings of the American Society of                     
              Heating, Refrigeration, and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE)                
              and the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE).
