Title       : Elementary Education Technology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1993       
File        : a9352405

Award Number: 9352405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31241              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt Killion jkk852f@vma.smsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clyde A. Paul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Missouri State U
	      901 South National
	      Springfield, MO  658040027    417/836-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project will assist in the development of a mathematics                   
              laboratory classroom for preservice elementary education                       
              students and for a college geometry course for prospective                     
              secondary mathematics teachers.  The computers and software                    
              acquired as a result of this proposal will provide a                           
              technological environment which students will use to enhance                   
              their mathematical explorations. The course for which this                     
              laboratory is being designed serves approximately 300 students                 
              per year and is currently undergoing major curriculum                          
              development to provide a true laboratory experience in                         
              mathematics. This project will make it possible for students to                
              integrate technological approaches with their activity-oriented                
              and manipulative-based approach to learning mathematical                       
              concepts. As suggested by the NCTM's Professional Standards for                
              Teaching Mathematics, it is essential that preservice teachers                 
              have these kinds of mathematical experiences in their                          
              undergraduate courses. It is unreasonable to expect these                      
              future teachers to provide, for their students, mathematical                   
              experiences which involve, for example, problem solving,                       
              communication, and the use of technology if they have not                      
              experienced that mathematics themselves. The technology                        
              available in this laboratory will not only be used to enhance                  
              the preservice teacher's expertise, but will also have an                      
              important impact on the curriculum development of the                          
              elementary laboratory course. Dissemination plans involve use                  
              of the developed-curriculum in subsequent courses, inservice                   
              workshops for teachers In the region, and the availability of                  
              a laboratory manual to help implement the curriculum.
