Title       : Multimedia Laboratory For Undergraduate Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1993      
File        : a9352486

Award Number: 9352486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Kress kress@postbox.csi.cuny.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marsha Moroh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred M. Levine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard Domanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta Klibaner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Staten Island
	      2800 Victory Boulevard
	      Staten Island, NY  10314    718/982-2254

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              In order to educate a skilled work force able to compete in the                
              world market it is necessary to teach in ways vastly different                 
              from heretofore. Increasingly complex technology requires a                    
              multidimensional understanding of physical processes,                          
              algorithms and systems. The linear approach of conventional                    
              media is poorly adapted to this purpose. A multimedia and                      
              hypermedia environment which can employ animation, interactive                 
              graphics and sound annotation embedded in interactive                          
              courseware, and compression of the time scale is needed for                    
              understanding complex systems. Given the heterogeneous                         
              population of students now educated in institutions of higher                  
              learning, teaching methods must respond to a variety of                        
              backgrounds and needs. Although individual classroom                           
              instruction is not feasible with conventional media it is                      
              fundamental to a multimedia and hypermedia environment.                        
              This project will develop a computer laboratory based                          
              multimedia environment (MLUI) for teaching undergraduate                       
              courses in multimedia technology, science, engineering, and                    
              mathematics, and for undergraduate research. The project                       
              consists of installing a multimedia laboratory, offering new                   
              courses in multimedia technology, developing multimedia                        
              courseware and using it as well as other multimedia courseware                 
              to teach interactive courses in the MLUI. Special provisions                   
              for the use of the multimedia technology for the disabled are                  
              a high priority, for example, touch displays and speech                        
              synthesizers for the visually impaired.
