Title       : Computer Laboratory to Sustain Cumalative Improvement in Calculus and
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9352541

Award Number: 9352541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Eslinger Eslinger@alpha.hendrix.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Dwayne Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hendrix College
	      1600 Washington Avenue
	      Conway, AR  72032    501/329-6811

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
                  Hendrix College proposes to establish a computer laboratory                
              to continue improvement in Calculus and Differential Equations                 
              consistent with the following objectives: (1) present concepts                 
              in a meaningful context; (2) use writing as an effective                       
              learning tool; (3) nurture collaborative learning among the                    
              students; and (4) develop an environment for discovery                         
              learning. For the past five years, the Mathematics Department                  
              has made incremental, innovative changes in its Calculus III                   
              sequence by introducing writing assignments and computer                       
              laboratories which integrate writing and numeric, graphic, and                 
              symbolic computations using the "notebook" feature of                          
              Mathematica on the Macintosh. The Department is poised to                      
              implement similar curricular enhancements in Calculus III and                  
              Differential Equations. However, these courses require more                    
              extensive computations to visualize and explore concepts in a                  
              dynamic, collaborative environment, and existing equipment is                  
              not adequate to perform these tasks.  This proposal requests                   
              funds to (1) establish a student computer laboratory to run                    
              Mathematica satisfactorily, (2) provide a mobile computer                      
              workstation for classroom demonstrations, and (3) upgrade two                  
              workstations for faculty developing and teaching the courses.                  
              The requested equipment is designed to sustain cumulative                      
              improvement through incremental curricular change initiated                    
              within the context of institutional needs and resources.                       
              Diverse materials generated by other calculus reform and                       
              writing across the curriculum initiatives are evaluated and                    
              then adapted to meet local objectives. This approach not only                  
              serves as a model to other institutions who share the desire to                
              invigorate their curriculum, but it also stimulates the                        
              utilization of these valuable materials to do so.
