Title       : The Design and Use of an Interactive Laboratory for CS1 and CS2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1993       
File        : a9352340

Award Number: 9352340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ongard Sirisaengtaksin ongard@dt.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Waller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ananda D. Gunawardena  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston Downtown
	      Number One Main Street
	      Houston, TX  770023313    713/221-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to equip a classroom for the                 
              purpose of conducting closed laboratories for CS1 and CS2                      
              courses.  The equipment requested includes IBM compatible 486                  
              microcomputers and support hardware and software such as Novell                
              Netware, a laser printer, Microsoft WIindows, and Turbo                        
              Pascal.The laboratory exercises conducted in this classroom                    
              will follow the model for introductory programming labs which                  
              has emerged in the literature.  However, these labs will be                    
              interactive in the following sense:  A GUI shell program will                  
              guide students through the tasks and activities of the lab,                    
              providing access to required resources such as compilers and                   
              demonstration programs.  Students will interact with this shell                
              in the standard way, via controls such as icons, buttons,                      
              menus, etc. The proposers believe this new environment will be                 
              significantly more engaging and stimulating for the student,                   
              aiding the recruitment and retention of potential majors in                    
              Computer Science.  Each shell program would be a free-standing                 
              Windows application, and thus can be used as is by instructors                 
              at other institutions.The authors propose development of an                    
              object-oriented framework to support the quick and efficient                   
              coding of these lab shell applications.  This framework would                  
              capture the design of the shell applications as well as the                    
              model upon which they are based.  With minimal knowledge, other                
              instructors could use the framework to develop interactive lab                 
              exercises customized to their own student body and interests.                  
              Moreover, the framework could be used to devlop lab exercises                  
              for other CS courses also. Thus, this lab framework would                      
              represent a significant contribution to instructional                          
              technology.
