Title       : ICP for an Interdisciplinary Environmental Science Program at Colorado College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9352208

Award Number: 9352208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan W. Bower nbower@cc.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Loeffler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Ebersole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado College
	      
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80903    303/473-2233

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Colorado College proposes to strengthen offerings in a new                     
              interdisciplinary environmental science program by adding an                   
              inductively coupled plasma spectrometer (ICP) to the current                   
              equipment used to teach environmental courses in the chemistry,                
              geology, economics, and biology departments. Faculty in a                      
              variety of departments have created new courses and improved                   
              existing courses to meet student demand for environmental                      
              science education. The next step in providing a substantive                    
              curriculum for these students is to strengthen the quantitative                
              analysis components of environmental course offerings. The                     
              proposed ICP, because of its multicomponent analysis                           
              capabilities, is particularly effective for involving students                 
              in developing and evaluating various alternative models,as well                
              as providing quantitative data. The ICP will be used by                        
              students in environmental courses in chemistry, biology,                       
              geology, and economics to analyze air and water for elemental                  
              pollutants, and plants and soils for nutrients and toxic                       
              metals, as well as investigate the bioaccumulation of heavy                    
              metals in food webs.Colorado College faculty believe strongly                  
              that the sciences should be taught as a laboratory or field                    
              experience in which models and theories are created to explain                 
              observations, and that the best laboratory teaching experiences                
              contain a significant component of original research that                      
              allows students to become involved in the practice of science.                 
              Not only are students prepared for possible teaching, graduate,                
              or industrial work, but non-science majors are exposed to the                  
              processes by which scientists arrive at the conclusions that                   
              impact all of our lives.  Based on past experiences with other                 
              instruments at Colorado College we expect the ICP to further                   
              enhance the interaction between departments, both within the                   
              natural sciences and across to the social sciences.
