Title       : Flight Testing for Undergraduate Instruction, Minority and Community College
               Recruitment, and K-12 Outreach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9352400

Award Number: 9352400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36092              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Abbitt jda@mozart.aero.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Hirko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce F. Carroll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Fearn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold W. Doddington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              We propose to instrument our Cessna 172 aircraft with                          
              scientific equipment so that we may implement a cohesive flight                
              test program. The engineering instructional capability of the                  
              instrumented aircraft will strengthen and unify our                            
              undergraduate Aerospace Engineering program, our minority                      
              student community college outreach program, and our K-12                       
              engineering outreach programs. We envisage a scenario similar                  
              to that existing in a corporate aircraft company whereby a                     
              problem is defined by top administrators, a flight test program                
              to solve that problem is designed by the engineering staff, and                
              support for the flight test program is provided by the various                 
              branches. In the university analogy, the faculty will pick a                   
              flight test problem such as an aircraft stability problem. The                 
              senior level Stability and Control class will develop a flight                 
              test and become program managers. Other classes will support                   
              that effort: Low Speed Aerodynamics students will calibrate the                
              instrumentation, the Design class will design and construct                    
              wing mounts for the instrumentation, the Instrumentation class                 
              will be responsible for integration of the instruments,                        
              community college students will perform data analysis, and                     
              middle school students will assist at the airport with aircraft                
              preparation. All students will participate in the actual flight                
              tests. To carry out this project, we require a data analysis                   
              and display system, a flow visualization system, a pressure                    
              measurement system, a flight dynamics system, and a global                     
              positioning system.
