Title       : Development Site for Complex, Technology-Based Problems in Calculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1995  
File        : a9352849

Award Number: 9352849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron Klebanoff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Winkel  (Principal Investigator former)
              Bart Goddard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Lautzenheiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9352849  Winkel                                                                 
               Faculty and students at Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology in  cooperation
              with several high school teachers are developing and  disseminating complex
              problems in calculus. These calculus problems  are based on applications in
              science and engineering and offer an  opportunity to use computers as part of
              the problem-solving  strategy.  These technology-based problems are
              interdisciplinary in  nature and integrate concepts from calculus, engineering,
              and  physics.  During the academic year, faculty are locating resources and 
              developing significant problems, testing them in courses,  summarizing student
              reactions and solution strategies, and  modifying and extending problems.
              Student developers are assisting  in evaluating solutions submitted by student
              solvers, assessing  prerequisite knowledge needed for attempting these
              problems, and  determining the level of effort and time needed for success.  In
              the summer, teams of faculty, students, and associate high  school mathematics
              teachers are developing new problems, polishing  established problems,
              preparing standard formats for problem  presentation, loading the materials for
              electronic access through  anonymous "ftp" site facilities (Bitnet and
              Internet) at Rose-  Hulman, producing Mathematica resources to accompany
              problems, and  writing up guidelines for using problems in high school and
              college  calculus settings. Suggestions for non-Mathematica users are being 
              offered in each situation as well as guides on how to use the  materials. About
              50 problem sets are being developed. Faculty from  Rose-Hulman are conducting
              short courses in problem use and  development at local, regional, and national
              meetings.
