Title       : A Computing Classroom - Laboratory For Undergraduate Mathematics Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1993      
File        : a9352676

Award Number: 9352676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Gilliam gilliam@texas.math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Schovanec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9352676  Gilliam     Texax Tech University is creating a computerized classroom-
               laboratory that will have a major impact on undergraduate  science and
              mathematics education. First, it is providing a  classroom environment in which
              to teach the course "Computa-  tional Techniques for Mathematics and Science"
              (CTMS) for  prospective mathematics and science teachers as well as honors 
              calculus using Maple. This allows for both demonstration and  guidance while
              students gain hands-on experience during class.  This equipment is also being
              used as a laboratory in which  students can complete assignments and projects
              utilizing the  same computing format they deal with in class.Enrollment in 
              CTMS consists primarily of post-calculus students who are  mathematics majors
              or students seeking secondary mathematics  teacher certification. This course
              includes topics that develop  skills in programming, numerical computation, and
              symbolic  manipulation using primarily MATLAB and Maple. It also provides 
              training needed by a growing number of secondary teachers who  use computers in
              their classrooms. In particular, the Lubbock  Independent School District has
              recently implemented the use of  computer algebra systems into the secondary
              curriculum. The  Department of Mathematics offers a special summer workshop 
              modeled after the CTMS course for the purpose of introducing  secondary
              teachers to the uses of modern computer systems.  Since many high school
              graduates from the Lubbock area attend  Texas Tech, the CTMS course and the
              Summer Workshop for  secondary teachers are having an important influence on
              the  undergraduate program in mathematics and science at Texas Tech  and the
              high school mathematics curricula.            ***
