Title       : Creation Of A Computer-Based Synoptic Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1993  
File        : a9352344

Award Number: 9352344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49356              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick H. Carr fcarr@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Condo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9352344  Carr  The School of Meteorology at the University of Oklahoma will 
              improve the quality and scope of its undergraduate education  for both majors
              and nonmajors through the creation of a  computer-based synoptic laboratory.
              This facility primarily  consists of a network of UNIX-based servers and X
              terminals,  and enables students to access and effectively process current 
              and/or archived meteorological data using software produced by  the UPC
              (UNIDATA Program Center).  The facility meets three needs. First, it will
              permit more  innovative techniques in exposing nonmajors to scientific 
              concepts which may impact their daily lives, and allow them to  gain a better
              understanding of local and global weather,  climate, and environmental issues.
              Second, this facility will  satisfy the need of undergraduate majors in
              atmospheric science  to utilize, software packages on X terminals for
              simultaneous  viewing of text and raster image graphics in a classroom 
              environment. This laboratory will greatly facilitate the  teaching of important
              meteorological concepts via real-time use  of conventional, profiler, surface
              mesonetwork, satellite,  radar, and model data. Third, the School will convert
              from a  VMS computing environment to a UNIX-based one, enabling it to  fully
              participate as a primary node in the distribution of  weather data over the
              Internet.  The creation of a computer-based synoptic laboratory addresses 
              these crucial needs because of the versatility and power of the  UNIX-based
              servers, and the enhanced graphics capabilities of  the X terminals. The
              quality of undergraduate instruction will  be improved considerably since
              faculty and students will be  able to utilize UPC software packages with
              current or archived  meteorological data in both classroom and research
              endeavors.  ***
