Title       : Collaborative Research: Characterization of Pigments and Ultrastructure of
               Photosynthetic Ultraplankton in the North Atlantic and Pacific Oceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1991        
File        : a9018298

Award Number: 9018298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146269             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen D. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,1650,
Abstract    :
                   The photosynthetic ultraphytoplankton dominate ocean systems,             
              both in terms of primary productivity and biomass, especially in               
              stratified waters.  However, the eukaryotic ultraplankton are only             
              poorly known.  This lack of basic information probably results from            
              their small size, fragility, and resistance to culturing efforts.              
              General studies of pigments in diverse oceanic systems reveal                  
              several abundant pigments which undoubtedly are from the eukaryotic            
              ultraplankton and they undoubtedly will be of utility in                       
              classifying and identifying the taxa.  However, there has been no              
              systematic attempt to correlate these pigments with the taxa---a               
              result of lack of species definition.  It is unclear whether the               
              few recorded instances are characteristic of the oligotrophic                  
              systems.  The PIs propose to characterize oceanic ultraplankton                
              populations through the seasons and at a variety of stations in the            
              Atlantic and Pacific oceans.  They will use ultrastructural                    
              analyses of cultured specimens to provide reference materials and              
              correlate those morphological entities with their pigment-                     
              signatures.  The resultant information will provide valuable                   
              information for studies on distribution, physiological ecology, and            
              systematics of the oceanic ultraphytoplankton.
