Title       : Cross-bridge Kinetics in Extracted/Reconstituted Muscle Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1993    
File        : a9018096

Award Number: 9018096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masataka Kawai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Contractility is one of the fundamental properties of life and                 
              exhibited by nearly all cell types.  Cell contraction occurs by                
              converting chemical energy into mechanical work.  In muscle                    
              tissue, contraction generates large force, an is carried out by a              
              specialized structure called a "cross-bridge".  The cross-bridge               
              is a portion of a large contractile protein "myosin", and it                   
              generates force by interacting with another protein called                     
              "actin" (an activator).  Contraction is fueled by adenosine                    
              triphosphate (ATP), the universal energy source of all living                  
              organisms.  Our main objective is to document the fundamental                  
              mechanisms of contraction at the molecular level.  To explore the              
              structure-function relationship, we will employ a technique                    
              called protein isoform substitution.  In this method, a                        
              contractile protein is replaced with that of naturally occurring               
              isoform, which has a known structural modification.  By examining              
              the resulting molecular motion of the reconstituted muscle                     
              system, we can determine the relationship between the particular               
              structural modification and the functional alteration.  In our                 
              study we will use the vertebrate skeletal muscle model, but the                
              techniques developed and the knowledge acquired can be applied to              
              cardiac and smooth muscle, as well as to non-muscle motility.  In              
              the long run, we hope that these techniques and the knowledge                  
              gained will benefit the understanding and treatment of muscular                
              dystrophies and related dysfunctions.//
