Title       : Causes and Consequences of Large-scale Fires in Yellowstone National Park
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1993   
File        : a9018381

Award Number: 9018381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $549997             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Romme   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Lewis College
	      
	      Durango, CO  81301    303/247-7661

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0304040   Fire                                    
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The magnitude of the Yellowstone fires of 1988, which were the                 
              largest fires every experienced in a national park within the                  
              continental United States, has created an exceptional opportunity              
              to address some of the central questions in ecology today.  Drs.               
              Romme, Turner and Gardner will use the Yellowstone National Park               
              fires to ask three basic questions: First, how climate and                     
              landscape pattern interact to create situations in which                       
              extremely large fires are possible.  The investigator's previous               
              experience suggest that there may be thresholds in parameters of               
              landscape structure and meteorological conditions that interact                
              to control fire size.  They propose to identify the thresholds                 
              and then use them in a modeling approach to explore the                        
              implications of global climate change for Yellowstone's                        
              disturbance regime.  Second, Drs. Romme, Turner and Gardner ask                
              how fire size affects landscape pattern.  They hypothesize that                
              landscape heterogeneity is greatest with fires of intermediate                 
              size and least with very small or very large fires.  They will                 
              test this hypothesis by using remotely sensed imagery and the                  
              Park's geographic information system.  Third, they ask how plants              
              having different modes of reproduction respond to fire size,                   
              severity, and heterogeneity.  They will sample areas burned from               
              1972 to 1988 in three successive field seasons to test specific                
              hypotheses relating landscape parameters (e.g. the size of a                   
              burned patch, distance from an unburned edge, and internal                     
              heterogeneity of a burned patch) to the reestablishment of                     
              individual species and to community richness.                                  
                                                                                             
              This investigation of Yellowstone fires will not only help us                  
              understand the events of 1988 but will provide insights into                   
              interactions between vegetation patterns and ecological processes              
              in all landscapes.  Drs. Romme, Turner and Gardner are                         
              international experts in the area of landscape ecology.  The                   
              facilities for this research are excellent.
