Title       : Degradation, Transport, and Diagenesis of Recent Crinoid Ossicles in Fernandez
               Bay, San Salvador Island, Bahamas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1991    
File        : a9018302

Award Number: 9018302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33318              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald D. Lewis lewisrd@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Although crinoid ossicles (skeletal plates) are common                    
              components of many ancient limestones and shales, they have                    
              received relatively little attention from the standpoint of                    
              taphonomy.  With the recent documentation of crinoid ossicles in               
              Recent sea floor sediment, the opportunity now exists to pursue                
              actualistic studies of the taphonomy of individual plates.                     
                   The main emphasis of the study lies in the area of plate                  
              degradation: objectives are to determine relative resistance to                
              abrasion and dissolution, to examine the distribution of these                 
              taphonomic processes and others in the study area, and to set some             
              constraints on the rates of these processes.  With respect to                  
              transport, objectives are to determine the sites of accumulation               
              of transported ossicles, and to see if ossicles travel as bedload.             
              The primary objectives with regard to diagenesis are to determine              
              if ossicles are "prefossilized" by sediment infilling or early                 
              diagenesis and to determine if biostratinomic signatures are still             
              recognizable in ossicles recovered from Pleistocene reef rocks.                
                   Sediment samples taken from the upper 2-3 cm of the sediment              
              and from 1-2 meter cores will be used to map the distribution of               
              plates and their degree and type of alteration.  Laboratory                    
              experiments of abrasion and dissolution and implants on the sea                
              floor will aid in defining processes and constraining rates of                 
              degradation.                                                                   
                   Because the vast majority of fossil crinoid material consists             
              of disarticulated skeletons, this approach will help to make a                 
              large volume of fossil material more useful to other scientists,               
              assisting geologists from sedimentologists to crinoid specialists.
