Title       : Physical Parameters of White Dwarfs and Links to Previous Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1992     
File        : a9018244

Award Number: 9018244
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Detlev Koester   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              White dwarfs are by far the most common end-products of stellar                
              evolution.  In addition to a general interest in their final                   
              physical properties, such as mass, chemical composition, and                   
              radius, they give important information on the cumulative mass lost            
              by stars through various stages of their evolution.  The Principle             
              Investigator (PI) will continue past studies to clarify the                    
              physical properties of a statistical sample of white dwarfs.  These            
              investigations will focus on two specific areas.   First, clusters             
              of stars formed at the same time ("galactic clusters") will be                 
              surveyed for white dwarfs with modern spectroscopic means, using               
              Charged Couple Device detectors.  This survey will lead to a better            
              estimate of a special delimiting mass for precursor main sequence              
              stars (now thought to be about six times the mass of the Sun).                 
              Stars below this limit are thought ultimately to become white                  
              dwarfs, whereas stars just above it probably become supernovae and             
              neutron stars or pulsars.   The PI will use modern theoretical                 
              stellar atmosphere techniques to estimate the values of several                
              mutually dependent characteristics of white dwarf atmospheres, such            
              as their light element chemical abundances and surface gravities.              
              It is hoped that this will solve one of the current astrophysical              
              riddles about white dwarfs: why are most white dwarfs observed to              
              have so low an abundance of hydrogen compared to what stellar                  
              models "evolved" to their white dwarf states predict?
