Title       : Regulation of Neutrophil Functions by Cyclic GMP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9018417

Award Number: 9018417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Pryzwansky KBP@med.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Lincoln  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Neutrophil activation in response to chemotactic agents, phagocytic            
              stimuli, and other endogenous regulators is a complex process                  
              involving migration, phagocytosis, degranulation and generation of             
              toxic oxygen metabolites.  Modulation of the neutrophil response               
              by intracellular second messengers, especially cGMP has been                   
              proposed, but no mechanism of action of cGMP has emerged over the              
              past two decades despite intensive investigation.  Dr. Pryzwansky              
              in collaboration with Dr. Thomas Lincoln has recently obtained                 
              evidence that the major cellular receptor for cGMP, the cGMP-                  
              dependent protein kinase (G-kinase) is present in neutrophils at               
              low concentrations, and may be compartmentalized to specific                   
              intracellular structures during cell activation.  To further define            
              the role of cGMP and G-kinase in neutrophil functions, the goals               
              of this research are: 1) to identify the intracellular compartments            
              or structure(s) associated with G-kinase by immunocytochemistry,               
              and to correlate its localization with cell function (motility and             
              degranulation),  2) to investigate the physiologic role of cGMP and            
              G-kinase by monitoring cGMP levels in response to chemoattractants             
              and other modulators, by identifying specific cellular protein                 
              substrates for the kinase, and by studying the effects on                      
              neutrophil function of antibodies to G-kinase introduced into                  
              neutrophils by electroporation.                                                
                                                                                             
              Neutrophils play a vital role in host defense against                          
              microorganisms.  These specialized cells move in response to a                 
              chemotactic gradient and phagocytose and kill foreign                          
              microorganisms.  Although the regulatory mechanisms which control              
              neutrophil activities have been the topic of investigation for a               
              century, important gaps still remain in our understanding of how               
              these physiologic processes are regulated.  One area of potential              
              importance, but uncertainty is the physiologic role of the small               
              molecule, cyclic-GMP (cGMP), as a second messenger in controlling              
              neutrophil functions.  The combined cellular and biochemical                   
              approach proposed here should, for the first time, define the role             
              of cGMP in neutrophils. An important key to understanding this                 
              pathway of cellular signal transduction may be to understand the               
              subcellular distribution of the molecules involved.  A unique                  
              feature of this project will be the use of state of the art                    
              techniques of light and electron microscopy to study the                       
              subcellular localization of key signaling molecules within                     
              neutrophils in various functional states.
