Title       : Marine Viruses Infecting Phytoplankton: Host-Specificity, Temporal Variability,
               Decay Rates and Effects on Natural Phytoplankton Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1991  
File        : a9018833

Award Number: 9018833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis A. Suttle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There are four specific objectives to this research program                    
              which, together, will yield answers to important questions                     
              regarding indigenous marine viruses which infect phytoplankton.                
              First, the investigator will characterize the host specificity of              
              viruses that have been isolated and which infect eukaryotic and                
              prokaryotic phytoplankton.  Each of the viral isolates will be                 
              screened against a large number of potential hosts with close and              
              distant phylogenetic relationships, to the original host.                      
              Second, the temporal variability of a virus which infects                      
              Synechococcus sp. will be determined monthly in natural waters by              
              plaque assay.  Third, Dr. Suttle will determine the decay rates                
              (turnover times) in natural waters of three viruses which have                 
              been isolated and developed plaque assays for.  Fourth, the                    
              effect of natural virus communities on phytoplankton productivity              
              and community structure will be ascertained.  Almost nothing is                
              known about viruses which infect marine phytoplankton; yet, data               
              included in this proposal suggests that viruses are important and              
              can affect rates of carbon fixation.  This research will answer                
              fundamental questions concerning phytoplankton-virus interactions              
              and persistence of infectious viruses in the sea.  Only studies                
              such as these will provide the requisite data to enable                        
              incorporation of viral-mediated processes into comprehensive                   
              models of nutrient and energy cycling in the global oceans.
