Title       : Tectonic Setting and Uplift History of Metamorphic Rocks, Kigluaik Mountains and
               Vicinity, Seward Peninusla, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1991   
File        : a9018922

Award Number: 9018922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy K. Dokka                            
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97957              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth L. Miller miller@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dome-shaped uplifts of high temperature-low to medium pressure                 
              metamorphic rocks with cores of Cretaceous granite are flanked by              
              high pressure-low temperature Jurassic (?) blueschists in the                  
              Seward Peninsula of Alaska.  The origin and tectonic setting of                
              these complexes is controversial, and their uplift has been                    
              attributed to thermal relaxation following crustal thickening.                 
              Preliminary new work in the Kigluaik Mts. indicates patterns                   
              of deformation, metamorphism and magmatism that are similar to                 
              those in Cenozoic metamorphic core complexes of the Basin and Range            
              province.                                                                      
                   Field mapping, structural analyses, andgeochronologic/                    
              thermochronolgoic studies will elucidate the timing and mechanism              
              of uplift of the blueschists rocks on Seward Peninsula.  Areas of              
              concentrated study include:  the highest structural levels exposed;            
              low angle faults between feebly metamorphosed Paleozoic rocks and              
              greenschist to blueschist facies rocks beneath; and the high                   
              temperature core rocks of the domes.  This approach will also                  
              establish whether uplift was single or multi-stage.  The results               
              will bear on the age, regional tectonic setting, and uplift of                 
              blueschist facies rocks in N. Alaska and will address the possible             
              history of extension leading to the offshore shelf region beneath              
              the Bering and Chukchi Seas.  The results will also provide insight            
              on the interplay between magmatism, metamorphism and strain in                 
              regions of the crust that undergo large vertical uplift.
