Title       : Characterization of dekl: A Maize Embryo-Lethal Mutation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1993     
File        : a9018945

Award Number: 9018945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Sheridan bill_sheridan@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1111,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to obtain a greater understanding of               
              the role of genes in plant embryogenesis by analyzing the dek1                 
              locus. Dr. Sheridan will characterize ten mutations at the dek1                
              locus. All ten mutant alleles produce a recessive embryo lethal                
              and a defective endosperm phenotype lacking anthocyanin and                    
              carotinoids. The dek1 mutant embryo is blocked at the proembryo                
              state and is unable to form a shoot apical meristem but can                    
              enlarge and form a root apical meristem late in development. The               
              mutant alleles will be analyzed for uniformity of phenotype and                
              level of expression by dosage analysis including deletion                      
              studies. Five of the alleles arose in stocks that were active for              
              the transposable element Mutator and two of these alleles display              
              mutability. Segregation analysis on one of these alleles by                    
              Southern blotting and hybridizing with a Mu1 probe has revealed a              
              cosegregating DNA band. This allele will be used for an initial                
              cloning effort while continuing to search for new tagged alleles               
              and DNA cosegregating bands. The cloned mutant allele will be                  
              used to identify a normal allele clone and to isolate a cDNA                   
              clone. The latter will be used to examine spatial and temporal                 
              expression in developing embryos. X-ray induced sectors will be                
              used to examine the cellular autonomy of dek1 morphogenesis                    
              expression, and to evaluate the role of this locus in anthocyanin              
              gene expression. New 1S B-A translocation will be induced that                 
              will aid in the genetic and structural analysis. In addition to                
              studying the blockage of shoot apical meristem formation by the                
              dek1 mutation, X-ray and structural approaches will be used to                 
              follow up promising preliminary observation of x-ray blockage of               
              shoot apical meristem formation of normal embryos and the                      
              capacity of irradiated normal embryos to regulate and produce                  
              multiple embryos.
