Title       : Predator-Prey Interaction at the Cellular Level in a Protozoan System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1993     
File        : a9018047

Award Number: 9018047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine A. Sundermann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Investigations of cell recognition in free-living protozoa have,               
              in the past, been limited mainly to mating type recognition in                 
              ciliates.  One other example that has been partially investigated              
              is the predator-prey relationship between suctorians and their                 
              prey.  Prey are selected by recognition of surface antigens                    
              displayed on the prey's cilia.  During proveious work, monoclonal              
              antibodies specific for ciliary antigens of the prey, Tetrahymena,             
              were generated and localized on the prey.  The proposed work will              
              utilize these monoclonal antibodies and identify which antigens are            
              responsible for recognition.  Inhibition of recognition (and                   
              therefore feeding) will be assayed by selectively masking the                  
              prey's surface antigens with monoclonal antibodies.  In order to               
              characterize the predator's surface receptor that selects prey,                
              monoclonal antibodies directed against the suctorian will be used              
              to block receptors in a set of assays of feeding inhibition that               
              are complementary to the assays mentioned above.  Binding of all               
              monoclonal antibodies that are important in recognition/receptor               
              function will be localized at the light and electron microscope                
              levels with labeled secondary antibody.  The ciliated larva of the             
              suctorian, which is not recognized as prey, also will be probed                
              with monoclonal antibodies and lectins to determine its similarity             
              to the adult suctorian and to prey.                                            
                                                                                             
              Suctorians are tentacle-bearing protozoa that feed upon other free-            
              living, ciliated protozoa.  Some microorganisms that swim against              
              the tentacles of the suctorian are not captured and remain                     
              unharmed, while other ciliated protozoa are immediately captured,              
              immobilized, and ingested.  A variety of evidence suggests that                
              receptors for prey are located on the tentacle and that these                  
              receptors recognize only certain components of the ciliary membrane            
              of the prey.  The goals of the proposed research are to understand             
              the specificity of the receptors on the suctorian tentacle involved            
              in recognizing prey vs non-prey, and to identify the proteins of               
              the prey's ciliary membrane that are recognized. The results of                
              this research will contribute to a new understanding of recognition            
              phenomena in protozoa.
