Title       : Structural/Functional Analysis of Chicken and Lamprey C3
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1993     
File        : a9018751

Award Number: 9018751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Lambris lambris@mail.med.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              C3 plays a critical role in complement activation due to its                   
              ability to bind to other complement proteins, and interact with                
              several cell surface receptors.  The elucidation of the molecular              
              features related to these C3 associated functions requires further             
              analysis of its structure.  The goal of this project is to analyze             
              the structure and functions of C3 from two phylogenetically key                
              species, the chicken and the lamprey, and to compare and correlate             
              this information with what is known about mammalian C3 in order to             
              further our understanding of this molecule.  At the protein level,             
              the objectives will be to purify C3 from the plasma of chickens and            
              lampreys and test their ability to react with human complement                 
              proteins CR1, CR2, CR3, C5, H, B, I, and P as well as with                     
              autologous complement receptors.  Previously established                       
              purification procedures will be used.  The binding of C3-binding               
              proteins to C3 from the two species will be analyzed by direct                 
              binding ELISA, by binding to C3 fragment-coated erythrocytes, and              
              by inhibition assays.  Amino acid sequences for the different C3s              
              will be obtained by sequencing proteolytic fragments of C3 .  In               
              order to obtain N-terminal amino acid sequences of fragments                   
              generated by autologous C3 convertases and factor I (in the                    
              presence of H), serum of the two species will be activated by                  
              zymosan, the zymosan bound C3 fragments will be eluted, separated              
              by SDS-PAGE, and then blotted to PVDF membranes.  The different C3             
              fragments will be sequenced directly from the PVDF membranes.  The             
              presence of carbohydrates and thiolester bonds will also be                    
              determined.  Oligonucleotide probes constructed from the determined            
              amino acid sequences, cDNA probes or affinity purified anti-C3                 
              antibodies will be used to screen lambda gt11 cDNA liver libraries             
              to obtain complete primary structure for the various C3s. (Lambda              
              gt11 cDNA liver libraries from the two species have been prepared              
              already, and four candidate clones for chicken C3 have been                    
              isolated thus far.)  The obtained sequences will be compared and               
              correlated to functional data.  Of special interest are the C3                 
              segments known to mediate the binding of C3-binding proteins.                  
                                                                                             
              The interaction of the protein, "C3", with other plasma proteins               
              and with several cell surface receptors make it a key participant              
              in phagocytic and immunoregulatory processes involved in animal                
              defense mechanisms.  Preliminary experiments suggest that it is                
              possible to identify the structural features of C3 that are                    
              important for its functions by comparing the C3 amino acid                     
              sequences between species, and correlating this information with               
              the ability of these C3s to bind to different C3-binding proteins.             
              The proposed studies, in addition to providing new information on              
              the phylogenetic history of C3, will provide basic information on              
              how the structural features of C3 relate to its multiple functions.
