Title       : Phloem in Plant Tissue Cultures: An Alternative Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1994     
File        : a9018880

Award Number: 9018880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Sjolund rsjolund@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,9109,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Phloem sieve elements differentiate in tissue cultures of                      
              Streptanthus tortuosus (Brassicaceae).  The cell walls of the                  
              callus sieve elements are thicker than the walls of the surrounding            
              parenchyma cells.  When treated with a solution of cell wall-                  
              digesting enzymes, the callus parenmchyma cells form wall-less                 
              protoplasts.  The sieve elements, however, retain their walls                  
              during this procedure, especially the walls which form sieve plates            
              between the sieve elements.  As a result, it has been possible to              
              separate sieve elements from parenchyma cells in these cultures.               
              Using the sieve element fractions as immunogens, monoclonal                    
              antibodies directed against the antigens present in sieve elements             
              have been produced.  The monoclonal antibodies were screened for               
              reactivity with phloem cells in frozen sections of S. tortuosus                
              callus tissue.  These antibodies will be used to identify phloem-              
              specific proteins using immunoblotting techniques and to identify              
              specific sieve element organelles and membranes that contain the               
              identified proteins.  Since the antibodies are also able to cross-             
              react with sections of Arabidopsis plant tissues, the antibodies               
              will be used to screen an Arabidopsis expression library in order              
              to identify phloem-specific genes.                                             
                                                                                             
              Specialized cells known as phloem sieve elements play a vital role             
              in the biology of higher plants.  These conducting elements are                
              responsible for passage of nutrients from leaves to non-                       
              photosynthetic organs such as roots and meristems.  In addition,               
              long-distance transport of assimilates is a key step in the                    
              movement of nutrients into the harvestable grains, fruits, and                 
              tubers that form the basis of agriculture.  Despite the critical               
              role that these cells play in higher plants, many key aspects of               
              phloem development, structure and function remain to be determined.            
              The proposed research will address the basic cell biology of phloem            
              sieve elements.  The phloem-specific antibodies that will be                   
              produced in this study should allow new approaches to determining              
              the genetic basis of phloem development and function.
