Title       : The Papoose Flat Pluton: A Microstructural and Petrofabric-Based Analysis of
               Deformation Processes Associated with the Forceful Intrusion of a Granitic
               Pluton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1991  
File        : a9018929

Award Number: 9018929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy K. Dokka                            
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85641              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Law rdlaw@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur G. Sylvester  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Spatial and temporal variations in strain path and shear sense            
              associated with emplacement will be documented for the Papoose flat            
              pluton of eastern California.  This pluton has been considered a               
              classic example of forceful emplacement in a coaxial strain field              
              on the basis of earlier petrographic studies of the pluton's                   
              marginal facies and its surrounding country rocks.  Recent                     
              reevaluation of the published petrofabric data from the pluton                 
              shows, however, that a uniform sense of asymmetry exists in the                
              fabric diagrams that is consistent with pluton emplacement during              
              large scale non-coaxial shearing.  Microstructural and                         
              crystallographic fabric criteria will be used with data from                   
              rotated porphyroblasts and contract metamorphic mineral assemblages            
              to determine the strain path, temperature and shear sense during               
              pluton emplacement.  The kinematic and deformation processes                   
              operative will thus be determined and these data will constrain the            
              possible mechanisms of pluton emplacement.  The results of this                
              study will greatly improve our understanding of pluton emplacement             
              mechanisms in general, and will also provide a much needed link                
              between naturally produced deformation microstructives and those               
              produced experimentally and by computer simulation studies.
