Title       : Receptors for Bovine Placental Prolactin-related Hormones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1993   
File        : a9018633

Award Number: 9018633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda A. Schuler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Kessler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The successful pregnancy requires careful orchestratation of fetal             
              development and maternal physiology.  Many of these changes may be             
              coordinated by placental hormones, which are in a unique position              
              to alter both maternal and fetal physiology.  The bovine placenta              
              secretes a family of placental prolactin-related hormones which may            
              assist or replace the pituitary hormones during pregnancy.  Despite            
              the obvious relationship of these hormones to prolactin, the                   
              placental hormones are very distinct from the pituitary hormones               
              and one another in amino acid sequence, differing by 50-65%.  These            
              include bovine placental lactogen (bPL), which was identified by               
              binding to prolactin and growth hormone receptors, and a diverse               
              subfamily which does not interact with these characterized                     
              recepors, including bPRCl.  As part of a long term effect to                   
              investigate the function and mechanism of action of these placental            
              hormones in this bovine model system, attention will be focused of             
              bPL and bPRCI.  Specific high affinity binding sites for each these            
              hormones have been identified.  The plan is to characterize bPL                
              receptor protein(s) and localize their target cells.  The copy DNAs            
              corresponding to the receptor proteins from a model target tissue              
              will be isolated and cloned.  These will then be used to                       
              investigate other target tissues.  Taken together, these studies               
              will increase understanding of the hormone and tissue specific                 
              actions of this gene family, and provide the tools to begin to                 
              examine the function of these placental hormones in the controlled             
              proliferation and maternal adaptions which occur during pregnancy.
