Title       : Molecular Basis of Antibody - Antigen Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1993    
File        : a9018037

Award Number: 9018037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yvonne Paterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long term objective of these studies is to further our                     
              understanding of the molecular basis of the interaction between                
              protein antigens and immune system receptors.  Dr. Paterson                    
              will use a model system consisting of monoclonal antibodies to                 
              a structurally defined protein, cytochrome c.  Dr. Paterson has                
              obtained a specific antibody, E8, and is collecting x-ray data                 
              on the free and antigen complexed form in Dr. Elizabeth                        
              Getzoff's laboratory.  Dr. Paterson wishes to complete and                     
              extend these studies to other horse cytochrome c specific                      
              monoclonal antibodies and anti-idiotypic antibodies to E8.  She                
              is also examining the  interaction of antibody/antigen                         
              complexes using hydrogen exchange and 2D NMR.  She has                         
              completed these studies on E8 and finds they agree well with                   
              previous epitopic assignments and with the general nature of                   
              antigenic sites on other proteins determined by other workers                  
              using x-ray crystallography.  This information from the                        
              antigenic epitopes on horse cytochrome c will be used to                       
              modulate antibody/antigen affinity through single residue                      
              changes in the antigen using site directed mutagenesis.  Dr.                   
              Paterson will also extend these studies to the lysozyme model                  
              antigen system for which x-ray structural data is known for two                
              monoclonal antibodies. single residue changes in the antigen                   
              using site directed mutagenesis.  Dr. Paterson will also extend                
              these studies to the lysozyme model antigen system for which                   
              x-ray structural data is known for two monoclonal antibodies.
