Title       : Invertebrate Dormancy: Mechanisms of Metabolic and Biosynthetic Arrest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1993  
File        : a9018579

Award Number: 9018579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Hand   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              There are widespread examples of animals in nature that suppress               
              metabolism and enter dormant states in response to suboptimal                  
              environmental conditions.  Such a metabolic response would seem to             
              require coordinated suppression of both energy-producing pathways              
              and biosynthetic, energy-utilizing processes.  One objective of the            
              proposed studies is to identify the mechanisms responsible for the             
              simultaneous, yet independent, arrest of protein biosynthesis and              
              of catabolic pathways during anaerobic dormancy in embryos of the              
              brine shrimp Artemia.  Regulation of protein synthesis will be                 
              examined in the cytoplasmic as well as the intramitochondrial                  
              compartments.  The same intracellular signal (acidic intracellular             
              pH) may directly or indirectly mediate arrest of anabolic and                  
              catabolic pathways, and that rates of macromolecular degradation               
              may ultimately limit the duration of dormancy.  Secondly, the                  
              importance of intracellular solutes in disrupting metabolic                    
              organization during cellular dehydration will be studied.  Thirdly,            
              studies will be directed toward understanding the nature of                    
              developmental and metabolic arrest during diapause in Artemia                  
              embryos.  Methods employed in these studies will include                       
              simultaneous microcalorimetry-respirometry, a cell free translation            
              system for quantifying protein synthesis, permeabilization of                  
              embryos, and in vitro studies with isolated organelles.  Results               
              of these studies should have implication for a variety of                      
              biological systems that experience stress as a result of                       
              desiccation, oxygen deprivation an temperature extremes, or in                 
              general, for any tissue or cell where acute modulation of                      
              biosynthesis and energy metabolism is known to occur. //
