Title       : Provenance, Age and Biomechanics of SuperContinental Weathering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1991   
File        : a9018747

Award Number: 9018747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195457             (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Brimhall brimall@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,5912,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              There are a number of intrinsic properties of cratons unified in               
              their pre-dispersal position in Gondwana.  Exposure of deep                    
              crustal levels of this supercontinent is an essential precursor                
              to continental weathering being vital to the on set and nature of              
              the continental weathering process itself.  These cratonal                     
              attributes include: the petrological and imeralogical character                
              of the bedrock parent material, its unique thermal history,                    
              depletion in water and heat-producing elements, uplift, erosion                
              and ultimate stability necessary for attainment of a state of                  
              tectonic quiescence when subjected to intense weathering.  This                
              transcontinental belt of deep continental crust exposed as                     
              graulite-charnockite-anorthosite bodies parallels the Gondwanide               
              Orogen of Paleozoic and Early Mesozoic plate convergence                       
              affecting South America, Africa, India, Australia and Antarctica               
              implicating Gondwana supercontinental scale weathering as the                  
              appropriate crustal unit of analysis rather than individual                    
              continental land masses.  The necessity of viewing lateritic                   
              weathering on a supercontinental scale is further accentuated by               
              the fact that the classical "residual" origin of lateritic                     
              bauxites is inconsistent with a recent discovery that wind-blown               
              foreign dust consisting of gibbsite, hematite and goethite also                
              bearing a component of resistant detrital minerals derived from                
              basement rocks elsewhere (zircon, ilmenite, rutile and monazite)               
              dominates near surface metal enrichment of bauxites and                        
              laterites.  By considering the crustal processes preceding                     
              continental weathering as well as the surficial recycling and                  
              redistribution of chemically-resistant minerals accessed as a                  
              direct consequence of the petrology and mineralogy of the deep                 
              crust, we have formulated a testable model of deep crustal                     
              weathering systems.  An integrated three-part project is planned               
              addressing (1) the provenance of chemically-stable detrital                    
              minerals, especially zircon contaminating the upper portions of                
              laterites, (2) age and duration of lateritic weathering in                     
              combination with correlations of paleo-weathering surfaces in                  
              Australia, West Africa and Brazil, and (3) mechanisms of                       
              subsurface transport and incorporation of detritus into the                    
              lateritic regolith during dilational biomechanical mixing of                   
              eolian dust by root growth cycles.  Part I utilizes U-Pb ion                   
              microprobe dating of zircon using the SHRIMP to define the                     
              sources of mobile minerals and the depths of their translocation               
              into laterite and bauxite weathering profiles.  Part II involves               
              40Ar/39Ar laser dating of jarosite as well as manganese and iron               
              oxides.  Part III is laboratory experimentation using a soil                   
              mechanics cell capable of simulation root growth cycles.  The                  
              proposed interdisciplinary research can contribute to further                  
              development of a much-needed long-term continental record of                   
              surficial environments to complement the marine stratigraphic                  
              record of global processes.
