Title       : International Meeting on Oxygen Transport to Tissue, April 15-19, 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9018556

Award Number: 9018556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: W Erdmann   (Principal Investigator current)
              A. W. Grogono  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane School of Medicine
	      
	      New Orleans, LA  70118    /   -

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The International Society on Oxygen Transport to Tissue                        
              (ISOTT) is dedicated to the pursuit of knowledge                               
              concerning metabolism and anabolite and metabolite                             
              transport in tissue.  ISOTT emphasizes a dual scientific                       
              and engineering approach, utilizing interdisciplinary,                         
              theoretical, and experimental methodology to unravel the                       
              secrets of tissue maintenance, repair, growth, and                             
              replacement.  The Society was established to involve                           
              international scientists and engineers in the development                      
              and application of forefront techniques to allow a more                        
              basic understanding of the important physical/chemical/                        
              biochemical phenomena that are necessary for normal tissue                     
              functioning.  The Society has made contributions in                            
              advancing the gross analysis techniques of the past to the                     
              synergistic studies of tissue micro areas by the                               
              sophisticated mathematical and experimental means of                           
              today.  Efforts have been directed towards the acquisition                     
              of knowledge at the regional tissue level, both in vitro                       
              and in vivo, and are now moving rapidly to the examination                     
              of fundamental biochemical reactions at the cellular                           
              level.  This work necessitates the use of today's most                         
              powerful computing machinery and the use of state-of-the                       
              art experimental methodology, such as polarographic, auto                      
              radiographic, cytometric, and nuclear magnetic resonance                       
              techniques.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              ISOTT's mission is to enhance the understanding of                             
              mechanisms that lead to tissue pathology, to overcome                          
              pathologic trends, and to repair and replace                                   
              nonfunctioning tissue.  The meeting results will be                            
              published as a proceedings (usually by Plenum Press in its                     
              Advances in Medicine and Biology series), which will be                        
              used as a reference throughout the world.
