Title       : Mechanism of Transcription Termination Protein Rho
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1991   
File        : a9018892

Award Number: 9018892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Stitt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Escherichia coli transcription termination protein rho employs                 
              an RNA-dependent ATPase activity to effect transcript release                  
              from paused transcription complexes.  The PI is studying the                   
              molecular mechanism of the rho ATPase reaction using                           
              enzymological, biochemical, and molecular biological                           
              techniques, in order to understand its role in transcription                   
              termination .  The knowledge gained will prove useful to the                   
              broader question of RNA-protein interactions and to the                        
              understanding of energy-transducing ATPases. In the present                    
              proposal, studies of rho ATPase activity are continued, and an                 
              investigation of rho-RNA interactions is begun. RHO is thought                 
              to use the energy of ATP hydrolysis to move with respect to the                
              RNA chain of transcription complexes.  Rho binds to this RNA                   
              and releases it from RNA polymerase and the DNA template.  The                 
              postulated mechanism for such movement is the ATP hydrolysis-                  
              dependent binding and release of the nascent RNA.  From earlier                
              work on rho-ATP interactions it is predicted that RNA should                   
              bind to rho ATP complexes much more tightly than to rho ADP.Pi                 
              complexes, and an experiment had been designed to test this                    
              prediction.  To test whether rho uses the energy of ATP                        
              hydrolysis to travel with respect to RNA, Dr. Stitt and co-                    
              workers have developed a system to measure the amount of ATP                   
              hydrolyzed per RNA chain released.  This system is being used                  
              in a normal rho-dependent release; it will also be employed in                 
              a system in which an insert has been made between the rho                      
              binding site and the end of the transcript.  If rho used ATP                   
              energy to travel along RNA, it should use more ATP in the                      
              system where it has to travel further.  The sites on rho of its                
              interaction with RNA have only vaguely been localized; RNA                     
              crosslinking  experiments will be used to better  define them.                 
              Rho shows a requirement for RNA to activate its ATPase                         
              activity, although the DNA poly(dC) binds as well to rho as the                
              RNA poly(C).  Mixed RNA-DNA oligonucleotides of defined                        
              sequence will be used to identify the locations on RNA where                   
              the 2'OH is critical for rho ATPase activation.
