Title       : The Relationships of parasite Polydnaviruses and Venom Secretions to Host
               Immunosuppression and Development Arrest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1991    
File        : a9018020

Award Number: 9018020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Max D. Summers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Some insect parasites that lay eggs in their hosts inject special              
              secretions into the host along with their eggs.  These secretions              
              appear to have two effects.  First, they protect the parasite's                
              eggs from the host's immune defenses and second, they cause arrest             
              of host development.  For Campoletis sonorensis, both phenomena may            
              be induced by a polydnavirus (PDV).  PDV is the only animal DNA                
              virus with a heterogeneous, segmented genome.  Several viral gene              
              families have been identified, and viral gene expression is tissue             
              and/or host specific.  Through evolution the parasite has acquired             
              the ability, which is essential for its survival, to assemble,                 
              amplify and transfer this genetic information in a viral form to               
              another eucaryotic host.  Prior results from this laboratory have              
              shown that one family of the venom-related (VR) wasp and                       
              polydnavirus (PDV) genes belong to the "DEAD" protein family whose             
              members are implicated in the control of gene expression at the                
              levels of translation and splicing.  This suggests that these                  
              unique genes may regulate splicing or translation of wasp and/or               
              host genes.  Recent studies show also that three CsPDV genes                   
              contain a cysteine motif characteristic of peptide toxins.  The                
              presence of this motif may reflect a function as a ligand of cell              
              surface receptors which may correlate with parasite survival.                  
              Polydnavirus expression products and venom secretions may be more              
              related in "host regulation" phenomena than previously thought.The             
              next stage of this research will be directed toward identifying                
              these expression products and determining their functional                     
              significance.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The life cycles of certain wasps involve a stage at which they are             
              parasites on other insects such as moths.  The adult wasp lays its             
              eggs by injecting them into the body of a larval moth.  Special                
              secretions are injected along with the eggs.  These secretions                 
              contain factors that protect the eggs from the host's immune                   
              defense mechanisms and arrest the development of the host.  In at              
              least some such parasite/host relationships, a virus is an                     
              important component of this interaction.  This laboratory is                   
              approaching this complex problem by identifying parasite and virus             
              genes and gene products involved in this relationship.  The overall            
              goal of this research is to understand the molecular basis of the              
              parasite-induced avoidance of host insect defense systems.
