Title       : Light Scattering Studies of RecA Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1993     
File        : a9018782

Award Number: 9018782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert S. Benight abenight@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is to contribute to the understanding                
              of the physical basis of post-replicative repair of DNA damage                 
              and genetic recombination.  In the prokaryotic organism                        
              Escherichia coli, recombination and repair are controlled by                   
              the activities of RecA protein.  In vitro, RecA exhibits a                     
              manifold of activities (DNA binding, strand exchange catalysis,                
              ATPase, proteolysis, etc.) making it the current paradigm for                  
              general genetic recombination, in vivo.  Intrinsic to its                      
              functions, RecA exists in various assembled and/or disassembled                
              quaternary states including (ostensibly) monomers, small                       
              aggregates of monomers (protomers), aggregates of protomers                    
              (filaments) and large bundles of self-assembled filaments.                     
              Although a number of conventional biochemical techniques                       
              (chemical crosslinking, size-exclusion chromatography,                         
              centrifugation-sedimentation, optical turbidity and electron                   
              microscopy) have been applied to probe the phyical behavior of RecA            
              protein, the mechamisms governing formation for the various                    
              quaternary forms of RecA remain to be elucidated.                              
              In the proposed research light scattering techniques                           
              complemented by electron microscopy will be employed to address                
              eight fundamental questions about RecA: (1) What are the                       
              fundamental kinetic mechanisms governing RecA protein self-                    
              assembly?  (2) What is the nature of the protein-protein                       
              interactions involved in self-assembly of RecA?  (3) What is                   
              the associated state of RecA in solution under in vitro strand                 
              exchange conditions?  (4) What are the quaternary form(s) of                   
              RecA that bind DNA?  (5) To what extent do processes of RecA                   
              self-assembly and RecA assembly on single strand and double                    
              stranded DNA compete with one another?  (6) How do nucleotide                  
              sequence, fragment length and secondary structures of DNA                      
              influence the associated states of RecA?  (7) Which quaternary                 
              forms bind nucleotide tri-and di-phosphates?  (8) What is the                  
              nature of the DNA sequence dependent ATPase activity of RecA                   
              protein?                                                                       
              The information gained from these studies should provide                       
              fundamental information not accessible by any other means.                     
              Development of light scattering methodology and its successful                 
              application to study the solution behavior of RecA and RecA/DNA                
              complexes will pave the way for further studies of a number of                 
              other regulatory proteins (microtubules and helicases, for                     
              example) whose functional activities critically depend on                      
              intermolecular association to various quaternary forms.
