Title       : Protein (s) that Catalyze Extension of Plant Cell Walls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1993   
File        : a9018028

Award Number: 9018028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Cosgrove fsl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal outlines experiments to characterize a recently                  
              identified protein that appears to be directly involved in the                 
              induction of plant cell wall expansion.  The protein will be                   
              purified in quantities sufficient to raise rabbit polyclonal                   
              antibodies.  The antibodies will be used (i) to identify the                   
              anatomical and cytological location of the protein, (ii) to                    
              quantify developmental changes in the protein, and (iii) to test               
              whether this or homologous proteins are involved in growth of                  
              other organs and other species.  The purified protein will be                  
              assayed for enzymatic activities and binding properties that                   
              might provide clues about the biochemical mechanism of its                     
              wall-extension activity.  Cell walls will also be analyzed for                 
              evidence of post-translational modification (e.g. thiolreduction               
              or protein phosphorylation) of this or other proteins, under the               
              influence of auxin and other growth-control agents.   The results              
              will test the hypothesis that plant cell expansion is                          
              developmentally regulated by this protein, which appears to be                 
              the first endogenous protein shown to cause expansion of isolated              
              plant cell walls.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The growth of plants is controlled primarily by the relaxation                 
              and expansion of the polymeric wall.  The precise molecular                    
              structure of the plant cell wall and the molecular mechanism of                
              cell wall relaxation and expansion is not known.  The                          
              identification of a specific protein that can induce these                     
              processes in isolated cell walls provides strong evidence that                 
              the protein is directly involved in this phenomenon.  The                      
              purification and characterization provides for the first time the              
              ability to directly investigate the molecular mechanism of cell                
              enlargement.  Understanding the mechanism of cell wall loosening               
              may also provide new information about the molecular architecture              
              of the plant cell wall.//
