Title       : Transcriptional Activation by TUF and GCR in S. Cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1991   
File        : a9018102

Award Number: 9018102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Santangelo George.Santangelo@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joanne Tornow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The expression of a very large number of genes (mostly glycolytic              
              genes or translational component genes) that influence the growth              
              rate of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is influenced               
              in turn by the action of only a few regulatory proteins.  In a                 
              recent publication we presented evidence that two of these                     
              regulatory proteins, TUF and GCR, activate transcription                       
              interdependently.  Our data suggested that GCR is an absolute                  
              requirement for activation by a single, isolated TUF binding site              
              (UASrpg element).  Here we propose to test the reciprocal idea-                
              that UASrpg is an absolute requirement for activation by GCR.  We              
              will try to disprove the idea that GCR-dependent transcriptional               
              activation occurs only through UASrpg, and test for DNA binding                
              by the GCR protein.  The successful completion of this research                
              will contribute to our understanding of GCR function, and form                 
              the basis for further investigation of the complex roles of TUF,               
              how those roles are balanced in vivo, and the means by which                   
              growth rate is controlled in yeast cells.  Yeast cells respond to              
              changes in their environment (e.g., availability of nutrients) by              
              changing their rate of growth and division.  These changes                     
              involve the complex coordination of the action of many different               
              genes in the cell.  The mechanism of this coordination is poorly               
              understood, and this is a proposal to study one aspect of this                 
              process.
