Title       : U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research: Plio-Quaternary uplift and tectonism of
               western Mexico from geologic studies and 36Cl cosmogenic isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0123000

Award Number: 0123000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Righter krighter@ems.jsc.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0123000
Righter

This US-Mexico award will fund a collaborative project
              between Dr. Kevin Righter, of the University of Arizona, in collaboration with
              Dr. Jose Rosas-Elguera of the University of Guadalajara, Mexico.  The
              researchers aim to study the Cenozoic volcanic and tectonic evolution of
              western Mexico.  The project will help to determine ages of more recent
              volcanic activity in western Mexico, and improve our understanding of the
              spatial and temporal distribution of volcanism. The Division of Earth Sciences
              will also contribute partial support for this project. 

The Cenozoic
              volcanic and tectonic evolution of western Mexico has been influenced by two
              processes - extension from opening of the Gulf of California, and compression
              from the subduction of the Rivera Plate beneath the North American Plate.
              Although there is some evidence for uplift in western Mexico, the timing of
              that uplift is uncertain. It may be young and related entirely to the current
              subduction environment. Or it could date back to the mid-Cenozoic, when the
              region started undergoing change as a result of the transfer of Baja California
              to the Pacific Plate.  In order to understand the uplift history of this
              region, the researchers propose to determine regional uplift rates in the
              Atenguillo region of western Mexico, using new isotopic methods. The technique
              has been tested successfully on a small suite of samples.  In addition, a
              selected suite of very young volcanic rocks will be dated from the western
              Mexico region. Results of this study will be integrated with geologic studies
              of the area, and also with the results of recent and ongoing regional plate
              motion and GPS studies.

