Title       : Coalescence and Phase Separation During Spinodal Decomposition of Solvent
               Mixtures Far From Critical Point
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0123445

Award Number: 0123445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reuel Shinnar shinnar@che-mail.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0123445
Shinnar, Reuel
CUNY City College

The PI's main
              achievement so far has been to show, both experimentally and theoretically,
              that phase separation of low-viscosity liquid mixture is driven by the
              convection induced by a non-equilibrium force due to gradients of chemical
              potential and that this force can act over distances of a few centimeters.
              While the investigation has produced novel and unexpected results, much work is
              required to achieve the ultimate goal and model the flow of liquid mixtures
              during phase transition in the presence of surface-active compounds. As has
              been stressed, the results so far have opened a new and till now unknown area
              of research which they do not expect to exhaust within the time frame of the
              proposed investigation. What the PI's would like to do, instead, is to focus on
              the most needed areas, to enhance the understanding of the dynamics of phase
              separation and increase the applicability of its unique properties to the
              solution of practical problems. In fact, they expect that coalescence can be
              eventually retarded increasing the amount of surfactants and of thickeners,
              thereby increasing the viscosity of the mixtures, or when quenching the mixture
              into its metastable region. Therefore, they intend to determine the thresholds
              of the surfactant concentration and of the mixture viscosity and composition
              beyond which surfactants start to slow down significantly the separation
              process, just as they do in the absence of phase transition. In addition, the
              PI's want to study how mixing, which is necessary to rapidly cool the system,
              can counteract the effect of phase transition, causing the formation of stable
              emulsions.

As in the past, the experimental work will be accompanied by
              modeling and simulation, in such a way that these two activities will interact
              and compliment with each other. The results should not only lead to a better
              understanding of spinodal decomposition and nucleation, but will also be of
              great value to any industrial applications of this approach to phase
              separation. In particular, the PI's want to focus on the following areas of
              research, to be addressed both experimentally and numerically.

