Title       : ADVANCE Leadership Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0123493

Award Number: 0123493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice E. Smith aesmith@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1739      ADVANCE - LEADERSHIP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1739,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed activity aims to improve the recruitment and retention of women
              in
engineering academia and to enhance career development of women
              engineering
academics by addressing publications in refereed scholarly
              journals. 

This project will develop a CD ROM that demystifies the journal
              publication process.
The CD ROM will contain both text material and digital
              video. An overview of how the
system works and the differences, both in
              procedure and in impact, of journal articles,
journal short papers, journal
              notes, refereed proceedings and book chapters will be
documented in clear and
              general terms. How the editorial board of a journal operates
from
              editor-in-chief down to individual reviewers will be explained with suggestions
              on
how to become involved with a journal in an editorial capacity. Then, a set
              of best
practices case studies that follow engineering papers from first
              submittal through
publication will be included. These will take the user
              through the review and revision
process step by step and at least one case
              study will involve a rejected paper that is
successfully transformed for
              another journal. The video clips will provide comments and
discussion by
              article authors, journal editors and reviewers, using women
              engineering
academics where possible. While the focus is on journal papers,
              this CD ROM will
assist the users in developing other peer reviewed
              publications including proposals.
Dissemination will be in two phases and will
              be aligned with assessment efforts
involving surveys and interviews. This
              project will benefit a large number of women
academics and potential academics
              by addressing an issue vital to scholarly success.

This project is supported
              by the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to
              increase the participation of women in the scientific and engineering workforce
              through the increased representation and advancement of women in academic
              science and engineering careers. 

