Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program (CSEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a0123223

Award Number: 0123223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce C. Little jclittle@saber.towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha J. Siegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program is designed to encourage talented but economically disadvantaged
              students to major in mathematics, computer science, and CIS at Towson
              University and to assist them in being successful in its completion. The
              program pro-actively solicits applications from districts that have significant
              populations of women and ethnic minority students, since those groups have not
              chosen these programs in large numbers. 

Towson University coordinates and
              supervises the designated cohort groups through three management committees,
              provides support services, and provides additional financial support from the
              two centers in the College of Science and Mathematics and from existing
              corporate partners. Regular academic support services are available to these
              scholars, including matriculation and admission assistance, advisement and
              counseling, tutoring, career advisement, securing internships or part-time
              employment, and assistance with job placement at graduation. In addition to
              these services, scholars are expected to participate in a special support
              community, have access to specialized tutoring assistance, and be given
              financial assistance for joining a student chapter of a national professional
              association.

Though all the regular student support mechanisms on campus are
              available for this group, a coalition of educators, students, and local
              professionals serve to support them and to provide a nurturing community of
              scholars to assure their success.

