Title       : Conference on Specificity and Crosstalk in Plant Signal Transduction being held
               on January 22 - 27 2002: in Tahoe City, California.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0123960

Award Number: 0123960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian I. Schroeder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keystone Sympo Molec & Cel
	      Drawer 1630
	      Silverthorne, CO  90498    970/262-1230

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1136,1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Signal transduction networks are essential in eukaryotes, allowing cells to
              perceive and
respond to continuous changes in extracellular conditions.
              Multiple signaling pathways
co-exist in individual cells controlling essential
              responses, including hormone signaling,
mitogenesis and apoptosis.
              Understanding the molecular mechanisms by which signaling
pathways cross talk
              with one another or by which specificity is conferred within a
              complex
signaling network is an area of present intensive research in
              eukaryotic biology. It has
long been recognized that most aspects of plant
              growth and development are regulated by
networks of signaling mechanisms
              rather than linear signal transduction pathways.
Furthermore, most plant cells
              express receptors for the six major classes of plant
hormones and additional
              light and pathogen responsive receptors and need to process each
pathway,
              while also making use of cross talk among these pathways.
              Recent
interdisciplinary studies using new genetic, biochemical and genomic
              approaches have led
to rapid and accelerating progress in understanding
              mechanisms that mediate cross talk and
specificity in plant signal
              transduction.

Hormones, light, pathogens and stress stimuli trigger signal
              transduction cascades that
are essential for growth, development and survival
              of plants. The Keystone Symposium on
Specificity and Cross Talk in Plant
              Signal Transduction will be focused on presentations
on newly recognized
              reception and transduction mechanisms in these responses. The
organizers have
              set up important avenues that will ensure diversity among presenters at
the
              conference and are requesting funds, that will enable travel support for
              graduate
students, post doctoral associates and selected speakers, towards
              achieving the goal of
diversity and multidisciplinarity. The goal of the
              meeting will be to highlight major
advances in this rapidly moving field and
              to synthesize an integrated understanding of
which mechanisms mediate cross
              talk among pathways and which mechanisms allow specific
modulation of plant
              growth and developmental responses. Understanding of these mechanisms
is
              essential for manipulation of plant growth and development and for developing
              new
biotechnological applications, that will ultimately benefit human health.
