Title       : Program for Attracting and Retaining Scholars in Computer and Mathematical
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0123168

Award Number: 0123168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398495             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Wilkes jtw@cs.appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Arnholt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cindy Norris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric S. Marland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rahman Tashakkori  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The major objective of this program is to increase the overall number of
              graduates in computer science and mathematics coming from economically
              disadvantaged backgrounds. We are especially interested in increasing the
              opportunities for students from the Northwest North Carolina region to pursue a
              degree in computer science or mathematical sciences. In order to achieve this
              goal, we are improving the student support infrastructure available for the
              CSEMS scholars community, and building partnerships with regional high
              technology industries. Scholars in the program participate in a variety of
              activities and use support services designed to achieve program goals.
              Community building is by participation in Freshmen Learning Communities,
              membership in student organizations like ACM and MAA student chapters, and
              departmental receptions and seminars. Academic success is bolstered through
              faculty mentors, lab tutors, and the extensive university support services.
              Through the Cooperative Education program, the Computer Science Industry
              Advisory Board, and ASU's Career Development Center, scholars are positioned to
              take advantage of a variety of employment opportunities in the high technology
              workforce.


