Title       : Intermountain/Southwest Conference on Industrial and Interdisciplinary
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0123533

Award Number: 0123533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23310              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily F. Stone stone@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Estep  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon J. Tavener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dieter H. Armbruster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0123533
Stone

This project will support the first three years of the
              
Intermountain/Southwest Conference on Industrial and Interdisciplinary
              
Mathematics to be held at Utah State University, Colorado State 
University,
              and Arizona State University.  The conference series, which 
will rotate among
              these institutions on an annual basis, would provide 
both a venue for the
              presentation of problems in industrial and 
interdisciplinary mathematics and
              a forum for the discussion of ways to 
broaden the traditional curriculum in
              order to prepare mathematicians for 
industrial and interdisciplinary
              positions. The conferences would bring 
together researchers from both
              academia and industry, enabling cross-
fertilization between the programs in
              the Intermountain/Southwest 
region, and providing a venue for the students to
              present their work and 
interact with other students, faculty, and
              representatives from industry.

The first of these annual meetings will be
              held at Utah State University 
in Logan, UT in February 2002. The two-day
              meeting will include 
sessions for invited talks by researchers from academia
              and industry, a 
round-table discussion involving faculty and industry
              representatives, 
sessions of shorter contributed talks and/or poster
              sessions, a special 
session involving only graduate students, and an
              informational session 
for undergraduates. The round-table discussion would
              focus on (a) 
integrating the needs of local industry into the mathematics
              curriculum 
and (b) current research activities in the region. For the first
              meeting, 
representatives from the Boeing Company have already agreed to
              attend 
and individuals at Motorola, Intel, IBM, and Hewlett Packard have been
              
approached.  Participation is also expected by faculty members from
              
departments of physics, electrical and computer engineering, computer
              
science, and industrial engineering. Faculty and students from other
              
universities in the region and from broader areas will be invited to
              
attend.

This conference series will be jointly supported by the Applied
              
Mathematics Program and the Infrastructure Program of the Division of
              
Mathematical Sciences and by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities 
of
              the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.
 

 
 

