Title       : Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Signal Processing for
               High-Data-Rate Optical Communications Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0123409

Award Number: 0123409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tulay Adali adali@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis R. Menyuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1751,4096,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0123409
Adali, Tulay
U of Maryland-Baltimore County

Within the
              last fifteen years, the maximum data rate that a backbone communications line
              can handle has grown by five orders of magnitude.  A key enabling technology
              for this impressive growth has been the
advent of commercial
              wavelength-division-multiplexed systems that has allowed systems designers to
              fill the available bandwidth far more efficiently than in the past. Recently,
              the physical impairments
in the optical fiber transmission lines have become
              the major factors limiting the obtainable data rates. The chromatic dispersion,
              fiber nonlinearities, polarization effects, and amplified spontaneous
emission
              noise from the amplifiers, all interact limiting the data rates and/or
              transmission distances. Polarization mode dispersion (PMD), in particular,
              introduces intersymbol and intercarrier interference and is the primary
              limitation in increasing  transmission rates and distances in installed
              terrestrial fiber systems. Though it has been noted that signal processing
              approaches hold great promise for mitigating PMD 
and other impairments in
              optical communications systems, the area is still in its infancy, and the
              current activity in the area is limited to ``off-the-shelf'' techniques that do
              not take into account characteristics of the optical domain, thus unable to
              truly take advantage of the possibilities that signal processing offer.

By
              bringing in expertise from two complementary research areas: signal processing
              for communications and optical communications,  this research develops
              effective electrical domain (post-detection) 
approaches for optical
              communications by taking into account the physical properties of the optical
              transmission medium.  The investigators introduce a new class of receiver
              structures for 
optical communications that exploit polarization diversity and
              study their performance by accurate modeling of the physical phenomena and
              using efficient simulation techniques that they have developed.
The two
              research groups have expertise in both areas relevant to the proposed work: (1)
              theoretical and computational study and modeling of optical communication
              systems and (2) development of error
compensation/mitigation techniques for
              communications.  Their collaboration within the last couple of years has
              demonstrated the potential of solutions developed with this approach for
              significant 
performance gains in optical communications systems.  An
              important additional benefit of the project is establishing meaningful
              communication between the two research communities and the emphasis 
on the
              importance of their full collaboration. The research also offers the potential
              for a more unified view of communications systems.

