Title       : Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: High-Performance
               Electrooptic Tunable Filters for Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0123367

Award Number: 0123367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ohannes Eknoyan eknoyan@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry F. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1751,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0123367
Eknoyan

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
              NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking."  The
              goal of this project is to demonstrate unprecedented tuning range and speed in
              electrooptic tunable filters for dense wavelength division multiplexing (WDM)
              using recently developed design principles and fabrication methods. The
              filters, which will be produced on LiNb03 substrates, are expected to provide a
              combination of faster tuning (< 50 ns) and wider tuning range (> 10 THz) than
              has previously been achieved in any tunable filter technology.

Optical
              frequency selection in the proposed filters is based upon phase-matched
              polarization mode conversion by a spatially periodic strain perturbation in a
              single mode optical waveguide. Tuning is accomplished by an applied electric
              field which alters the waveguide birefringence, and hence the phase-match
              frequency at which near-complete polarization conversion occurs.  The devices
              are inherently polarization independent because the TE TM and TM TE coupling
              are reciprocal processes.

Innovations from the research at Texas A&M which
              will be incorporated into these devices include: (1) The use of spatially
              periodic strips of SiO2 to induce polarization coupling of light via the
              strain-optic effect. The SiO2 is deposited at an elevated temperature on the
              LiNb03 substrates and patterned at room temperature, so that longitudinal
              strain results from thermal expansion mismatch. (2) A new filter design which
              eliminates the need for polarizing beam splitters and thus gives an extra
              degree of freedom in the fabrication process. (3) The use of a sparse, apodized
              strain grating to achieve polarization coupling. This gives an etalon-like
              periodicity to the filter response, with nulls which are almost evenly spaced
              in frequency. This design technique should make it possible to extend the
              spectral range by an order of magnitude over previous EOTF
              designs.

Preliminary laboratory work directed towards the optimization of
              LiNb03 circuit elements has prepared the way for the proposed research.
              Phase-matched polarization coupling with > 99.3% efficiency for both TE TM and
              TM TE conversion has been achieved in straight waveguides at a wavelength of
              1537 nm, and electrooptic tuning of the peak conversion wavelength over a range
              > 15 nm (2 THz) was also demonstrated. Response speed for polarization
              conversion was measured to be 52 ns. Both polarizing beam splitters with
              splitting ratios > 25 dB and non-polarizing beam splitters suitable for EOTF
              application have been produced and characterized.

Under this project,
              four-port spectral slicing filters, two-port bandpass filters, and four-port
              add-drop filters with 50 GHz and 100 GHz channel spacing will be fabricated on
              LiNb03 substrates. Spectral and temporal response of the filters and their
              tuning range will be characterized.


