Title       : Northwest Indian College TCUP Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0123214

Award Number: 0123214
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2323555            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rissa Wabaunsee rwabaunsee@nwic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              JOSEPH RICH  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lucille Wood-Trost  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northwest Indian Coll
	      2522 Kwina Rd
	      Bellingham, WA  982269278    360/676-2772

NSF Program : 1744      TRIBAL COLLEGE & UNIVERS PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The mission of Northwest Indian College (NWIC) is to provide
              post-secondary
educational opportunities for Native Americans that is
              sensitive to their worldviews,
background, and academic needs and goals, and
              prepare them for the challenges of 
leadership in their tribal communities. In
              addition to providing effective opportunities 
for students to develop
              academic competence, the NWIC mission is to infuse students 
with clear
              communication skills, critical thinking skills, and a developed sense of
civic
              responsibility. 

The Northwest Indian College Division of Math and Science
              is proposing implementation 
of a SMET learning community educational plan
              that begins with entering freshman and
supports them through to the completion
              of an AA or AS degree. 

The first-year goal of this program would be to
              generate student interest and growth 
toward further education in math and
              science. Building on this foundation, the overall
goal would be to have these
              students then obtain associates and baccalaureate degrees 
in science or
              math-related fields. The first year would be a "developmental year"
              for
students whose test scores indicate that this is necessary. (Note: The
              majority of 
students entering NWIC would have test scores reflecting this
              need. It is often
the lack of a growth or preparation period that contributes
              to student failure
in math and science.)

During the first year, the plan
              would be as follows:
* Each eligible student would enter into an integrated
              academic group or cohort.
* A testing specialist would evaluate math and
              science competencies for each student.
* All students would be enrolled in the
              following courses: Public Speaking, Introduction to
Computers, Native American
              History/Philosophy, and Introduction to Successful Learning
during fall
              quarter and throughout their first (or developmental) year. These
              courses,
which are required for graduation from Northwest Indian College,
              would be fully
integrated among each other while also being integrated with
              introductory science and
math courses in which students are placed according
              to their initial test scores.
Example: The cohort would be assigned a relevant
              science topic such as iswater quality.lo
Individually and as a group, students
              would research the topic, using math to compute
statistics, the Internet to
              find background material and group discussions to enhance
individual research.
              Students would give oral and written presentations using the
principles
              discussed in the cohort instruction. (Note: A somewhat different form of
              this
schedule and approach has been used successfully with our NSF funded
              Tribal
Environmental and Natural Resource Management program (TENRM). The
              result has
been much higher than average retention and completion for students
              lacking needed
skills.)

By combining required courses where NWIC students
              typically do well (i.e. Speech), with
developmental science and math courses,
              students will be more likely to successfully
complete essential coursework for
              graduation.

Northwest Indian College students have demonstrated they must be
              immersed in their
culture, history, and philosophy if they are to effectively
              understand and build upon 
their role inthe Native communities. The college
              knows they must also develop the
science and math skills necessary to help
              their culture survive and intends to meet
these needs by offering introductory
              science and math courses fully integrated with 
curriculum related to Native
              culture, history, and philosophy. As they build increased 
self-esteem while
              finding success in the classroom, students will recognize their 
capacity to
              do science and math. They will then feel comfortable pursuing further 
science
              and math-related courses as they eventually enter baccalaureate programs
              and
the SMET workforce.
