Title       : U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research: Adaptation and Migration Among Populations of
               Spiders (Nephila clavipes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2002   
File        : a0123578

Award Number: 0123578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37280              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linden E. Higgins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0123578
 Higgins

This U.S.-Mexico award will support a research
              collaboration between Dr. Linden E. Higgins of the University of Massachusetts
              and Dr. Juan Nunez Farfan of the Instituto de Ecologia of the Universidad
              Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) in Mexico City.  The researchers intend to
              study the mechanisms of evolution of local adaptation in organisms found in
              diverse habitats. Not all species found in diverse habitats show local
              adaptation, and an improved understanding of why species fail to evolve local
              specialization will improve our understanding of how and when evolutionary
              diversification can proceed. A central question of their project is: Why do
              some species remain coherent units over diverse habitats? 

The large,
              orb-weaving spider Nephila clavipes (Araneae: Tetraglathidae) is found
              throughout central and southern Mexico, continuously distributed along a cline
              from the Gulf Coast to the Pacific coast and in isolated peripheral populations
              in mid-altitude mountainous locations. There is little local differentiation
              among these populations, and the species exhibits great phenotypic plasticity
              in many aspects of its biology. Two alternative models will provide the
              researchers with testable predictions concerning the amount of genetic
              differentiation and local adaptation among populations. Predictions arising
              from these two alternative models of species coherence will be tested using
              field observations, molecular genetics, and laboratory experiments.  The
              collaboration will benefit from bringing together the U.S. PI's expertise on
              the ecology, development, behavior, and physiology of the chosen spider
              species, with the Mexican PI's work on the phenotypic evolution in different
              organisms using the framework of quantitative and population genetics. 

