Title       : Selective Just-In-Time (JIT) Information Propagation in Large Network-Centric
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0123730

Award Number: 0123730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharma Chakravarthy sharma@cse.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Efficient and effective change detection and notification is becoming
              increasingly important for environments such as WWW and distributed
              heterogeneous systems. Change detection for structured data has been studied
              extensively. Change detection and notification for unstructured data in the
              form of html and XML documents is the goal of this project. The objectives of
              this proposal are to investigate the specification, management, and propagation
              of changes as requested by a user in a timely manner, and meeting the quality
              of service requirements. The user is allowed to specify the kind of changes to
              documents s/he is interested in, at different levels of granularity. They also
              specify how they need to be notified (email, mobile host, PDA, etc.) when the
              requested information becomes available. Quality of service (QoS) information
              such as timing constraints, aggregated vs. individual changes is part of the
              user specification. User specifications are translated into a set of rules that
              are used for extracting documents, monitoring changes, and propagation of
              relevant information. Special attention is paid to scalability issues, as it is
              an important aspect of the solution. The ability to selectively monitor and be
              informed of changes (push) augments the current strategy of pulling information
              periodically and checking for interesting changes. By disseminating the
              resulting prototype and the results over the Internet, scientists can benefit
              from it. Through integration of research into courses taught at UTA and into
              student research, this project will impact education at UTA and other
              universities.
