Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0123321

Award Number: 0123321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marilyn J. Suiter                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith K. Gwathmey jgwathmey@gwathmey.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst for Cardio Dis & Musc
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    /   -

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Judith K. Gwathmey has given exceedingly personal attention to her mentees
              from the time she identifies them. She is said to frequently identify a
              "diamond in the rough," who she supports through their formal education and
              into their careers. Gwathmey currently heads the Institute for Cardiovascular
              Diseases and Muscle Research Institute, and holds a faculty position at Boston
              University School of Medicine, as well as adjunct or lecturer positions with
              Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Tufts
              University School of Veterinary Medicine. Along with her active research,
              teaching, and consulting activities, she is an active mentor, described as
              personally generous with time and financial resources to support her mentees.
              Gwathmey has provided students with financial support for tuition and books
              from her personal income.

Her direct, "hands-on" mentoring style provides
              students with research opportunities, guidance on presenting research outcomes,
              and lessons in how to compete successfully in academic science. Those she has
              mentored include high-school students through doctoral students and faculty;
              fifty-six persons mentored. She has demonstrated a keen interest in students
              from underrepresented groups, and has employed a diverse, multi-national staff
              in her laboratory. Although her efforts are not aligned with the programs of a
              traditional education institution, she has had broad success with many
              individuals who are likely to replicate her mentoring in their own careers.

