Title       : ADVANCE Leadership Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0123592

Award Number: 0123592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31461              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica A. Macaulay mmacaula@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1739      ADVANCE - LEADERSHIP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1739,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for reconfiguration and revitalization of a project
              called Women
in Linguistics Mentoring Alliance (WILMA). WILMA was started in
              1996 to provide women in
linguistics with mentors to help them acquire general
              survival skills and guide them through the
early stages of their careers, thus
              increasing the numbers of women in linguistics. WILMA grew
out of discussions
              among members of COSWL (the Committee on the Status of Women in
Linguistics)
              and others which indicated a need for consistent mentoring practices for women
              in
linguistics. In this project a new program which makes use of the internet
              for identifying and arranging mentorships will be initiated. The goal is to
              create a self-sustaining website where women in linguistics can go to search
              for mentors who share their interests and attributes.

Effective mentoring is
              critically important for academic advancement and personal
development in any
              field of study. WILMA is based on a model that
supplements rather than
              replaces other mentoring, on the premise that students and faculty
benefit
              from exposure to a range of points of view and alternative responses to
              practical
questions. There is also additional benefit to developing contacts
              beyond the home department
and campus. Thus, the kind of mentoring provided
              through WILMA can be useful even to
women lucky enough to have good mentors
              and advisors at their home institutions.

This project is supported by the
              NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase
              the participation of women in the scientific and engineering workforce through
              the increased representation and advancement of women in academic science and
              engineering careers. 

