Title       : The Fond du Lac Tribal Technology and Science Infrastructure Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0123121

Award Number: 0123121
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2456041            (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom Davis tomdavis@ezigaa.fdl.cc.mn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Wold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ted J. Wetherbee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Gillespie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fond du Lac Tribal College
	      2101 14th Street
	      Cloquet, MN  55720    218/879-0810

NSF Program : 1744      TRIBAL COLLEGE & UNIVERS PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project was developed as a result of a technology and science planning
              process that
Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College (FDLTCC) initiated in
              2000 and is still
continuing. This planning effort involved a large number of
              college and community
stakeholder groups and provided both the underlying
              concepts for this proposal as well as the
outline for specific curriculum
              programs and hardware/software infrastructure needs.
The project proposed has
              several interrelated elements. High performance computing assets,
including
              Internet2 hookup, cluster installation, and visualization panels, are put into
              place to
support both curriculum and research agendas. The research agenda is
              centered in ongoing
research efforts at the college in environmental science,
              soil mapping, computational science,
and information technology (IT). The
              research effort is designed to provide students with
experience in research,
              experience with the collaborative research environment, and
experimential
              activities related to what they are studying. The grant also proposes to build
              a
partnership with the University of Minnesota's Laboratory for Computational
              Science and
Engineering, both to provide help with constructing the high
              performance infrastructure, as
well as a research agenda that will involve
              students in computational science, physics, and
other SMET-related curriculum
              areas.  Other collaborative efforts will be implemented with
current partners
              involved in FDLTCC research projects.

At the proposed project's heart are
              curriculum development and implementation activities
designed to not only
              build on the enhanced research projects, but to also initiate new
              SMET
degrees.  Research with FDLTCC's target student population has indicated
              that these degrees
and a one-year certificate program will increase the number
              of Native American students
majoring in SMET-related programs.  These degrees
              are all designed to launch a new
curriculum track design, which provides a
              core of Information Technology courses that
students can use to build either
              baccalaureate or associate degrees in a number of
              different
disciplines.

The degrees and certificate initiated through the
              project will include: A GIS/GPS certificate
which can be earned in conjunction
              with the environmental science, computer science, and
law enforcement
              associate degrees; a baccalaureate in computer science with the IT core;
              an
associate degree in E-Crime and Computer Security that can be earned with
              the IT core, the
GIS/GPS certificate, and the college's current Minnesota
              Transfer or Law Enforcement
associate degrees in order to complete the
              requirements for a baccalaureate.  The new IT core
will also be available to
              baccalaureate students in Elementary Education at FDLTCC.  By the
end of the
              grant, enrollment in these curriculum areas will support continuation of
              each
program based on the timetable described in the grant.

The last two
              elements of the grant include the plan to develop an associate degree online
              for
students located at FDLTCC's Augsburg Offsite program that serves the
              Native American
community in St. Paul/Minneapolis. This effort will also use
              the high performance
computing resources built through the project.  SMET
              related faculty and staff development
activities are also included designed to
              increase IT sophistication at FDLTCC as well as to
increase the number of MS
              and Ph.D.-qualified faculty in SMET-related areas.
