Title       : Sustained Economic Growth of the Oglala Lakota Nation through Development of the
               Technological Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0123149

Award Number: 0123149
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Fredenberg mfredenberg@olc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Haas  (Principal Investigator former)
              Adel Heriba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oglala Lakota College
	      P.O. Box 490
	      Kyle, SD  577520490    605/455-2321

NSF Program : 1744      TRIBAL COLLEGE & UNIVERS PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Oglala Lakota College (OLC) is a tribally controlled and community governed
              four-year
academic institution with 1300 students located in ten college
              centers across the
Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota (SD). The student
              base is approximately 90%
American Indian.  As one of six NSF-designated Model
              Institutions for Excellence 
(MIE), OLC has developed the infrastructure to
              offer Science, Engineering, Math and
Technology (SMET) degrees and increase
              the number of Native Americans continuing 
on to graduate school.  We
              currently have general collaboration agreements with the 
SD School of Mines &
              Technology (SDSM&T) and SD State University.  Since 1995, the 
MIE Program at
              OLC has developed five new accredited degrees in the SMET areas.

Presently
              the Oglala Lakota Nation is forced to outsource all analytical work to
              off-
reservation labs due to the lack of qualified facilities and expertise.
              Our long-term 
goal is to train a pool of highly skilled scientists and lab
              technicians who will serve
their communities as self-employed entrepreneurs or
              hired employees. Also, one of 
the major shortcomings of our SMET programs is
              the lack of lab facilities with modern 
analytical equipment. This creates a
              disadvantage for our students at every level of 
their career.

We propose a
              multifaceted approach to develop the technological infrastructure of
              our
institution and the reservation as a whole.  We will build a research
              center housing 
several federal and state certified labs that will provide us
              with the capacity to conduct
research and routine analytical work in the areas
              of chemistry, environmental science, and 
biology.  Collaboration agreements
              with three faculty members at SDSM&T and Black Hills
State University in these
              areas are procured for this proposal.  We will actively seek 
partnerships
              with tribal agencies to provide research and analytic services. This
              insures
that a significant portion of the funding allocated by tribal agencies
              would be re-infused
into the reservation economy. This would also sustain the
              project beyond NSF funding.

Our faculty and students will be trained on the
              equipment by the collaborators and
through industrial short courses, workshops
              and seminars.  Both collaborators and 
faculty will initiate research projects
              involving our students utilizing the new equipment. 
We will strengthen our
              curriculum by developing new analytical lab classes and by
enhancing existing
              sciencecourses. Finally, students and faculty will reach out to 
reservation
              communities to help them address their concerns about economic 
development
              and the environment.  Students and faculty will also teach SMET
classes at
              reservation schools and will open up the labs for teachers and students 
to
              stimulate scientific knowledge and curiosity .
