Title       : Designing and Building a National Middleware Infrastructure: Towards a National
               GRIDS Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0123973

Award Number: 0123973
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alan R. Blatecky                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4218150            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Kesselman carl@isi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randal L. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip M. Papadopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4089      Network Centric Middleware Svc
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4089,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The proposal focuses on designing and building the NSF Middleware Initiative
              (NMI), and will be one of two System Integrators. The NMI program will expedite
              the development of middleware functions and services to support the national
              research and scientific community, and will also accelerate the deployment and
              use of new and emerging applications across the Internet.  The purpose of the
              NMI program is to enable members of the advanced networking community to
              collaborate in developing and assembling common network services and resources
              (middleware) to optimize the network for applications and to share limited
              resources for the common good of all users.  The proposal will be based on an
              open extensible architecture by building on the success of the GRID activities
              (primarily Globus) and other middleware technologies.  The project would
              enhance and extend this architecture to the larger research community and has
              three primary goals;
Define an integrated, modular, and extensible Grid
              architecture addressing a large fraction of current and projected future
              middleware requirements for the scientific and engineering communities, as well
              as the larger academic communities. 
Instantiate the NMI architecture,
              creating robust, tested, packaged, and documented middleware solutions that
              address a significant fraction of these requirements, and that involve
              community extensions over the next several years to address other
              requirements.
Work with middleware research community and to evolve the
              architecture and to integrate selected components into the NMI middleware
              infrastructure.
In constructing the NMI, ISI will build on widely used
              research middleware, such as the Globus Toolkit, the de facto standard for Grid
              environments, Condor, and Storage Resource Broker, heavily leveraging open
              (e.g., IETF and W3C standard) protocols, as well as middleware which is being
              developed by independent researchers and communities. The results of the
              project will rely on open protocols, open source implementations and
              interoperability. In undertaking these activities, ISI will work closely with
              major U.S. projects including the NSF PACIs, which will help us to reach out to
              other user communities, and UCAID, which has committed to working with ISI to
              address the challenging and important problem of integration with campus
              infrastructures and the broader academic science and research communities.  ISI
              will also work with other international users communities as identified by NSF,
              will help transition relevant technologies to standards and products, and will
              develop industrial relationships.


