Title       : Dissertation Research: The Ceramics of Piedras Negras, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0123016

Award Number: 0123016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Patrick Culbert tpc@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. T. Patrick Culbert, Mr. Arturo Munoz will collect
              data for his dissertation. For the last four years Mr. Munoz has been a member
              of the archaeological team excavating the ruins of the Classic Maya city of
              Piedras Negras, Guatemala. Piedras Negras is located in a remote corner of the
              Peten rainforest and is renowned for the excellent quality of its sculpture and
              for the unusually complete sequence of dated stelae erected by the cities
              rulers between A.D. 650 and 800. Piedras Negras is particularly notable because
              of the heavy emphasis on resist decoration on locally made ceramics. This
              technique, virtually unknown in other parts of the Maya Lowlands, dominates the
              Late Classic polychrome ceramic tradition at Piedras Negras. Because of the
              unusually complete historical record for the site as well as the excellent
              provenance data available as a result of the recent excavations it is possible
              to track the development and spread of resist decorated ceramics with a rare
              degree of precision. Resist decorated ceramic appear first in elite contexts.
              They are carefully decorated and well fired. Later, more crudely executed
              resist types become common and are recovered from all levels of settlement.
              These observations lead to several hypotheses amenable to testing utilizing a
              variety of quantitative measures. 

In general terms, this research is a
              diachronic study of changing ceramic styles, framing the development of
              resist-decorated ceramics first as a result of particular historical and social
              circumstances at Piedras Negras and second, and more broadly, as a result if
              general processes linking crafting and the possession of cultural goods to
              processes of political legitimation. With very few exceptions, Americanist
              archaeologists rarely consider the social component of technological change,
              becoming what have been described as "somnambulists" adopting the position that
              technological change unfolds automatically according to its own inevitable
              logic and independently of social and cultural processes. As a result, most
              archaeological research focusing on technological change has emphasized the
              effects of increased efficiency on mitigating changing environmental or other
              conditions. If this research is successful, it will present a model for
              understanding processes of technological change emphasizing the importance
              social processes in determining not only the content of emerging technologies,
              but also their success or failure.

For a variety of reasons the Usumacinta
              Basin is one of the most understudied part so the Maya Lowlands. This research
              will provide some of the very first detailed data for the region, and will
              provide key information on one of the preeminent Lowland Maya sites. This
              research will not only be a valuable reference for future archaeologists
              working in the area, it will also interest any member of Guatemalan society
              curious about their country's ancient past. Finally, this research will assist
              in the training of a promising young scientist.

