Title       : Faculty And Curriculum Enhancement Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0123235

Award Number: 0123235
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2388733            (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarice Baker-Big Back cbabbb@fbcc.bia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Orion Gillette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Berthold Community Co
	      PO Box 490
	      New Town, ND  587630490    701/627-3816

NSF Program : 1744      TRIBAL COLLEGE & UNIVERS PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Statement of Objectives. The Fort Berthold Community College Technology
              and
Instruction Enhancement Project is proposed to increase the numbers and
              persistence of
American Indian SMET majors and potential majors

- The
              technology infrastructure of the college will be strengthened by expanded band
              width
 and high tech access for students, faculty and staff.
- The SMET
              curriculum will integrate constructivist methods and technology applications

              to improve SMET student learning outcomes and persistence rates.
- The college
              faculty and staff will build teaching and learning capacities through

              constructivist methodologies and techniques and technology applications.
-
              American Indian SMET students persistence will be increased by 10% per year
              through a
 student retention model called Family Based Education.
- SMET
              students will have expanded internships and community service placements,

              workforce placement and transfer opportunities through formal community
              outreach
 relationships.

 Methods to be Employed. The Technology and
              Instruction Enhancement Project of 
Fort Berthold Community College will focus
              on the recruitment and retention of American 
Indian Students toward
              graduation and transfer or workforce placement. First, the
technology
              infrastructure will be expanded by improving the band width to speed up and
              
broaden technology capacities. The student access to high tech equipment and
              applications
will include the additionof high tech laboratories for student
              learning Web-conferencing 
capacities will be installed in theMentor Sites in
              three remote satellite campus locations. 
Second, constructivist
              teaching/learning methods and techniques that heightened student
experiential
              learning and active discovery based activity; and increased technology
              
applications will be integrated across the curriculum. The computer science
              networking 
program will deliver professional certificationsand two full time
              faculty members will 
make this a technology centerpiece in the curriculum.
              

 Third, the curriculum and college services will be vastly improved through
              faculty and 
staff development opportunities in constructivist
              teaching/learning methods and technology 
applications. Faculty development
              opportunities will include individual professional 
conferences and
              mini-grants for research projects that involve SMET student interns
              as
assistants. Fourth, to improve student retention rates, the student
              services division will 
acquire a full time retention officer to implement an
              aggressive, pro-active retention 
strategy called the Family Based Education
              Model. Pressure points in the family based
American Indian students lives are
              identified and through a team analysis, referral and 
intervention strategies
              are prescribed to each student itat-risk.ln Community outreach 
will expand
              SMET student opportunities for internship and community service
              placements.

Project Outcomes. The project outcome will be increased American
              Indian SMET
student retention rates, 10% increases annually during the project
              period. The technology
infrastructure will advance according to campus-wide
              plans. The faculty and staff will have
long term capacities and skills
              reflecting constructivist methods and technology
applications. The Family
              Based Education Model will have intervened with at-risk SMET
students, to
              heighten retention rates. Broad-based community relationships will
              support
SMET majors and graduates and the college as an educational
              institution.
