Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Involvement of Clathrin-Coated Vesicles in
               Preprophase Band Formation in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0123182

Award Number: 0123182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3400               (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Andrew Staehelin staeheli@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0123182
Staehelin

This award supports a two-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Andrew Staehelin of the University of Colorado,
              Boulder and Professor Yoshinobu Mineyuki of Hiroshima University in Japan.  The
              researchers will undertake a study of the involvement of clathrin-coated
              vesicles in preprophase band formation in plants.  This is part of a larger
              ongoing research effort to produce a 3-D structural database of the cytokinetic
              apparatus of plant cells at a resolution of 6nm.  To produce this database,
              cells and tissues will be high-pressure frozen and freeze-substituted, and then
              reconstructed from dual-axis tomograms.  The preprophase band (PPB) of cortical
              MTs, the focus of this study, defines a plasma membrane zone that becomes
              depleted of cortical actin filaments and serves as the site where the cell
              plate links up with the parental wall.  Preliminary studies have shown that
              ultra rapid freezing/freeze-substitution techniques can not only provide
              exceptionally clear images of cortical MTs and MFs in the PPB zone, including
              images depicting the dynamic state of individual MTs, but also that forming PPB
              regions contain increased numbers of clathrin-coated pits and vesicles,
              suggestive of an increased amount of endocytosis and membrane recycling. 
              Although clathrin-coated pits have been seen previously in electron micrographs
              of PPBs, the idea of endocytosis being an important element of PPB formation
              has not been investigated to date.  However, based on the initial findings,
              endocytosis could play an important role in PPB formation.  The researchers'
              goals are:  1) to determine if the number of clathrin-coated pits and vesicles
              increases in the plasma membrane zones involved in PPB narrowing and formation;
               2) to determine the spatial relationship between these pits and vesicles to
              MTs and MFs; and  3) to show that these clathrin-coated pits and vesicles are
              involved in endocytosis.

The project brings together the efforts of two
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. 
              Results of the research could determine how PPBs are formed and what drives the
              narrowing of the cortical tubule array into a PPB.  Through the exchange of
              ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
              promote international understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to
              publish results of the research in scientific journals and report on the
              findings at scientific meetings.


