Title       : ADVANCE Leadership Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0123581

Award Number: 0123581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhonda J. Hughes rhughes@brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1739      ADVANCE - LEADERSHIP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1739,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is to continue the work of Bryn Mawr College in the promotion and
              support of the next generation of women in the mathematical sciences. The award
              supports the outreach, mentoring, and research projects of Professor Rhonda
              Hughes of the Department of Mathematics.  This effort builds on previous
              efforts of the Principal Investigator and the College, aims to further identify
              and replicate effective structures that promote the successful advancement of
              women mathematical scientists, so that they might eventually assume positions
              of leadership in the science, engineering, and mathematics community.  A
              significant portion of the  work involves collaboration with Professor Sylvia
              Bozeman of Spelman College, as well as cooperation between Spelman and Bryn
              Mawr Colleges.

The activity involves four major components:(1)The EDGE
              Publication
Program, which would provide for the broad dissemination of
              information about successful strategies for increasing the retention of women
              in graduate programs in mathematics,
and supporting the advancement of their
              careers;(2)The Capacity Building Program for
Women, which would establish a
              three-tiered mentoring program in order to increase the
capacity of women to
              advance to positions of leadership in the academic community;(3)
The EDGE
              Symposium 2003,which would provide a forum for identifying and disseminating
              information about institutional and individual paradigms that contribute to
              this
advancement, and include an EDGE Reunion and mentoring workshops; and
              (4)The Re-
search Program of the Principal Investigator, which would enable
              the Principal Investigator
to intensify her research program in functional
              analysis and operator theory, and permit
the increased involvement of
              undergraduate and graduate students in timely areas of mathematical research,
              with the long-range goal of their pursuing careers in the
              mathematical
sciences.

This project is supported by the National Institutes
              of Health through the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE
              Program is to increase the participation of women in the scientific and
              engineering workforce through the increased representation and advancement of
              women in academic science and engineering careers.

