Title       : ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0123571

Award Number: 0123571
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4128082            (Estimated)
Investigator: Abigail J. Stewart abbystew@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Lichter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela A. Raymond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley Neuman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen W. Director  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1738      ADVANCE - INSTITUTIONAL TRANSF
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1738,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
              science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
              of women at all levels of faculty and academic leadership, particularly at the
              senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional practices,
              policies, climate and culture. The University of Michigan proposes to undertake
              three different types of interventions to improve the opportunities and
              circumstances of tenure-track women faculty in basic science
and engineering
              fields. These include: (1) a campus climate initiative, which will focus on
              activities (e.g., workshops, focus groups, climate surveys, consultation on
              increasing pools of female applicants in searches) that have been identified,
              or will be created, and made available to any interested science or engineering
              unit (a department or college) throughout the University;  (2) a gender equity
              resource fund, which will provide new types of direct support to individuals;
              and (3) a departmental transformation initiative, which will permit a sequenced
              program of activities to be developed and tailored to a small number of units
              on a competitive basis. This sequenced program (including internal review or
              self-study, goal-setting, and a series of targeted activities addressing
              recruitment, retention and/or climate issues) will enable a sustained,
              committed intervention within a single department, as well as provide a model
              of change for other institutional units. 
All three sets of programs will be
              evaluated by independent researchers.  Evaluations will be conducted throughout
              the course of the Award, using both qualitative and quantitative methods.
              Results of early evaluations will be used to revise
Programs. 

This
              multi-level program is designed to improve the campus environment for
              women
faculty in science and engineering at the University of Michigan, and as
              a result to increase the successful recruitment, retention and promotion of
              tenure-track women faculty in basic science fields. The presence and success of
              these women faculty will in turn affect the expectations and attitudes of the
              many women and men who are graduate and undergraduate students in science and
              engineering fields. Many of these individuals will go on to have science and
              engineering careers themselves; because UM trains so many students, it is
              anticipated that the impact of this program will reach well beyond this
              university. Creation of a more equitable climate at UM will affect other
              campuses through the next generation of science and engineering faculty who
              will themselves train students, as well as non-academic work settings in which
              scientists and
engineers trained at UM are employed.

This project is
              supported by the NSF ADVANCE Program.
The overall mission of the ADVANCE
              Program is to increase the participation of women in the scientific and
              engineering workforce through the increased representation and advancement of
              women in academic science and engineering careers.

