Title       : Supporting Research and Collaboration through Integrated Middleware
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0123937

Award Number: 0123937
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alan R. Blatecky                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3529936            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Klingenstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Luker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry P. Draayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Renee Woodten Frost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Van Houweling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp Adv Internet Dev
	      3025 Boardwalk
	      Ann Arbor, MI  48108    734/913-4264

NSF Program : 4089      Network Centric Middleware Svc
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4089,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The proposal focuses on designing and building the NSF Middleware Initiative
              (NMI), and will be one of two System Integrators as well as playing a Service
              Provider role. The NMI program will expedite the development of middleware
              functions and services to support the national research and scientific
              community, and will also accelerate the deployment and use of new and emerging
              applications across the Internet.  The purpose of the NMI program is to enable
              members of the advanced networking community to collaborate in developing and
              assembling common network services and resources (middleware) to optimize the
              network for applications and to share limited resources for the common good of
              all users. 

UCAID, along with its EDUCAUSE and SURA partners, will help
              define, develop and deploy the NMI and will integrate across three different
              streams of developing middleware applications and initiatives; one stream is
              the middleware being developed and deployed by the GRIDS community and the
              GRIDS Center, another stream is the set of middleware initiative being worked
              on by the Internet2 community of research institutions and universities, and a
              third stream is middleware which is being developed by independent researchers
              and communities.
This proposal focuses on the deployment and support of this
              middleware architecture, and in particular is a focused outreach to the larger
              academic communities.  While the other two Cooperative Agreements primarily
              focus on GRID technologies and then work with the larger academic and research
              community, this proposal focuses on the campus infrastructure, discipline and
              desktop and then works with the GRID technologies, among others.   In order for
              middleware to be successful to the broad education and research community, it
              must specifically address;
a) Integration with campus infrastructure: core
              middleware services (such as identifiers, basic directory services, and first
              levels of authentication and authorization) are typical activities that will be
              supplied by the campus infrastructure.
b) Integration with vertical
              discipline-oriented applications and middleware; such as workbenches and tool
              sets and application portals. 
c) Integration at the desktop (i.e., operating
              systems, user interface, personal production tools), 
d) coordinate its
              activities and efforts with the other two partners of the NMI
e) Integrate
              with the components of the developing high performance and GRID
              technologies.


