Title       : Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: "Integrated photonic
               crystal/quantum dot chip for wavelength division multiplexed fiber optic
               transceivers"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0123519

Award Number: 0123519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John O'Brien jdobrien@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis G. Deppe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1687,1751,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on
              "Ultra-High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking."  Semiconductor
              fabrication technology has advanced to a state where revolutionary new devices
              can now be fabricated that bring new functionality and applications to fiber
              optic interconnects. Two of these new technologies, photonic crystals and
              self-organized quantum dots (QDs), enable a synergistic match of nanostructured
              materials that are particularly interesting. Photonic crystal defects enable
              ultra-small semiconductor microcavities with 3-dimensional mode confinement
              that intrinsically sets the wavelength of the light source. They also provide a
              mechanism for routing light signals on chip in sharp bends between elements,
              for example to multiplex the outputs of several laser sources into a single
              optical output. Because of these unique features, photonic crystals enable a
              new type of monolithicaliy integrated chip technology ideally suited for
              wavelength division multiplexing (WDM). This new chip technology offers
              revolutionary advances for low cost, high performance, ultra-small form factor
              transceivers for ultra-high bandwidth fiber optic communication. Such a WDM
              chip technology can easily provide single fiber bandwidth in excess of 100
              GB/sec.

Here we propose to demonstrate the multi-wavelength source for such
              a chip. We propose to design, and demonstrate a nanophotonic WDM source that is
              a multi-wavelength laser array in which each element of the array consists of
              coupled photonic crystal defect cavities emitting at a single wavelength with
              quantum dot active regions. This work relies on the design and nanofabrication
              of photonic crystals for the optical mode definition and the ability to define
              the output wavelength of an array element. It also relies on quantum dots for
              reducing or eliminating surface recombination and for eliminating the laser
              chirp. This WDM source is to be electrically pumped. Our program emphasizes the
              following technological developments

1)	electrically pumped photonic crystal
              lasers
2)	high efficiency photonic crystal lasers with quantum dot active
              regions and sampled- grating                 photonic crystal
              reflectors
3)	edge-emitting multi-wavelength photonic crystal/quantum dot
              laser arrays

