Title       : Mesoscale Modeling of Tropical Paleoclimate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0123797

Award Number: 0123797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry H. Cook khc6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will serve to develop and apply a mesoscale modeling system for
              studying past variability in tropical climates of Africa and South America
              during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). The modeling system consists of two
              models. A mesoscale climate model (MCM) will simulate climate on space scales
              of tens of kilometers. A general circulation model (GCM) will generate lateral
              boundary conditions on wind, temperature, and moisture for the mesoscale model.
                

Simulations of the dry climates of the present day and LGM (~21,000 years
              ago) over northern Africa will be contrasted with simulations for the African
              Humid Period, approximately 6,000 years ago when Sahelian and Saharan Africa
              supported numerous lakes and extensive vegetation. 

The research will
              address the following questions:
-What are the individual and combined roles
              of insolation, changes in land surface conditions, regional SST differences,
              and differences in large-scale climate (i.e., MCM lateral boundary conditions)
              in causing differences in surface wetness over northern Africa among the
              present day, African Humid Period and the LGM?
-Are the differences in wetness
              associated with changes in precipitation only, or do changes in evaporation
              and/or water table levels play an important role?
-What mechanisms are
              involved in changing the atmospheric column water vapor budget? 
-Are any
              important mechanisms nonlinear in a way that helps explain the speed with which
              the climate can change in this region? What are the implications for future
              climate change (global warming)?

Simulations with various combinations of
              lateral and surface boundary conditions, as well as other forcing functions
              such as insolation and atmospheric composition, will identify the important
              factors and physical mechanisms that lead to the wet conditions and the rapid
              climate change that is hypothesized to have occurred in Amazonia during the
              Holocene. The mesoscale modeling system will also be used to study South
              American climate of the LGM.

The research will address the following
              questions:
-What was the distribution of drying and cooling during the LGM in
              the Amazon Basin and what mechanisms are associated with the differences from
              the present day climate?
-What differences in aridity in the Central Andes are
              simulated with the MCM, and what mechanisms account for differences from the
              present day?
-How are the simulated differences in both regions related to
              global-scale climate conditions and how are they linked?
-Does the model
              support the idea that there are different aridity trends in different areas of
              the high Central Andes? If so, are these trends providing information about
              inter-hemispheric symmetry or asymmetry of climate change during the last
              glacial cycle?
