Title       : Fostering Effective Multidisciplinary Student Teams Through Engineering Projects
               in Community Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0123884

Award Number: 0123884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leah H. Jamieson lhj@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1746      DISTINGUISHED TEACHING SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1746,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the past ten years, it has become widely recognized that engineering
              students need skills that go beyond their technical strengths: skills in
              communication, project planning, and teamwork, as well as an awareness of the
              customer in an engineering design project, of ethical and professional issues,
              and of the social and global context in which their engineering is employed. A
              key component of this broader education is experience in collaborating with
              people from many disciplines. At the same time that engineering students are
              faced with the need to learn "soft skills," students from essentially all other
              disciplines are faced with a need to understand and appreciate technology. A
              powerful vehicle for enhancing the technical fluency of non-technical students
              is participation on design-oriented project teams with students from technical
              disciplines. The PI is leading a faculty team from education, organizational
              psychology, organizational communication, and engineering to address the issue
              of fostering effective multidisciplinary student teams. The EPICS (Engineering
              Projects in Community Service) program provides the framework for the proposed
              work. EPICS students earn academic credit for long-term, multidisciplinary,
              team-based projects that solve technology-based problems faced by
              not-for-profit community service agencies, K-12 schools, museums, and municipal
              organizations. Founded at Purdue in 1995, EPICS programs are in progress at six
              universities and planned at two more, with over 500 students participating on
              over 50 project teams paired with community partners. Although EPICS projects
              are engineering-centered, effective real-world solutions rarely depend on a
              single discipline. The quality of the teams' solutions and the breadth of the
              students' educational experience will therefore be profoundly affected if the
              institutional and educational challenges to creating well-functioning
              multidisciplinary teams can be addressed. Outcomes of the project are
              anticipated in three areas: 

Student learning outcomes: The project is
              developing vehicles to enhance students' ability to work effectively on
              multidisciplinary teams. As a result of their experience, students should be
              able to: identify and articulate areas of contribution from their discipline;
              apply their disciplinary knowledge to advance the team's goals; respect the
              contributions of individuals from other disciplines; describe how different
              disciplines add to the effectiveness of the team; enjoy the interactions with
              other disciplines in accomplishing the team's objectives. 

EPICS / Program
              outcomes: The increased effectiveness of the student teams enhances the ability
              of the teams to meet their community partner's needs. 

Pedagogical Methods
              outcomes: The project is developing a body of experience that draws on research
              and practice from several fields, and recasting the findings to apply them to
              the specific problems faced by teams of undergraduates in an academic setting.
              

By developing structures and processes that transform EPICS into a truly
              multidisciplinary program, the potential impact extends beyond the student,
              program, and pedagogical outcomes. EPICS provides  a framework for the
              in-context integration of faculty research and undergraduate education by the
              faculty from the many disciplines who will advise teams, bringing the full
              spectrum of research into the classroom. The collaboration of Engineering,
              Science, Education, and Liberal Arts has the potential to break down
              institutional barriers, transforming the way we think about the university. The
              partnership between student teams and the community gives both students and the
              people with whom they work a new view of the university, with the potential to
              transform the image of science and engineering.
