Title       : ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0123690

Award Number: 0123690
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3687812            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Frehill lfrehill@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Hills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miley Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reed Dasenbrock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine Marlow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1738      ADVANCE - INSTITUTIONAL TRANSF
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1738,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
              science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
              of women in all levels of faculty and academic administration, particularly at
              the senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional
              practices, policies, climate and culture.  New Mexico State University proposes
              a five year program to increase by 20 percent (net) the overall number of women
              in faculty science, math, and engineering tenure-track positions. NMSU is a
              public, land-grant university with a research focus, diverse student body, and
              commitment to minority participation in science, mathematics, and engineering
              (SME). NMSU's program of institutional transformation seeks to create an
              environment which supports the advancement of women SME faculty to leadership
              positions in the professoriate and in academic administration. Under this
              program, a Committee on the Status of Women in SME will form the central
              administrative unit to bring about these
changes. The Committee will include
              the associate deans of the Colleges of
Agriculture and Home Economics, Arts
              and Sciences, Engineering, and the Graduate School, department heads and senior
              faculty from departments within these colleges, and key advisory personnel with
              experience in diversity issues in higher education.
The NMSU Committee on the
              Status of Women in SME will:
(1) conduct a self-study of the current status of
              women in SME faculty
positions at NMSU and institutionalize an annual review
              of the status of
women faculty at NMSU to insure gains made toward equity
              under this
program continue after the grant period;
(2) distribute research,
              travel, and start-up funds with the goal of recruiting  and retaining women SME
              faculty;
(3) establish an endowment and long-term funding campaign to
              provide
financial resources to sustain ADVANCE initiatives after the grant
              period
ends;
(4) coordinate Faculty Development and Visiting Scholar
              programs;
(5) serve as consultants to SME Departmental Faculty Search
              Committees;
(6) disseminate programmatic results within NMSU and at
              professional
conferences.

As a Hispanic serving institution, NMSU will also
              encourage participation in SME fields among under- represented ethnic groups.
              This project is supported by the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of
              the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women in the scientific
              and engineering workforce through the increased representation and advancement
              of women in academic science and engineering careers. 



