Title       : U.S.-Japan Dissertation Enhancement: Speciation with Hybridization: The case of
               Japanese Hexagrammids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0123805

Award Number: 0123805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12081              (Estimated)
Investigator: Giacomo Bernardi bernardi@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen D. Crow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0123805
Bernardi

This award supports a one-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Giacomo Bernardi and Karen Crow at the University of
              California, Santa Cruz and Professor Hiroyuki Munehara of Hokkaido University
              in Japan as well as Professor Andrey Balanov of the Russian Academy of Sciences
              in Vladivostok.  The researchers will undertake a study of the involvement of
              speciation with hybridization of the Japanese Hexagrammids.  Reinforcement is
              the build up of assortative mating resulting from natural selection against
              hybrids upon secondary contact of allopatric species.  It has been theorized
              that reinforcement could be an important force driving speciation.  Evidence
              for reinforcement in laboratory experiments has been difficult to generate, and
              studies in natural settings have been lacking, especially in marine systems. 
              However, theoretical and empirical support has grown in the last five years and
              additional studies need to be done to further test these predictions.  Fishes
              of the genus Hexagrammos meet criteria theorized to favor speciation by
              reinforcement.  The research will involve testing whether assortative mating is
              being built up in conjunction with reduced fitness of hybrids to determine if
              reinforcement is an important force maintaining species boundaries in this
              system.  The main focus of the proposed research is to determine the role of
              hybridization in processes of speciation within the genus Hexagrammos.  The
              specific goals are to:  1) characterize the relative proportions of hybrids
              occurring in nature at three sites in the Northern Sea of Japan;  2) measure
              post-zygotic reproductive isolation between parental species by estimating
              differential costs in fitness associated with larvae produced from hybrid,
              specific and F1-hybrid backcrosses; and  3) estimate pre-zygotic reproductive
              isolation by comparing differences in assortative mate selection in parental
              species from both sympatric and allopatric populations.

The project brings
              together the efforts of three international laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The process of
              reinforcement of premating isolation is of great interest in evolutionary
              biology.  Results of this research are likely to provide a major contribution
              to our understanding of speciation processes, particularly in the area of
              reinforcement as a mechanism for speciation.  The project advances
              international human resources through the participation of a graduate student. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

