Title       : The Physics of Everyday Life: Java Applets and Interactive Lecture
               Demonstrations for Non-science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0123561

Award Number: 0123561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Wieman cwieman@jila.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1746      DISTINGUISHED TEACHING SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1746,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project aims to address the problem that physics, or more specifically
              physics courses, are widely held to be difficult, unpleasant, and irrelevant,
              even though physics provides the foundation of much of modern technology. The
              objective of this work is to change the curriculum and method of presentation
              of undergraduate physics courses to make them popular, engaging, and more
              effective at providing widespread understanding of physics concepts as they
              apply to the world around us. The approach that is being taken to achieve this
              goal is to first develop a novel introductory course for non-science students
              that will build on the unique curriculum put forth in the new textbook "How
              things work; the physics of everyday life". Interactive Java applets and
              interactive lecture demonstrations (ILDs) are being developed that cover the
              topics in this text, and thereby provide novel presentation formats to go with
              this novel curriculum. Applets and ILDs are two of the innovations that science
              education research has shown contribute substantially to student conceptual
              learning. Through the use of readily available technology these can also be
              easily and inexpensively implemented in the standard large lecture course
              format. The physics for nonscientists course is specifically targeted because
              it has the capability of reaching large numbers of students, but the
              institutional and disciplinary barriers to introducing such radical changes in
              it are uniquely low compared to other physics courses. However, demonstrated
              success in this course is likely to result in similar changes being adopted in
              the rest of the undergraduate physics curriculum, and the applets and ILDs
              being developed can be used equally well in a variety of courses. The
              development of these applets and ILDs heavily utilize the same skills that have
              made the PI a highly successful experimental physicist, and their effectiveness
              is being assessed using standard techniques of education research. The Wiley
              publishing company will vigorously pursue the implementation and distribution
              of these innovations.




