Title       : Mathematics, Computer Science and Technology Pipeline Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0123208

Award Number: 0123208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Ohring peter@purchase.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith F. Tavel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanine M. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rowan Lindley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Skrivanek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Purchase
	      P O Box 9
	      Albany, NY  122010009    914/251-6052

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Purchase College, State University of New York (SUNY) is unlike many
              institutions of higher education in the U.S. because it has outstanding
              Mathematics/Computer Science and New Media technology undergraduate research
              programs that serve a combined total of 60% economically disadvantaged
              students, 30% minority students, 29% women, and 5% disabled. These programs
              successfully place graduates in the high technology workforce or graduate
              school. They also maintain strong partnerships with other local colleges and
              high technology industry. Due to these strengths, Purchase has established a
              consortium with Dutchess Community College (DCC), Orange County Community
              College (OCCC), Rockland Community College (RCC), Westchester Community College
              (WCC), IBM, Modem Media, and seven successful Purchase programs that serve
              economically disadvantaged and underrepresented minority students. The
              Consortium, with Purchase as its leader, is developing and implementing a
              Mathematics, Computer Science and Technology Pipeline Scholarship Program.
              

The specific objectives of the Program are:
1. To recruit 30 academically
              talented, economically disadvantaged, underrepresented minority, women, and
              disabled students into AA, AS, AAS, and BA degree programs in mathematics,
              computer science and technology.
2. To provide research opportunities and
              academic and financial support for 100% of program participants to increase
              their retention to degree achievement.
3. To assist 100% of degree recipients
              with job/graduate school placement in the fields of mathematics, computer
              science and technology.
4. To increase collaborative arrangements among
              associate and baccalaureate degree-granting institutions and the local high
              technology industry.
5. To assess, document, and disseminate the effectiveness
              of 100% of the proposed activities implemented through this model Pipeline
              Scholarship Program.

This Program will be managed by Principle Investigator
              (PI) Dr. Peter Ohring, in cooperation with six Co-PIs and a Steering Committee
              consisting of representatives from each of the five Consortium institutions and
              local high technology industry. The PI will oversee publicity, student
              recruitment and selection, monitoring of student progress, financial
              administration, and Program assessment. The Co-PIs will coordinate student
              support programs and services. Concluding the four-year grant cycle, a total of
              120 students will receive AA, AS, AAS, or BA degrees, and be placed in the
              mathematics, computer science, and technology workforce or graduate programs.
