Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0123327

Award Number: 0123327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marilyn J. Suiter                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela H. Dase   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbus Public Schools
	      270 East State Street
	      Columbus, OH  432154312    614/365-5777

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ms. Pamela Dase is a gifted teacher of high-school mathematics who has made an
              extraordinary effort to mentor high-school students. In support her classes at
              Centennial High School in the Columbus Public School system, she advocated for
              the Algebra for All pilot program for all students in her building. Centennial
              High School is described as an urban school with a significantly diverse
              student population, including students for who English is a second language.
              Dase is a champion for increased math requirements; she has high expectations
              of her students and they respond. She provides after-school support to ensure
              that students are successful. One indicator of the outcome may be that
              Centennial's students tend to score higher that the district average on
              statewide proficiency tests.

Her principal describes Dase as a veteran
              teacher (thirty-two years) who is a trendsetter and role model, working with
              more junior staff to incorporate technology throughout the curriculum and in
              all classes. Dase's students have gone on to achieve doctorates in molecular
              biology, physics, and mathematics, as well as baccalaureate degrees in diverse
              areas. Several of her students have become teachers of mathematics; one such
              student is now a teacher at the same school.

