Title       : Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Nano-Photonic
               Integration of Ultra-fast WDM Optical Communications Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0123864

Award Number: 0123864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Blumenthal danb@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn L. Hu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew R. Teel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Bowers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nadir Dagli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1751,9217,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on
              "Ultra-High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." Ultra-fast optical
              packet communications, with packet bit rates exceeding 160 Gbps, is a key next
              step in the evolution of ultra-high capacity optical networks. Ultra high bit
              rate packet communications is a regime difficult to implement electronically.
              Photonic technologies hold promise to realize these high bandwidth systems, but
              integration of photonic technologies severely limits the ability to realize
              high density circuits comparable to that of electronics. New technologies are
              required to bring photonics through the same level of integration that
              electronics experienced in the 1960s and 70s.
This program will address
              nano-photonic integration of the building blocks for ultra-high capacity
              optical communications systems and networks with smaller, integrable
              components. The research objectives are to investigate nano-technologies that
              extend optical scaling to bit rates in excess of 160 Gbps and hundreds to
              thousands of wavelengths. The proposed project will also address how the
              physics and materials of nano-photonic devices and the nonlinear dynamics and
              control are coupled to each other and to the systems requirements. This
              interdisciplinary approach is carried across the research and
              educational/training aspects of this program. The design, performance,
              processing, fabrication and integration of these technologies must be
              understood and a new generation of scientists and engineers to lead and support
              this new technology base must be trained. This proposal brings together
              researchers from multiple fields under the common goal of nano-photonic
              integration for ultra-high speed WDM optical communications systems. New
              critical problems will be solved by integrating research in optical networks
              and communications with nano-photonic devices and materials and nonlinear
              dynamics and controls.
The educational objectives involve integrating student
              education that incorporates material growth, device fabrication, control theory
              and systems. Students will take joint, team-based responsibility for mentoring
              undergraduate students - giving those students a truly unique perspective on a
              real, exciting and technologically critical problem. We expect that this
              dynamic, multidisciplinary research program will attract a diverse set of
              graduate students from underrepresented groups, and these large scale photonic
              integration investigations will help train a new generation of scientists and
              engineers that will be needed over the next five to ten years to support future
              ultra-high capacity optical communications networks. The potential impact of
              this type of research can be as fundamental as that which occurred in the
              electronics industry in the late 1950s through the early 1970s.

