Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0123325

Award Number: 0123325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marilyn J. Suiter                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Therese A. Markow tmarkow@arl.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Dr. Therese Markow has worked to involve significant numbers of undergraduate
              and graduate students in active research, including co-authoring scientific
              papers with undergraduate students at Arizona State University, where she held
              a faculty position in the biological sciences. She initiated the Minority
              Access to Research Careers program at ASU in 1993. The program works to improve
              support for students from underrepresented groups who may enter research
              careers in bioscience. ASU MARC participants receive a wide range of support.
              The program has helped many minority students pursue research careers in the
              general biological sciences, with particular focus on and success among Native
              American students; more than twenty-eight undergraduate students, twenty-one
              graduate students, and nine post-doctoral students were mentored. 

Dr.
              Markow was especially noted by her students for conveying her passion and
              integrity as a scientist. Her international research record and partnership
              with her students in research publication are meaningful reflections of her
              dedication. Although Dr. Markow is now Regents Professor of Ecology and
              Evolutionary Biology at the University of Arizona, the ASU MARC program
              continues.

