Title       : Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Data processing
               modules using high-nonlinearity fiber for advanced optical networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0123495

Award Number: 0123495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prem Kumar kumarp@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Kath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1751,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The high demand likely to be placed on the capacity of telecommunication
              networks in the near future urges
conversion of hybrid electro-optical signal
              processing to all-optical processing, exploiting the largest bandwidth
              available in the optical domain. One way of catering to this demand is by
              multiplexing in time as
well as wavelength domains. Using picosecond-duration
              optical pulses, which could be soliton-like over
portions of the network, one
              can first perform multiplexing in the time domain (i.e., time-division
              multiplexing, or TDM) for local to metropolitan-area network applications and
              then in the wavelength domain (wavelength-division multiplexing, or WDM) for
              wide area coverage. This scenario leads one to conclude that the key issue to
              be addressed is how to take advantage of the powerful digital-processing
              techniques in the pure-optical domain, that minimize the detrimental effects of
              noise at a very fundamental level. The idea is that, for digitally encoded data
              [1's (0's) represented by the presence (absence) of pulses], instead of using
              linear amplifiers which act on signals in an analog fashion and inevitably
              introduce 3 dB of noise one can employ digital-switching amplifiers or optical
              regenerators. At the same time, pure-optical digital switching is potentially
              much more reliable and faster than electro-optical switching. Furthermore,
              optical switching will also be needed to implement other networking functions,
              such as demultiplexing to process at very high speed the header of a data
              packet used for addressing to different users on the network.
     Our
              preliminary experiments show that the parametric nonlinearity of optical fibers
              can be exploited
to perform functionalities that will be needed in
              packet-switched all-optical networks, such as fiber-optic
cache-memory
              buffers, picosecond-pulse all-optical regenerators, all-optical limiters, and
              tunable clock re-covery modules. These devices take advantage of the ultrafast
              parametric nonlinearity of glass fiber and
hence are capable of operating at
              speeds in excess of 100 Gb/s. Moreover, they will be essential for
              deploying
packet-switched, ultrahigh-speed time-division and
              wavelength-division multiplexed all-optical networks.
     In all of our
              experiments thus far, standard dispersion-shifted fiber (DSF) has been used.
              Fiber lengths
on the order of 100's of meters are required for used with
              ps-duration pulses of a few watts peak power to
achieve the data processing
              functions. Here we propose to explore the use of high-nonlinearity fiber,
              such
as microstructure fiber (MF, which is only now becoming commercially
              available), to perform essential
functions in high-speed all-optical
              processing. Because of their strongly guiding behavior, the MFs can
be wound
              into very tight loops, suggesting that they could potentially fit into a
              compact modular switching
package. Specifically, we propose to utilize the
              high-nonlinearity microstructure fibers to develop all-optical data processing
              modules. These include a cache storage buffer based upon parametric
              amplification that will be capable of operating in the 10's of Gb/s range. With
              use of the high-nonlinearity fiber, the average pump power requirement can be
              met with commercially-available watt-class optical amplifiers. We will carry
              out experiments to explore various ways of reading, writing, and erasing the
              stored data patterns.
Our work has shown that the ultrafast parametric
              nonlinearity can be exploited either to provide broadband
tunable gain or
              dynamic gain modulation for clock-recovery. We propose to combine the two to
              demonstrate
optical phase-lock loops, which in principle can be extremely fast
              as they rely on the Kerr nonlinearity
for envelope-phase discrimination.
              Simultaneous to the above experimental studies we will also develop
numerical
              models of the various optical systems. This will provide a design tool to
              determine the parameter
values allowing the most efficient operation of the
              experimental setups. We have previously demonstrated
the possibility of stably
              propagating sub-picosecond pulses in fiber lines in which conjugating gain is
              used
to compensate the linear loss. We propose to assemble a re-circulating
              loop experiment in which linear loss
will be compensated by a pair of
              non-degenerate parametric (conjugating) amplifiers. The location of the
two
              amplifiers will be chosen based upon further theoretical/numerical results. We
              will experimentally and
theoretically study the stability properties of the
              sub-picosecond pulses by making various signal and noise
measurements, and
              will compare the experimental results directly with numerical simulations.
