Title       : ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0123532

Award Number: 0123532
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4450521            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Lou A. Chameau jeanlou.chameau@coe.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary F. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sue V. Rosser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Realff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              April S. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1738      ADVANCE - INSTITUTIONAL TRANSF
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1738,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
              science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
              of women in all levels of faculty and academic administration, particularly at
              the senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional
              practices, policies, climate and culture. The Georgia Institute of Technology
              (Georgia Tech) proposes an integrated approach
to institutional factors that
              will support the full participation and advancement of
women, and provide a
              model of best practices, in academic science and engineering.
Georgia Tech
              will build upon previous activities and momentum for the advancement of women.
              The Georgia Tech ADVANCE team includes: the Provost and the Deans, faculty, and
              campus leaders from four cooperating Colleges: Computing, Engineering,
              Sciences, and Ivan Allen College, representing a full range of science and
              engineering fields. 
Through this project, Georgia Tech will emphasize
              organizational features and factors that shape outcomes for women in science
              and engineering, and will clarify and
portray the ways in which resources,
              processes of evaluation, organizational culture
and climate, including
              leadership, and family policies affect the full participation
and advancement
              of women by field, career-stage, and family/parental status. In
doing so, they
              will address critical transitions to senior status, and the meaning of
              full
participation in academic science and engineering. 

Proposed
              activities include1) creating an inter-college network of termed professorships
              that promotes the goals of ADVANCE; 2) institutionalizing a formal training
              process for committees involved in tenure and promotion; 3) collecting and
              using resource-allocation data for equity and development of best practices; 4)
              holding annual retreats of women faculty, provost, deans, and school chairs to
              review and refine goals and progress; and 5) strengthening and extending the
              scope and impact of family-friendly practices.

This project is supported by
              the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to
              increase the participation of women in the scientific and engineering workforce
              through the increased representation and advancement of women in academic
              science and engineering careers. 


