Title       : SGER: Spontaneous Mutation in the Moth, Heliothis virescens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0123942

Award Number: 0123942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81260              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Brown tbrown@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genetic mutation can be caused by external mutagenic agents such as chemical
              mutagens or radiation, or it can occur without the impact of external agents. 
              Natural mutagenesis due to transposable elements is understood primarily from
              research in fruit flies; it results when a gene is affected by the movement of
              another gene causing a change in phenotype.  Activity of a Mariner element was
              observable in Drosophila mauritiana as a high frequency of mosaicism or
              speckling in the eye controlled by the Mos1 gene (Hartl, 2001).  Although it
              appears that many transposable elements have become silenced leaving an
              inactive sequence in the host genome, the mechanism of regulation is not
              understood. There are few models of natural mutagenesis apart from those in
              fruit flies. 

The objective of this project is to develop a new genetic
              model for natural mutagenesis, focusing on understanding the mechanism by which
              multiple spontaneous mutations of pigmentation (black eye, golden eye, et al.)
              and patterning (striped eye) arose in a lineage of a moth, Heliothis virescens
              (Lepidoptera:  Noctuidae).  While there are many possible mechanisms for this
              phenomenon, this project will focus on one working hypothesis that each of the
              various phenotypes is controlled by mutation in a corresponding gene.  Each
              putative gene will be purified while gathering physiological data on mechanisms
              of altered pigmentation so that the mutations and any novel genetic mechanism
              involved can be identified subsequently.  This project bears the risks of
              disproving the stated hypothesis; however, in that case this approach will
              provide information applicable to an alternate hypothesis.  The significance of
              discovering a new type of natural mutagenesis if present will be in advancing
              the basic science of eukaryotic genetics leading to scientific applications to
              benefit society.  Examples of present and anticipated applications of
              understanding mutation include  defense against genetic weapons and genetic
              control of mosquitoes and other pests.
