Title       : Rural Systemic Initiatives in Science, Mathematics,and Technology Education -
               RSI: Leadership Fellows for the Texas Rural Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0123072

Award Number: 0123072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela Spaulding   (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norma J. Neely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eddie Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The Texas Rural Systemic Initiative (TRSI) currently has 450 Teacher
              Partners roughly divided into 5 regions. The Leadership Development Project
              intends to select 15 members of this group to give them three years of training
              to become Leadership Fellows. The group will be diverse in geography (around
              the state, distributed among the regions), area of expertise (science or
              mathematics) and grade level (elementary or secondary). The members will commit
              to the three-years of training up-front.

Given the dire need for science and
              mathematics teachers, especially in rural areas, the Leadership Project opted
              not to seek the release of teachers from the classroom any more than necessary.
              The potential Leadership Fellows would participate in the TRSI Leadership
              Academy for the 3 years. They would be required to participate each year in
              three four-day intensive sessions, and in addition a one-week summer session at
              the Texas A & M campus in Corpus Christie. These leadership sessions would
              emphasize leadership strands as well as major topics associated with systemic
              reform.
 
The Fellows will form regional groups mentored by regional science
              and mathematics specialists. The Fellows will be under a learn, implement,
              share dictum, and thus will be encouraged to communicate with and support each
              other, especially within regional groups. Electronic communication on a regular
              basis will be encouraged.

There will be a TRSI Leadership Fellows Advisory
              Board and each of the Fellows will select an advisor from this board. Under the
              guide of this advisor, the Leader will work on a Fellowship Project with the
              intent of impacting their school or district. The first year each Fellow will
              develop their project, which will be implemented in each of the following two
              years of the project. 

The evaluator for the Texas RSI will act in the same
              function for the Leadership Academy. The main source of dissemination is
              intended to be the Fellows themselves-both through their pronouncement of
              learn, implement, share, and their expected return to the Leadership Academy to
              help train future leaders.


