Title       : Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: III-nitride Wide
               Bandgap Semiconductors for Optical Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0123450

Award Number: 0123450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rongqing Hui hui@eecs.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1687,1751,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation NSF 01-65 on
              "Ultra-High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking." III-nitride
              optoelectronic devices offer benefits including UV/blue emission, the ability
              to operate at very high temperatures and power levels. Large band offsets of
              GaN/AlGaN or InGaN/AlGaN heterostructures allowing novel quantum well devices,
              and high emission efficiencies. But the research in III-nitrides has been so
              far focused on their applications in the blue/UV optoelectronic devices. We
              propose a combined effort to develop novel photonic components and photonic
              integrated circuits based on III-nitride wide band gap semiconductors for
              fiber-optical communications.

High-speed optical switches and wavelength
              routers are indispensable in future all-optical networks. Presently
              opto-mechnical switches and thermal tuning of silica-based array waveguide
              gratings (AWG) are not fast enough to perform optical packet switching. On the
              other hand, InP--based AWGs have high optical loss and temperature sensitivity
              due to high refractive index of the material and small waveguide size.

The
              refractive index of GaN is about 2.2 in infrared, which is much better matched
              to the index of optical fiber (1.5) than InP (3.2). The index-controllable
              nature of Al Ga N and In Ga N alloys makes them an ideal candidate for optical
              waveguide devices. These together may allow the creation of photonic devices
              with unprecedented properties and functions. Since Il1-nitrides are
              semiconductor materials, carrier injection can be used to modulate the
              refractive index and change the phase delay of the waveguide.

Another
              objective of this research is to make electrically pumped waveguide optical
              amplifiers in the optical communication windows. Currently, InGaAsP-based
              semiconductor optical amplifiers have sub-nanosecond carrier lifetime and they
              are not suitable for WDM optical systems because of the fast cross-gain
              saturation. Er-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA) are suitable for WDM applications;
              however, optoelectronic integration is not possible with EDFAs because of the
              fiber length. III-nitride semiconductors appear to be able to host erbium ions.
              Electrical pumping on InGaN/GaN heterostructures generates photons at the
              wavelength of approximately 400 nm, which can be used to optically excite the
              erbium ions. Since erbium has much higher absorption efficiency in the short
              wavelengths than the currently used pumping wavelengths of either 980 nm or
              1480 nm, the amplifier may potentially be made very short.

