Title       : Physical Properties of Strongly Correlated Quantum Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0123156

Award Number: 0123156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Gang Wen wen@dao.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical research on strongly correlated electron
              systems, focusing on high temperature superconductors and quantum Hall systems.
              Research focuses on three areas: (1) The PI takes the view that underdoped high
              temperature superconductors have a non-fermi liquid metallic state that
              exhibits spin-charge separation.  Research will focus on holon dynamics and the
              properties of a non-condensing quantum degenerate holon gas.  The transition to
              the superconducting state will be studied with the aim of understanding how the
              superconducting transition is related to spin-charge recombination and how
              coherent quasiparticles can grow out of incoherent spinons and holons.  The
              transition to the striped phase will also be studied; this is expected not to
              be a usual CDW transition. (2) The PI plans to develop a more complete theory
              of fractional quantum Hall states, with an aim to elucidate the mathematical
              structure of topological order.  The chiral operator product algebra will be
              examined to see if it could form the basis of a general theory of topological
              order. It is expected that a deeper understanding of topological order will
              enable the calculation of the physical properties of non-Abelian fractional
              quantum Hall states and so enable their identification in experiments. (3) The
              PI plans to study continuous phase transitions between topological orders.
              Continuous phase transitions can occur between clean fractional quantum Hall
              states as long as these states contain neutral quasiparticles. The properties
              of the critical point depend on the topological orders of the two states
              involved and so, provide a useful way to study topological order
              experimentally. The PI plans to find general effective theories for continuous
              topological phase transitions and to understand the close relation between the
              topological order and the critical theory. The PI will also explore how neutral
              gapless excitations at the critical point interact with surface acoustic
              phonons and other experimental probes.
%%%
This award supports theoretical
              research on strongly correlated electron systems with a particular focus on
              high temperature superconductors and quantum Hall systems.  The PI plans to use
              advanced theoretical methods to understand the nature of a proposed exotic
              metallic state of the high temperature superconductors and the nature of the
              phase transition from this state to the superconducting state. The metallic
              state is unlike that of an ordinary metal and the transition to
              superconductivity may differ qualitatively from that which occurs in
              well-understood superconductors. The PI will also study fractional quantum Hall
              states that exhibit internal order.  A kind of continuous phase transition can
              occur between two such states with the same symmetry. The PI intends to develop
              a more comprehensive theory of these states and the phase transitions that can
              occur among them. This research contributes to fundamental understanding of
              strongly correlated electron materials.
***

