Title       : ADVANCE Leadership Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0123697

Award Number: 0123697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine J. Didion didion@awis.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Helen Davies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc Women in Sci, Inc.
	      1522 K St NW
	      Washington, DC  20005    202/408-0742

NSF Program : 1739      ADVANCE - LEADERSHIP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1739,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Association for Women in Science (AWIS) is a recognized national leader
              and
innovator in developing mentoring and leadership programs. AWIS proposes
              to build on
a previous project on academic climate funded by the Sloan
              Foundation.
This project developed surveys for assessing the institutional
              climate for undergraduate students, graduate students, and faculty. 

In
              addition to surveys, site visit protocols were developed for campus visits.
              Nine central
issues for faculty emerged from this work: (1) Recruitment,
              hiring, and retention; (2)
Tenure and promotion; (3) Dual careers; (4) Family
              and work; (5) communication; (6)
Mentoring faculty; (7) Mentoring students;
              (8) Informal networking and socializing; and
(9) Career
              development.

Recommendations were developed to address these issues and
              sample model policies
were collected. AWIS has been involved in the
              dissemination of these materials for the
past three years. Recently, with the
              MIT Report, the demand has outpaced the ability of
AWIS to supply materials on
              an individual basis. AWIS proposes to develop an on-line
Institutional Climate
              Assessment Kit that institutions can use to implement their own
programs. In
              addition to the kit, AWIS will have a section on Model Academic Policies
that
              address many of the nine topics listed above and a bi-weekly on-line column
              that
tackles these issues. As a result of the proposed project, AWIS
              anticipates three clear and realistic outcomes, including (1) An institutional
              Climate Assessment Kit that will provide an evaluated and tested model for
              replication by the institutions; (2) Model Academic Policies that can be used
              by science societies and institutions; and (3) explicit professional science
              society
linkages that will facilitate replication and sustainability of the
              project.

This project is supported by the National Institutes of Health
              through the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is
              to increase the participation of women in the scientific and engineering
              workforce through the increased representation and advancement of women in
              academic science and engineering careers

