Title       : Silicon Run Implantation Video
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0123300

Award Number: 0123300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth A. Carranza   (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Film Arts Foundation
	      346 Ninth Street - 2nd Floor
	      San Francisco, CA  941033809    415/552-8760

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Silicon Run Series consists of topical videos on semiconductor
              manufacturing. This format, which includes overviews as well as process
              specific videos, has proven invaluable to instructors who often must teach
              courses to students at different levels of technical understanding. The Silicon
              Run series currently consists of the following videos:

Introductory:
              Overview Silicon Run Lite 30 min.

Intermediate: 
Overview Silicon Run I -
              2nd Edition 40 min.
Silicon Run II 35 min.

Advanced: Process-Specific:
              
Silicon Run Deposition 31 min.
Silicon Run Lithography 31 min.
Silicon Run
              Etch 37 min.
Silicon Run Ion Implantation (to be produced)

The objective of
              Silicon Run Ion Implantation is to complete the Series with a 30 minute video
              production featuring the process whereby impurities, known as dopants, are
              introduced into silicon wafers to alter the electrical conductivity of specific
              regions. As with the rest of the Series, this video is designed for
              undergraduate electrical engineering and engineering technology courses and for
              industry's semiconductor technician training programs. Educators who use the
              Series to supplement their courses are specifically requesting the production
              of this last video to ensure they have in-depth coverage of all four
              semiconductor processes. To them, the videos provide their students what they
              themselves can not; an intimate close-up view inside an IC fabrication
              facility. Industry's restrictive policies, due to clean room procedures and
              competitive issues, make manufacturing sites unavailable to the public and even
              to in-house employees. This inaccessibility has proven an educational challenge
              which the Silicon Run Series has addressed through its videos. The production
              of quality educational videos is the method being employed to visually document
              state-of-the-art ion implantation and make it relevant to semiconductor
              education and technician training programs. This requires the participation of
              professors and industrial trainers to ensure content accuracy; corporate
              sponsors to provide funding and access to industrial locations: and media
              artists to capture the process in a professional video format that can be edit
              into an engaging storyline. Animation, microscopic filming, and special effects
              are used to enhance understanding. The production of Ion Implantation will
              complete the Silicon Run Series so it can serve these programs as an
              educational tool that provides a realistic look at semiconductor
              manufacturing.

