Title       : Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications and Networking: Advanced Raman Gain
               for Next Generation Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0123484

Award Number: 0123484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George I. Stegeman george@mail.creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfons Schulte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. Belfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Delfyett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen A. Cerqua-Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1751,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0123484	
Stegeman

This proposal was submitted in response to the
              solicitation NSF 01-65 on "Ultra-High Capacity Optical Communications and
              Networking." The continuously growing demand for communications channels in
              short and long distance networks necessitates an expansion of the available
              spectral region near the loss minimum of silica-based fibers. Dramatic
              reduction of the "water" absorption peak at 1400 nm opened up the available
              communications window from 1270 to 1650 nm, corresponding to about 50 THz. Such
              a large bandwidth rules out existing erbium doped fibers and semiconductor
              lasers leaving Raman gain as the prime amplification mechanism. However, the
              Raman bandwidth in silica fibers is only 10 THz, and gain coefficients in
              silica glass are small. As a solution the PIs propose to investigate new
              materials for signal amplification by Raman gain for local networks,
              intermediate distance networks and long-haul fiber transmission. New Raman gain
              media will be considered in both bulk and fiber form, the first for local area
              networks and specialized applications, and the second for longer distance
              transmission.

New glass, molecular and polymeric materials will be
              fabricated, and characterized by spontaneous Raman scattering, Raman gain
              measurements. and the evaluation of the Raman gain materials in a fiber network
              environment. A selection of those will be fabricated into fibers and the Raman
              gain evaluated in network scenarios. 

The PIs propose to explore new classes
              of oxide and non-oxide glasses to optimize the structure-property relations
              that give the best properties for Raman gain. These will include chalcogenide
              glasses with varying As, S, and Se content, and  heavy metal halides such as
              the "TeX" glasses. Oxide glasses of interest are phosphates, heavy metal
              oxides, and borophosphates which exhibit spectrally broad Raman bands. A
              variety of organic species will be examined, mostly in polymer form. The
              diversity of functional groups in organic media can cover the fully desired 50
              THz bandwidth, and more, for Raman gain. Polymer blends and composites will be
              prepared that contain specifically designed molecules that cover this spectral
              range and their Raman signal strength measured. Families of interest will
              include polythiophenes and related polymers that have previously shown strong
              Raman scattering. Also investigated will be the fluorenyl family of
              chromophores which possess high thermal and photochemical stability. Inorganic
              and organic components can be combined in virtually any ratio to obtain hybrid
              sol-gel nano-composites extremely versatile in their composition, processing
              characteristics, and properties. Thus through judicious selection of the
              organic component, particular optical properties can be realized such as
              extended Raman bandwidth and gain coefficient.

