Title       : Collaboration to Integrate Research and Education in Marine and Environmental
               Science and Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0123753

Award Number: 0123753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1547186            (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew R. Gilligan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chandra I. Franklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph R. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Savannah State University
	      State College Branch
	      Savannah, GA  31404    912/356-2186

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9250,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding to initiate a master's level graduate program in
              Marine Sciences and further develop an educational partnership between Savannah
              State University (SSU), a Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU),
              and Skidaway Insitute of Oceanography (SkIO), an oceanographic research
              institution. This program will greatly expand the opportunities for minority
              students to conduct marine research at a graduate level while attending an
              HBCU. SSU and SkIO have collaborated for the past three years to develop a
              highly successful program in marine science for undergraduate students. The
              existing program includes opportunities for SSU undergraduates to complete
              research internships at SkIO and for SkIO faculty to teach at SSU. Both
              institutions have benefited greatly from this program, which was initiated with
              funding from NSF/HRD.  In recognition of the growth and success of the
              undergraduate program, the University System of Georgia (USG) approved a new
              M.S. degree program in marine science at SSU. USG will provide new faculty
              lines and funds for construction of a new building in support of this program.
              This award provides funding to initiate the M.S. program while additional state
              resources are brought on-line and while funds for graduate students are sought
              via traditional research awards. The program could provide an important model
              for successful collaborations that will increase minority participation in
              science. 

Joint funding for this program will be provided by NSF's IGERT
              program and the Office of Naval Research (ONR).

The intellectual merit of
              this program lies in the development of a collaborative graduate education
              program between an HBCU and a major marine science research institution. Such
              collaboration will be unique to this field and may provide a model for such
              efforts, both in geosciences and other scientific fields. Two important
              societal impacts should be realized from this award. First, a unique graduate
              program in marine sciences will be established and should become
              institutionalized within five years. Second, if this program is able to attract
              minority students who either would not have attended graduate school or who
              would have gone into other fields, it should greatly increase the number of
              minority students receiving Master's degrees in ocean sciences. The link to the
              IGERT program strengthens the possibility that ultimately these students may
              choose to continue in the field of geosciences for a PhD. Since the percentage
              of minority students who receive Master's degrees in the "physical sciences"*
              is about 2.8% (NSF Publication #00-327, Table 4-6), and the number of students
              who receive PhD's in ocean or marine sciences is typically one or two per year
              (NSF Publication #00-327, Table 4-12), this program could have a very important
              impact on diversity of ocean sciences graduates within a five to ten year
              time-frame. 

