Title       : ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0123666

Award Number: 0123666
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4498720            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Carnes mlcarnes@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jo E. Handelsman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1738      ADVANCE - INSTITUTIONAL TRANSF
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1738,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
              science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
              of women at all levels of faculty and academic leadership, particularly at the
              senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional practices,
              policies, climate and culture. This proposal presents a comprehensive,
              multi-layered approach addressing the institutional barriers inhibiting the
              progress of women in science and engineering. The research questions to be
              addressed are 1) what are the climate-related factors, barriers, attitudes, and
              experiences of women in science and engineering at UW-Madison, 2) to what
              extent are the current programs and the proposed initiatives successful in
              addressing these factors, 3) to what extent can the eventual institutional
              transformation model be replicated and extended to other campuses. A National
              Women in Science and Engineering Leadership Institute (WISELI) will be
              established to centralize collected data, monitor the success of the proposed
              efforts, implement a longitudinal data system, and ensure dissemination of best
              practices. In addition to establishing WISELI as a visible entity with
              campus-wide endorsement, new initiatives will include national workshops for
              academic women as well as chairs and deans; establishing 10
              professorships/chairs to support the advancement of women in science and
              engineering in the Chancellor's endowment goals; awarding Life Cycle Research
              Grants at vulnerable career junctures; sponsoring Celebrating Women in Science
              and Engineering Seminar Series. Existing programs such as the Chancellor's
              Climate Initiative, dual-career hiring programs, the Women Faculty Mentoring
              Program, the Committee on Women, Sexual Harassment Information Sessions, and
              Gender Pay Equity studies will be evaluated for effectiveness and modified as
              needed for women in science and engineering. While the proposed project focuses
              on sustainable institutional change, it incorporates interventions to foster
              networking, mentoring, and role modeling for women graduate and postdoctoral
              trainees with the goal of filling the academic pipeline. Evaluation, directed
              by the Learning through Evaluation, Adaptation, and Dissemination (LEAD)
              Center, will be on-going and will inform development and redirection of
              initiatives in an iterative process of implementation, evaluation, and
              modification. Complementing the evaluation, an ethnographic study and
              linguistic discourse analysis will be conducted by a cultural anthropologist
              and linguist, respectively. The Chancellor has committed to making the program
              sustainable beyond the funding period by continuing support for a research
              position dedicated to the institutional study of the status of women, the
              endowed professorships, and planned efforts to raise funds to make WISELI a
              permanent element of the campus. The UW-Madison has all of the scientific,
              historical, administrative, and cultural ingredients to make it an ideal campus
              to develop and study innovative initiatives for true institutional change for
              women in science, both locally and as a model for other campuses.

The
              overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of
              women in the scientific and engineering workforce through the increased
              representation and advancement of women in academic science and engineering
              careers. 


