Title       : ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0123609

Award Number: 0123609
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3750000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia V. Valian vvvhc@cunyvm.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley Raps  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vita C. Rabinowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ann Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 1738      ADVANCE - INSTITUTIONAL TRANSF
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1738,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to contribute to the development
of a national
              science and engineering academic workforce that
includes the full
              participation of women in all levels of faculty
and academic administration,
              particularly at the senior academic
ranks, through the transformation of
              institutional practices,
policies, climate and culture.  

With this award,
              Hunter College will design and implement a program 
to improve the
              institutional practices and culture
that affect the hiring, retention,
              promotion, salary, and
professional development of women in the natural and
              social
sciences.  As part of the largest public urban university in
              the
nation, Hunter College will be a model for the other CUNY
colleges and
              for urban public universities generally. Goals include: a) to develop,
test,
              and disseminate measures for identifying, measuring, and
reporting hidden and
              subtle, as well as visible and obvious,
indicators of gender equity; b) to
              correct unintended institutional
practices that work against the advancement
              of women scientists;
c) to educate administrators and other evaluators, via
              workshops and
training manuals, about inadvertent gender biases in
              evaluating
and recognizing scientists' contributions and about strategies
for
              equalizing men's and women's ability to advance; d) to develop
interventions
              to advance junior and mid-level women scientists
via a sponsorship
              program.

This project is supported by the NSF ADVANCE Program. The
overall
              mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the
participation of women in
              the scientific and engineering
workforce through the increased representation
              and advancement of
women in academic science and engineering careers.
