Title       : Secondary Science, Mathematics Preservice Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9852170

Award Number: 9852170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2029899            (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Andrews   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan P. Speece  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fresno Fdn
	      4910 N. Chestnut Ave
	      Fresno, CA  93726    559/278-0840

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Secondary Science, Mathematics, Pre service Partnership Program (SSMP3) is a
              collaborative initiative among several key stakeholders in K-12 and Higher
              Education in the Central Valley of California. SSMP3 will develop, implement,
              and institutionalize a comprehensive secondary science and math teacher
              preparation and support a program geared primarily toward grade 7-12 science
              and mathematics teaching credential students. The primary elements of the
              project are (a.) recruitment of potential successful preservice science and
              math students; (b.) preservice mentoring by university/community college and
              school district faculty; (c.) early paid field experiences in math and science
              classrooms (d.) a 5 year academic program that combines pedagogy with content;
              (e.) university and community college revision and summer field testing of
              introductory science and math courses take by preservice science and
              mathematics students; (f.) a clinical model for math and science education
              methods course delivery that involves the teaming of veteran practitioners from
              the public schools and university faculty; (g.) a comprehensive
              content/pedagogy summer institute for the professional development of
              preservice teachers who are teamed with inservice teachers whereby key elements
              of revised science and math courses will be piloted and where standards-based
              classroom curriculum materials common to both the preservice and inservice
              teachers will be employed; (h.) an intensive mentoring program for science and
              math teacher interns (i.) a support program for new science and math teachers
              and interns in science that deals with problems faced by educators in the early
              stages of their career; and (j.) a program that features hiring assurances from
              FUSD, California's 4th largest school district, along with likely opportunities
              in surrounding (Fresno County) school districts. SSMP3 will be a model that is
              disseminated throughout California and the US.
