Title       : Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation-Sacramento
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9953181

Award Number: 9953181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $901364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marion H. O'Leary   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Shea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth M. Kean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Smithson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Sacramento Fdn
	      6000 J Street
	      Sacramento, CA  95819    916/278-7381

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9103,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              California State University, Sacramento (CSUS) is establishing The Collaborative
              for Excellence in Teacher Preparation-Sacramento that works with university
              mathematics, science, and education faculty, three area community colleges (Los
              Rios Community College District), and local K- 12 school districts in pursuit
              of two goals: (1) To improve the math/science content knowledge and teaching
              practice of pre-service elementary teachers by revising math and science
              content courses and fully articulating them with area community colleges,
              supporting faculty in developing and using standards-based content and
              pedagogy, providing faculty with opportunities to gain experience in K-12
              education, and supporting integration of content and methods courses. This
              effort involves a collaboration among the university math and science faculty,
              teacher education faculty, and community college faculty. (2) To increase the
              number of elementary and secondary math/science pre-service teachers,
              especially from underrepresented groups, by building an infrastructure to
              coordinate recruitment, advising, and academic support, and by offering
              supported teaching opportunities to prospective teachers. This is being done in
              partnership with the area community colleges (three) and K- 12 school
              districts. A third goal, to improve the quality of math/science classroom
              teaching practices in student teaching sites by working with cooperating
              teachers to implement experience-based science curricula, and supporting
              cooperating teachers' use of technology to enhance classroom learning, is being
              pursued in parallel using alternative funding. This effort involves
              strengthening partnership schools and building collaborations with area
              businesses.

