Title       : SWT Middle School Mathematics Certification Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a9953186

Award Number: 9953186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $567853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley G. Wayment sw05@swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Kennedy  (Principal Investigator former)
              John J. Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constance Elko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Selina Vasquez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cecilia V. Gonzales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9103,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Project Summary

Over 40% of middle school mathematics teachers in the
              State of Texas are uncertified and 50% of new math teachers leave the
              profession within 5 years. The problem is even more acute in rural and urban
              areas with high minority populations. Southwest Texas State University, the
              leading certification institution in the state, is collaborating with the Texas
              Statewide Systemic Initiative, the feeder community colleges and K- 12 schools
              in Central/South Texas to establish a model new certification program for
              middle school mathematics teachers. The goal of this project is to
              significantly increase the numbers of qualified middle school mathematics
              teachers, trained in appropriate student-centered content and pedagogy who are
              enthusiastic about teaching and remain in the profession. This is being
              effected through a collaborative process involving recruitment, mentoring,
              curriculum improvement and implementation, certification and induction. The
              three-year project involves the revision of the core math, science and
              education curricula for middle school teachers in alignment with national and
              state standards and informed by other NSF CETP projects. Although efforts are
              concentrated on curriculum reform, the development of recruitment, teacher
              mentor, and induction strategies are also components of the project. Immediate
              outcomes of the project are the production of over 100 new highly qualified
              middle school math teachers for Central/South Texas and the development of a
              model certification program for implementation throughout the state.



