Title       : Engineering Applications in Teacher Preparation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9953189

Award Number: 9953189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1009603            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheryl A. Sorby sheryl@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              LeRoy J. Oberto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chris Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline E. Huntoon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fritz J. Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9103,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY


Shortages of qualified mathematics and science teachers in
              America are reaching 
epidemic proportions. Some estimates suggest that as
              many as 40% of current math and science teachers do not have the training nor
              the background to do so. One result is that even though we are one of the
              richest nations on earth, our children consistently lag behind peers in other
              countries in terms of mathematics and science preparation. An untapped resource
              for improving mathematics and science instruction at the K-12 level lies in our
              colleges of engineering. Engineering students and faculty, with their highly
              developed mathematics and science skills as well as their unique perspective on
              the application of mathematics and science to real world problems, are ideally
              suited to assist in alleviating this crushing national problem. This project is
              improving mathematics and science instruction in the K-12 system through
              implementation of three activities. The first is the development of a course on
              Engineering Applications in Education and a teaching minor for Technology and
              Design for future secondary teachers. These courses are being developed and
              delivered by engineering and technology faculty at Michigan Tech and are also
              being adapted by Northern Michigan University which is closely partnering with
              Michigan Tech on the project. The second activity is the development of a
              program whereby students are receiving an accredited Bachelor's of Engineering
              degree while simultaneously satisfying teacher certification requirements--all
              within a normal four-year course of study. Internships with local school
              districts will ensure that interested students have critically important
              experiences in the classroom. The third activity is the development of summer
              coursework aimed at introducing engineering principles to current K-12
              teachers, especially those working in school districts with high minority
              populations.



