Title       : Lower Limb Diaphyseal Cross-Sectional Geometry of Near Eastern Middle
               Paleolithic Hominids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1994      
File        : a9318702

Award Number: 9318702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27030              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik Trinkaus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT    P.I. Erik Trinkaus  SBR-9318702    Recently, it has become
              clear that in the Near East, in the Middle Paleolithic, there were two rather
              distinctive, morphologically defined hominids - the Neanderthals (or late
              archaic humans with affinities to the Eurpoean Neandertahls) and robust early
              modern humans.  The late archaic group not only resembles the European
              Neanderthals in cranial features, but also in a suite of features from the rest
              of the skeleton, most of which appear to be related to overall robusticity,
              shared with some other later archaic humans.  By contrast, the Near Eastern
              early modern human sample more closely approaches Recent human skeletal
              morphology than does the late archaic sample.      The issue to be addressed by
              this research is to what, if any, significant behavioral differences might
              these two lineages possess?  There are a number of clues to the different
              possible habitual behaviors, but Trinkaus will focus on one relevant aspect,
              leg bone size and shape, as related to differences in locomotor activity (the
              implication is that the more Neanderthal - like individuals possessed thicker,
              more robust leg bones, and were engaged in more strenuous patterns of habitual
              activity).      Whatever the outcomes of the proposed research, it will provide
              further insight into the dynamics fo the origins of modern humans in the Near
              East, one of the earliest regions to witness populations we call early modern
              humans.    The work will therefore contribute to understanding more global
              issues of the origins of modern humans, for which the Near East provides only
              one regional example.    ***  P\a nthro\jfried\9318702.abs                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              V   X   =   ?                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     !         !         !         !         !              D
                                                                                          (  
               Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                             5   "          
                h     ,5 %,5 %                        =        Jonathan Friedlaender Jonathan
              Friedlaender                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
