Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Development and Implementation of Parallel Algorithms for
               Protein Inverse Folding Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9318771

Award Number: 9318771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill P. Mesirov   (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam Godzik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Batrouni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Skolnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thinking Machines Corp
	      245 First St
	      Cambridge, MA  021421292    617/876-1111

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9139,9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The investigators develop and implement parallel algorithms  on the
              Connection Machine CM-5 for solving the protein folding  problem faster and
              more accurately than is currently possible.  In the inverse folding approach,
              the assumption that the sequence  being analyzed adopts one of the already
              known protein folds is  tested.  The energy, or a score, of the new sequence
              forced to  adopt structures of other proteins is calculated for all known 
              protein structures.  Structures that are not compatible with the  sequence are
              dismissed.  This approach is not a complete solution  to the folding problem
              since it is possible for a sequence to  adopt a novel, previously
              uncharacterized topology.  Still, the  number of examples where nonhomologous
              proteins adopt very similar  structures is large and still growing.  This and
              the extension of  the inverse folding approach to the supersecondary structure 
              elements provide a very general protein structure prediction  method.  The
              method is computationally very intensive.  The  investigators expect that the
              increase in performance from the use  of appropriate parallel algorithms and
              architecture will allow  them to reduce some approximations that are made in
              the current  approach, and thus increase the utility and predictive power of 
              the approach.       The protein folding problem, i.e. predicting a protein's 
              three-dimensional structure from its amino acid sequence, is a  fundamental,
              unsolved problem in molecular biology.  Kowledge of a  protein's
              three-dimensional structure is necessary to understand  its function and
              interactions with other agents.  Inverse folding  refers to a more tractable
              approach to the general problem of  protein structure prediction.  The inverse
              protein folding problem  is the problem of determining whether a newly
              sequenced protein  can fold into one of the known protein topologies.  This
              problem  has many applications in drug design and protein structure 
              prediction.  The investigators use high performance parallel  comput ing
              technology to increase the performance and utility of  this methodology.  The
              algorithms and software packages resulting  from this project will be available
              for commercialization and  industrial applications.
