Title       : Spatial Competence: The Contribution of Socio-Cultural and Gender Factors in
               Measures of Differences Between Men and Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1995      
File        : a9318643

Award Number: 9318643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170639             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald G. Golledge golledge@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carole M. Self  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel R. Montello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9318643  GOLLEDGE       It is well known that there are significant differences 
              in performance levels for spatial tasks between men and  women.  Many
              scientists have argued that this difference in  performance is an important
              factor deterring women from  participating more fully in many of the sciences
              and  engineering.  However, it is unclear whether this difference  in
              performance is the result of innate sex-related  differences in spatial
              "competence" (i.e. physiological  differences) or in gender-related influences,
              such as  experience, training, attitude, and culture.  The goal of  this
              project is to seek a better understanding of the  relative importance of
              gender-related and sex-related  differences in spatial competence.  This
              project is being  undertaken by an interdisciplinary team that provides the 
              breadth necessary to undertake this ambitious research.  A  carefully chosen
              sample of 80 persons will be thoroughly  studied using a complementary variety
              of approaches  including personal histories, attitude surveys, behavior 
              surveys, psychological tests, and laboratory and field tests  of spatial
              competence and behavior.       This combination of research on
              social/anthropological  and human geographic factors, along with standard 
              psychometric test measurements and performance measures on  specific tasks,
              will provide an indication of the roles that  socially rooted values,
              expectations, and pressures play in  determining the existence (or lack) of
              sex-related  explanations of variations in spatial abilities and  performance. 
              Results of the analysis will contribute  significantly to better understanding
              the factors behind sex  and gender differences in spatial ability and to
              enhancement  of theories related to spatial knowledge in general.  As  such,
              the findings will have major implications for a broad  range of theoretical and
              practical issues related to gender  and sex differences in spatial performance.
