Title       : Parrallel I/O Methodologies for I/O-Intensive Grand Challenge Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9318145

Award Number: 9318145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3316464            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Messina messina@ccsf.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9318145  Messina        The Grand Challenge Application Groups competition
              provides one mechanism  for the support of multidisciplinary teams of
              scientists and engineers to meet  the goals of the High Performance Computing
              and Communications (HPCC) Initiative  in Fiscal Year 1993.  The ideal proposal
              provided not only the opportunity to  achieve significant progress on (1) a
              fundamental problem in science or  engineering whose solution could be advanced
              by applying high performance  computing techniques and resources, (2) enabling
              technologies which facilitate  those advances, but also significant
              interactions between scientific and  computational activities, usually
              involving mathematical, computer or  computational scientist, that would have
              impact in high performance computational  activities beyond the specific
              scientific or engineering problem areas(s) or  discipline being studied.  This
              multi-disciplinary project will investigate and  develop strategies for
              efficient implementation of I/O intensive applications in  computational
              science and engineering.  Scalable parallel I/O approaches will be  pursued by
              a team of computer scientist and applications scientists who will work 
              together to:          * Characterize the I/O behavior of specific application
              programs running          on large massively parallel computers        *
              Abstract and define I/O models (templates)        * Implement and test
              application-level I/O tools on large-scale          computations               
              The Pablo performance analysis environment will provide the foundation for  the
              performance instrumentation and analysis.  The application programs are 
              already fully operational on advanced architecture systems and their authors
              are  all co-investigators in this project.  The principal computers used will
              be the  Intel Touchstone Delta and Paragon systems at Caltech, each with over
              500  computational nodes.  Five application areas will be included:  fluid
              dynamics,  chemistry, astronomy, neuroscience, and modelling of m
              aterials-processing  plasmas.  The parallel programs for these applications
              cover a range of I/O  patterns and volume, and the techniques that will be
              developed in this project  will be of relevance to a broad spectrum of
              engineering and science applications.   In addition, by overcoming their
              current I/O limitations, the specific  applications targeted in this award will
              achieve significant new science and  engineering results.  By the end of the
              project, sustained teraFlops computers  will become available.  The project
              will devise and implement general methods for  scalable I/O using today's
              advanced computers, immediately apply those methods  to carry out unprecedented
              applications in several fields, and use the methods  and experience gained in
              the first half of the project to tackle the I/O issues  in future sustained
              teraFlops computers.  This project will be carried out by a  team of
              researchers who have many years of experience in using parallel computers  for
              large-scale applications, in measuring and characterizing the behavior of 
              applications on such computers, and in creating methods and tools that
              facilitate  the use of such systems.  Building on this considerable experience,
              the project  will concentrate initially on exploring the I/O behavior of
              existing applications  and on devising ways to get adequate and scalable I/O
              performance.  The five  application areas included in this award cover a wide
              range of I/O needs and  behavior, including the use of out-of-core methods,
              reading data from high-speed  instruments, interactive and irregular data flows
              in modelling, and pipelining  of data from distributed computing resources on
              high-speed networks.  A key part  of the approach is an integration effort that
              will concentrate on ensuring close  communication and synergy among the
              components of the project and on integrating  the results.  The primary
              objective of the project is to develop methods and  insights that are as
              generally applicable as possible.  This award is being  suppo rted by the
              Advanced Projects Research Agency as well as NSF programs in  engineering and
              computer science.
