Title       : International Social Survey Program: American Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1994     
File        : a9318653

Award Number: 9318653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192049             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Davis davisj@norcmail.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9318653  Davis    This is the American portion of an international project to 
              administer identical surveys in a number of nations, focusing on  attitudes
              toward environmentalism and on women, work and the  family.  The International
              Social Survey Project (ISSP) will be  carried out in the United States and
              twenty other countries:   Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, the Czech
              Republic,  Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,  the
              Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, Poland,  Russia, Slovenia,
              and Sweden.  In each nation, questionnaire  interviews will be administered to
              scientifically drawn samples  of the population, employing items selected by an
              international  committee of experts.  The module on women, work and the family 
              will chart changing gender roles, challenges facing the family,  the correlates
              of declining birth rates, and changes in women's  labor force participation. 
              The environment module measures  attitudes and behaviors related to
              preservation of the ecology.  %%%  The data collected in the United States by
              these two survey  modules will be enhanced by the fact that they will be
              connected  to the General Social Survey (GSS), a major data base project 
              supported by the National Science Foundation.  In the past, more  than two
              thousand five hundred scientific reports have been based  on the GSS, and many
              researchers in several fields will use the  ISSP data.  Not only will the
              United States benefit from the  scientific findings of the ISSP concerning
              significant policy  issues, but the ISSP will enhance scientific cooperation
              with  twenty other nations.    ***
