Title       : Technical Developments in Scanning Force Microscopy for Bioimaging Applications.
               Studies of the Structure of E. coli RNA Polymerase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1995   
File        : a9318945

Award Number: 9318945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos J. Bustamante   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy A. Erie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318945  Bustamante  This proposal describes a program to develop the
              applications of Scanning Force Microscopy (SFM) as a structural method in
              biology. SFM offers several advantages over other microscopies as a tool for
              the structural characterization of biological samples because: i) It has
              resolution roughly comparable to the electron microscope (EM); ii) imaging can
              be done under physiologically relevant conditions, i.e. in air and in liquids;
              iii) It produces topographic images which are harder to obtain with other
              microscopes of equivalent resolution; and iv) It uses methods of sample
              deposition which are significantly gentler than those required in EM.    During
              the last two years our efforts have been concentrated in establishing Scanning
              Force Microscopy as a method of direct visualization capable of imaging
              biological structures at high resolution and in conditions preserving their
              native state. In this period we have: i) Developed reliable methods of
              deposition of nucleic acids and protein/DNA complexes on mica and image them in
              air, under controlled humidity; ii) Improved the spatial resolution of SFM with
              biomolecules in air through the use of sharp carbon "supertips"; and iii)
              Obtained some of the first images of biological macromolecules in aqueous and
              other liquid environments. Party as, a result of these efforts, SFM imaging of
              biological samples in air is now routine and reliable, and various laboratories
              including our own are now involved in several applications of SFM to structural
              biology.    However, it is apparent that the ultimate technical limitations of
              SFM have not yet been reached and that a dditional technical developments will
              be necessary before the potential of SFM in structural biology can be fully
              realized. These developments must occur in three main areas: spatial
              resolution, control of tip-sample interactions, and imaging under physiological
              buffers.    This application has two parts. In part A we propose experiments
              designed to address each of these important technical issues based on
              preliminary data obtained in our laboratory during the last two years. The
              specific objectives of this effort are: i) Development and test of new ultra
              sharp tips for SFM; ii) Use of non contact modes of operation; and iii) Design
              and test of new electrochemical methods of sample deposition for imaging under
              liquids. Part B describes the application of successful technical developments
              of part A we the structural characterization of E. coli RNA polymerase DNA
              complexes during initiation and elongation.     u    ~     @ This proposal
              describes a program to develop the applications of Scanning Force Microscopy
              (SFM) as a struc        &   ?   K   @   E                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                Õ                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             '         '          '           '           '  
                         F                                                                   
                       ;    CG Times    Symbol  & Arial  1 Courier  0 MS LineDraw            
                              3                 h     n  En  E                        =   
              abstract    Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
