Title       : Acquisition of a Shared Imaging Plate Area Detector Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1994       
File        : a9318001

Award Number: 9318001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155300             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Pflugrath   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Bedford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaodong Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested for the purchase of an imaging plate  area detector system
              in order to measure x-ray diffraction  data from biological macromolecular
              crystals.  This system  would directly support the research of 3 major
              investigators  and 4 minor investigators.  These investigators have  immediate
              data collection needs for 26 different existing  crystal forms of 11 proteins
              and complexes.  Since these  crystals include protein kinases, protein
              phosphatases, DNA  methylases, DNA endonucleaes, a calcium binding protein 
              involved in neurite extension, a zinc amidohydrolase, and an  enzyme involved
              in the control of glycolysis and  gluconeogenesis, the elucidation of these
              crystal structures  will advance the knowledge of the DNA methylation, protein 
              phosphorylation, mammalian development, control of cell  growth, gene
              expression, and cell differentiation and  provide insights into the basic
              mechanism of the human  afflictions of cancer, diabetes and Alzheimer's
              disease.  Most of these crystals require the large active area, high  dynamic
              range and/or low noise that the imaging plate area  detector diffractometer
              provides,  In addition, the  equipment will be used in teaching an advanced
              course in  macromolecular crystallography offered each October at Cold  Spring
              Harbor Laboratory (CSHL) and in training selected  undergraduates in structural
              biology during the summer.  The  new instrument will let us continue to give
              outstanding  training to students in our advanced teaching program.
