Title       : Structure/function analysis of a bacterial protein kinase/ phosphatase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9318792

Award Number: 9318792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander J. Ninfa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ninfa  9318792  Nitrogen regulation of gene expression in bacteria is
              accomplished  by the reversible phosphorylation of the transcription factor 
              Nitrogen regulator I (NRA) which binds to specific DNA sequences  and, when
              phosphorylated, activates transcription.  The  phosphorylation and
              dephosphorylation of NRA are catalyzed by the  bifunctional protein
              kinase/phosphates Nitrogen regulator II  (NRII).  This project outlines
              experiments designed to elucidate  the mechanisms of the kinase and phosphates
              activities of NRII and  their control.  NRA and NRII are related to a large
              number of  bacterial regulatory proteins, known collectively as the two- 
              component systems, that share a conserved mechanism of signal  transduction
              involving protein phosphorylation and  dephosphorylation.  The information
              gained from the studies of NRII  will increase our understanding of the related
              kinase/phosphates  proteins.  NRII has several well documented activities:  The
              protein binds to  ATP and catalyzes the phosphorylation group is then
              transferred to  NRA in a reaction catalyzed by NRA.  Finally, in the presence
              of  another signal transduction protein known as PII, NRII catalyzes  the
              dephosphorylation of the phosphorylated form of NRA.  Dr. Ninfa plans to
              identify, by classical mutagenesis or  oligonucleotide-directed site-specific
              mutagenesis, alternations of  NRII that result in altered regulation of
              nitrogen-regulated genes  in vivo.  The altered NRII proteins will then be
              purified and the  effect of the alterations on the known activities of NRII
              will be  ascertained.  In this way it is anticipated that the structural 
              features of NRII required for each of the activities and their  control can be
              elucidated.  In addition, the roles of the kinase  and phosphates activities of
              NRII in the control of nitrogen-  regulated genes can be further delineated. 
              Another approach that will be taken is to more completely  characterize the
              structure and activities of wild-type NRII.  For  example, a potentially usef
              ul improvement in the assay for the  phosphatase activity will be employed and
              the crystallization and  structural analysis of NRII are planned.   %%%  Living
              organisms do not express all of the genes present in their  DNA at all times;
              rather, various genes are expressed at certain  times in a manner that is
              appropriate for the orderly development  of the organism or for an effective
              response to a stressful  situation.  The turning on and off of genes is
              accomplished by  molecular switches.  The PI interested in how such molecular 
              switches function, and is studying a model switch from bacteria.   Bacteria
              respond to nitrogen starvation by turning on the  expression of certain genes. 
              The components of the switch required  for this process have been identified. 
              The most important switch  component is a protein called Nitrogen Regulator II.
               This protein  has been purified, and Dr. Ninfa is investigating its
              properties.  In particular, he would like to know which parts of the NRII 
              protein are responsible for interacting with NRA, another protein  known as
              Nitrogen Regulator I, with PII, another protein.  In order  to obtain such
              information, will be subtly perturbed at known  sites, and alterations in
              properties will be monitored.  Most  informative are those perturbations that
              affect only property of  NRII, leaving the other properties intact.  In this
              project, the  effects of such subtle perturbations to NRII will be studied in 
              great detail in order to increase our understanding of how this  molecular
              switch works.  ***
