Title       : RGHNET/NSFNET Connection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1993 
File        : a9318063

Award Number: 9318063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael McClure   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernie T. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester General Hospital
	      1425 Portland Avenue
	      Rochester, NY  146213001    716/336-3703

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              9318063  McClure  Rochester General Hospital (RGH) has an extensive internal
              network  (RGHNET) that services all of the buildings on the campus,  providing
              state-of-the-art computing and communications services to  over 1500 educators,
              researchers, clinicians, administrators and  students.  A major teaching
              facility offering primary, secondary  and tertiary levels of care, Rochester
              General Hospital is  constantly seeking innovative technologies that maximize
              the  abilities of hospital staff.  The following are a few important  examples
              of the wide range of services available through the  INTERNET that can enhance
              productivity and clinical care at  Rochester General.  Physicians participating
              in clinical trials can  log patient-care data and share this data on a national
              basis,  surgeons will have access to vascular and trauma registries and 
              medical images, administrators and residents in the independent  residency
              programs will have access to the AAMC electronic  residency application
              service, nurse researchers will have access  to the Sigma Theta Tau National
              Nursing Research Library, educators  can use the INTERNET to acquire and
              transmit curricular materials,  pharmacists will be able to exchange protocols
              for new drugs, and  the library will use the INTERNET to offer enhanced
              reference and  document delivery services.  Such access will greatly assist the
               hospital in "building a superior system of care which meets the  lifelong
              health needs of our community."  Initially, the clinicians, educators and
              researchers at Rochester  General will be the primary users of the INTERNET.
              But the impact  of the INTERNET link will extend beyond RGH to its corporate 
              partners.  As well, the circuit librarians based in the Health  Sciences
              Library will provide INTERNET training and linkages to the  practitioners in
              the rural hospitals surrounding Rochester.
