Title       : The Role of Leucine Aminopeptidase in Plant Defense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9318260

Award Number: 9318260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda L. Walling linda.walling@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9318260  Walling  Aminopeptidases are exopeptidases that hydrolyze the
              N-terminal  amino acid from peptides and proteins.  In animals, aminopeptidases
               have an important role in nutrition and modulation of the  activities of gut
              and brain peptide hormones by converting them to  active or inactive forms.  In
              addition, these exopeptidases may  have a role in modulating half-lives of
              proteins in vivo.   Surprisingly; little is known about aminopeptidase activity
              during  plant development.  Although aminopeptidases are known to be  induced
              after germination and during senescence, the expression of  these genes during
              the plant life cycle or in response to biotic or  abiotic stress has not been
              characterized.     Dr. Walling has isolated and characterized a leucine
              aminopeptidase  (lap) cDNA clone from Lycopersicon exculentum (tomato). 
              Leucine  aminopeptidase mRNAs are induced to high levels after mechanical 
              injury, insect feeding, and Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato  infection.  LAP
              proteins and activity are also induced after  wounding.  Two wound-induced lap
              genes are present in the tomato.   The proposed research is a multi-faceted
              approach to understanding  the expression, localization, and function of LAPs
              during the  plant-defense response.  Furthermore, these studies will be exteded
               to gain a comprehensive understanding of lap gene expression  throughout plant
              development and in response to abiotic stress.    Only recently, have plant
              leucine aminopeptidase genes been  isolated, and few directed efforts have been
              made to understand  their expression and impact on the plant responses to the 
              environment and to developmental cues.  Elucidation of the role of  LAPs during
              the plant defense reaction and during development will  enhance our
              understanding of the mechanisms that favor optimal  growth and development. 
              These factors will directly impact on  optimal crop productivity and
              potentially yield insights for  strategies to enhance a plant's endogenous
              protection mechanisms.  ***
