Title       : Structure and Function of a Prokaryotic Tyrosine Phosphoprotein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9318072

Award Number: 9318072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caitilyn Allen cza@plantpath.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Merelee M. Atkinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318072  Allen       In eukaryotes, tyrosine protein kinases occupy key 
              positions in signal transduction pathways that regulate cell  growth,
              development, and malignant transformation.  Although  protein phosphorylation
              is important in prokaryotes,  phosphorylation of tyrosine residues is rare.  It
              was shown  that Pseudomonas solanacearum, an economically important  plant
              pathogen, has tyrosine protein kinase activity that  phosphorylates a 90 kD
              membrane protein.  This protein  substrate has been partially purified and
              kinetic  experiments suggest that it is itself a tyrosine kinase.  Molecular
              genetic and biochemical approaches will be used to  investigate the role of
              this phosphoprotein in plant  pathogenesis.  P. solanacearum has an array of
              virulence  factors that contribute to bacterial wilt disease, this  include
              polygalacturonase production and motility.  Recent  evidence suggests that
              tyrosine phosphorylation is involved  in the regulation of these traits. 
              Strains that overproduce  a positive regulator of polygalacturonase production
              have no  detectable phosphorylation of the 90 kD protein.  Preliminary results
              also indicate that flagellin, the  flagellar filament protein, is
              phosphorylated on tyrosine.  Thus, the kinase activity may also affect
              bacterial  motility.  The objectives of this research are to determine  the
              functions of the kinase activity and its protein  substrates, and to
              characterize these proteins.  A  combination of molecular genetic and
              biochemical approaches  will be used.  Oligonucleotide probes derived from  an
              amino  acid sequence of the purified  tyrosine phosphoprotein will  be used to
              clone the cognate tpp gene from a P. solanacearum  gene library.  The DNA
              sequence of tpp will be compared to  eukaryotic tyrosine kinase genes.  The
              hypothesis that tpp  is part of the regulatory pathway for plant-inducible
              genes  will be tested by phenotypic analysis of tpp and  polygalacturonase
              regulatory mutants.  Site specific  mutagenesis and biochemical methods will be
               used to identify  and characterize functional domains with the 90 kD 
              phosphoprotein.  %%%  Pseudomonas solanacearum causes wilt disease on a wide
              range  of important crop plants, including potatoes, tomatoes,  bananas, pepper
              and eggplant.  These diseases cause severe  economic losses in the Southeastern
              US and many developing  countries.  Effective control of this pathogen requires
              that  we understand the mechanism by which it causes disease.  The  proposal
              addresses research on the activity of a specific  enzyme, a protein kinase,
              that regulates the growth of this  organism, and that also plays a major role
              in cancer  development.  ***
