Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for the Levine Science Resource Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9318118

Award Number: 9318118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. McClay dmcclay@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R.  Bruce Nicklas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is for a multi-user confocal microscope and  supporting
              instrumentation.  The core user group at Duke  University include faculty in
              the Department of Chemistry,  Zoology, Cell Biology, Immunology, and the
              Section of Cell  Growth, Regulation and Cancer.    In 1994, a new building, the
              Science Resource Center, now  being built as a multidisciplinary science
              facility, will be  occupied.  The building will house the School of the 
              Environment, and components of the Schools of Engineering,  Arts and Sciences,
              and Medicine.  One of the core facilities  in that building will be an
              microscopic Imaging Center.  The  intent for that facility, and all other
              shared-user  technologies in the building, is to keep the hardware and 
              software at the leading edge of biotechnology and to find  ways to interface
              these technologies with advances in other  emerging areas.  Also being planned
              for the new building are  an NMR center, X-ray crystallography and protein
              modeling  Center, and the University's transgenic mouse Center.  Each  of these
              Centers will be shared user operations which will  complement one another and
              will interface with the  Microscopic Imaging Center.  These Centers will foster
              new  developments as the chemists, biophysicists, physicists,  biochemists,
              biologists, and computer scientists interact  with one another in the
              continuing development of these  technologies.  This application for a confocal
              microscope  brings together seven faculty from five departments as the  core
              users.  Each of us has used confocal microscopes,  either at other institutions
              (four of us are new faculty at  Duke), or at Duke.  At present the Center has
              one confocal  microscope that has been getting increasingly heavier use.  That
              microscope is in need of an upgrade, and it is no  longer, by itself, capable
              of supporting many of the  applications that are proposed.  Therefore, this
              request is  for partial support of an effort to upgrade the existing 
              microscope and to purchase a newer generation of confoc al  microscope plus
              support hardware and software.  Our projects  are quite varied.  New
              innovations, plus the increase in  traffic of users will require a new
              microscopic platform and  newly available laser sources, plus they will be
              facilitated  by the networking capabilities that will be build into the  new
              building.
