Title       : U.S.-Africa Workshop on Fresh and Brackish Water Fishes: Collaborative
               Approaches to Biodiversity and Conservation, Nov. 15-20, 1993, Dakar, Senegal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1993  
File        : a9318355

Award Number: 9318355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frances Li                              
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melanie L J. Stiassny mljs@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl D. Hopkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 5928,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9318355  Stiassny    African and U.S. scientists will attend a  workshop called
              PARADI (Poissons Africains:   Role et Applications del la Diversity 
              Biologique), to be held in Dakar, Senegal,  November 15-20 1993, on African
              fresh and  brackish water fishes.  The workshop is  sponsored by a coalition of
              five organizations,  in Senegal, South Africa, and Europe (France  and
              Belgium), with an international scientific  board which includes participants,
              such as the  U.S. P.I., Dr. Melanie Stiassny of the American  Museum of Natural
              History, from a wide range of  institutions, disciplines, and countries.  The 
              purpose of the workshop is to convene active  researchers from a wide
              interdisciplinary  range, to identify common scientific and  conservation
              themes for African fisheries  biology.  The Workshop will review available 
              data from a biological diversity perspective on  a continent-wide basis and map
              directions for  programs and international research  collaborations and
              education.  In all, some 24  African countries are expected to be  represented.
               NSF funding will support the  participation of African scientists from 
              Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, and  Madagascar, and US researchers from a
              number of  institutions throughout the country, including  graduate students
              and junior faculty members.    This workshop will stimulate interchange to 
              establish needed baseline data on freshwater  fauna of Africa, an area which
              has been  relatively understudied, aside from the rift  valley lakes.  In
              addition to its contribution  to biodiversity, such research is vital to 
              sustainable development in many countries of  Africa for maintenance of their
              fisheries.   This project is likely  to serve as a catalyst  for the
              establishment of research networks  among African and US researchers, including
               some men and women how at early stages in their  careers, who may pursue
              collaborative efforts  for decades to come.  ***
