Title       : The Formation of Galaxies and Large-Scale Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9318185

Award Number: 9318185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Morris L. Aizenman                      
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3422091            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremiah P. Ostriker jpo@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Reed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Spergel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis B. Gannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph Z. Roskies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lars E. Hernquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Norman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edmund W. Bertschinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Ostriker  9318185      The Grand Challenge Application Groups competition
              provides one mechanism for the support of multidisciplinary teams of scientists
              and engineers to meet the goals of the High Performance Computing and
              Communications (HPCC) Initiative in Fiscal Year 1993. The ideal proposal
              provided not only the opportunity to achieve significant progress on (1) a
              fundamental problem in science or engineering whose solution could be advanced
              by applying high performance computing techniques and resources, or (2)
              enabling technologies which facilitate those advances, but also significant
              interactions between scientific and computational activities, usually involving
              mathematical, computer or computational scientist, that would have impact in
              high performance computational activities beyond the specific scientific or
              engineering problem area(s) or discipline being studied. This project brings
              together a balanced, critical mass team of astrophysicists, computational
              scientists and computer scientists, as well as the technical resources of two
              NSF supercomputing centers, to mount a focused attack on what is presently one
              of the most exciting and fundamental problems in the physical sciences: "What
              is the origin of large-scale structure in the universe and how do galaxies
              form?" There is abundant observational data sufficient knowledge of the
              physical laws and mathematical techniques required to understand the origin and
              evolution of cosmic structure. Yet, it is difficult to confront theory with
              observation in detail owing to the inherent complexity of these systems and the
              difficulty of simulating multiple length-scale interactions. However, recent
              developments in multiscale numerical algorithms by members of our Grand
              Challenge Application Group (GCAG) and their efficient implementation on
              scaleable parallel supercomputers should enable the investigators to overcome
              these limitations. The GCAG will explore the use of: (i) different numerical
              algorithms (grid-based, particle-based, and hybrid ( grid+particle) to solve
              the physical equations governing gas, radiation, dark matter and gravity in an
              expanding universe; (ii) different adaptation strategies (adaptive mesh
              refinement, hierarchical tree) to achieve efficient, multiscale solvers capable
              of resolving length scales of interest over 4-6 orders of magnitude; (iii)
              different programming models (data parallel, SPMD, object parallel) to express
              these complex, adaptive algorithms in an efficient and portable way on
              different parallel architectures (TMC's CM5, Intel PARAGON, Cray T3D, Convex
              MPP) available to the investigators; and (iv) new software technology (e.g.
              pC++) to develop compilers, optimization designs and performance analysis tools
              which allow the most efficient implementation of the above strategies in order
              to expose the various computational and computer science issues required to
              construct a portable, scaleable application for teraflop systems expected later
              in this decade. This unique numerical laboratory-will allow the investigators
              to compare theories of the origin of large-scale structure with the observed
              universe, to discard incorrect models and hopefully to determine the elements
              of a viable theory. This HPCC Grand Challenge will be extremely data and UO
              intensive, pushing current hardware and software systems and solutions to and
              beyond their limits. The investigators will work with staffs of the Pittsburgh
              and Illinois supercomputer centers as well as the computer vendors to develop
              practical and efficient strategies for the storage, visualization and analysis
              of massive numerical data sets of use to this and other HPCC applications. This
              award is being supported by the Advanced Projects Research Agency as well as
              NSF programs in astronomy and computer sciences.
