Title       : RUI: Instrumental Methods for the Analysis of Aquatic Bacteria by Flow Cytometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1996   
File        : a9318432

Award Number: 9318432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don K. Button dkbutton@ims.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1308,9117,9189,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9318432  Button  Aquatic bacteria control the organic chemistry of natural water
               systems and comprise about half the biomass of the oceans.  Yet,  because of
              recalcitrance to conventional procedures, the identity,  phylogenetics,
              biochemistry and nutritional requirements of most of  these organisms, called
              oligobacteria or ultramicrobacteria (UMB),  are unknown.  However, UMB cellular
              properties include extremely  small size and DNA content, high affinity for
              organic nutrients,  and resistance to growth in rich media.  Flow cytometry
              offers an  ideal window into these organisms not only because of the 
              flexibility and the variety of measurements that can be performed  by this
              instrumentation, but because typical cell numbers in  natural populations are
              ideally suited for this type of direct  analysis, natural cell populations can
              be preserved for analysis at  a later time, and the single-cell basis of the
              analysis can provide  a wealth of information on cell population structure.  
              Unfortunately, present flow cytometry analytical methods have been  developed
              only for large cells.  Techniques for treatment and  standard size curves for
              UMB-type cells have to be developed.  The  objective of the present research
              project is to develop methods for  efficient analysis of UMB by flow cytometry.
               Standard curves for  cell size and for DNA per cell will be completed. 
              Additional  standard curves will be generated for UMB RNA and protein content. 
               Membrane potential will be used to probe the physiological state of  cells,
              and the feasibility of using oligonucleotide probes as a  taxonomic tool for
              oligobacteria will be examined.  The concept of  deriving three-dimensional
              spacing and chemotaxis information about  bacteria in mixed systems from
              signal-proximity analysis will be  tested under both laboratory and field
              conditions.  %%%  Aquatic bacteria, especially the oligobacteria or the 
              ultramicrobacteria (UMB), comprise almost one half the biological  material in
              the sea and, as such their metabolic  activity can  control the chemistry of
              the world's oceans.  Surprisingly,  however, very little is known about these
              cells except that they  are small, they contain a minimum amount of DNA, and
              although they  have a strong attraction to organic compounds, they only grow
              when  the concentration is very low.  The objective of the present  research
              program is to develop methods using flow cytometry to  learn about the cells
              directly in sea water.  Standard curves will  be developed to measure cell size
              and estimate their DNA, RNA, and  protein contents.  Novel methods will be used
              to determine which  cells are metabolizing and how many different UMB-cell
              types may be  present in a water sample. The feasibility will be tested in the 
              laboratory and in the field of analyzing cell movement under flow  cytometer
              conditions to determine if the aquatic bacteria exhibit  tactic behavior toward
              desirable nutrients.  %%%
