Title       : Statistical Thermodynamics of Polymer Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9318744

Award Number: 9318744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaac C. Sanchez sanchez@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9318744  Sanchez    There are two broad areas of research:  polymer equations of
              state  and the interaction of polymers with compressed fluids.  Previously 
              funded National Science Foundation research has shown that the  compression
              response of polymers, solvents, and polymer solutions  to hydrostatic pressure
              satisfies a strong corresponding states  principle.  This work will be used as
              a basis to develop a new  universal equation of state for polymers that will be
              nearly as  accurate as experimental data.  Related computer simulations (Monte 
              Carlo) will also be carried out.  A search for other universal  features of
              polymer thermodynamics will also be pursued.  A  specific objective is to
              determine what thermodynamic properties of  a polymer solution in the vicinity
              of the lower critical solution  temperature phase boundary are universal.  The
              latter will require  pressure volume temperature and cloud point measurements
              at  temperatures approaching the critical temperature of the solvent.   
              Previously funded National  Science Foundation research has also  shown that
              the solubility of supercritical carbon dioxide in a  polymer can be modeled. 
              In addition, a semi-quantitative  prediction of the variation of the glass
              temperature with carbon  dioxide is possible.  The simultaneous control of both
              kinetics and  solubility raises the possibility of a new route to morphological
               control in certain types of polymer blends.  In principle, using  carbon
              dioxide as a common diluent for an immiscible polymer pair,  followed by
              controlled removal of the carbon dioxide can yield an  interesting variety of
              morphological structures.              Polymer physical properties are
              ultimately related to interactions.   Equation of state properties such as
              density, thermal expansion  coefficient, isothermal compressibility, etc. are
              intimately  related to polymer self-interaction.  Miscibility of polymer pairs 
              depends sensitively on the polymer-polymer interaction.  The  solubility of a
              polymer in a solvent or  the solubility of a gas in  a polymer depends on the
              small molecule-polymer interaction  The  goal in the research is to contribute
              towards this understanding.   It builds on previously supported National
              Science Foundation work  and involves a combination of experiments, computer
              simulations,  and theory.  ***
