Title       : Collaborative Research: Integrated Geological Interpretation of Deep-Tow Sonar,
               Submersible, and Petrological Observations of the Upper and Lower Oceanic Crust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9318731

Award Number: 9318731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86848              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Karson jkarson@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Hurst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9318731  Karson  This project is to analyse deeply-towed side-scan sonar data
              collected during recent studies in the Kane Fracture Zone on the Mid-Atlantic
              Ridge.  Delaney (University of Washington) and his colleague Karson (Duke
              University) propose to integrate the results of the Kane Fracture Zone study
              with similar side-scan sonar data from Blanco Fracture Zone in the Pacific, as
              well as submersible observations and rock samples from both areas.  The overall
              goal of the project is to decipher the structure and rock types involved in the
              formation of lower (Kane) and upper (Blanco) ocean crust, which are exposed at
              these sites due to their tectonic settings.  The proposed work builds on
              previous observations, including four separate field programs over seven years,
              collaborative among these investigators and French colleagues (the French
              submersible Nautile was used for the two diving programs).  Studies in the Kane
              Fracture Zone region integrate with recent Ocean Drilling Program drilling in
              this area by JOIDES Resolution, and provide a regional context in which to
              interpret these drilling cores.  Both programs provide a unique opportunity to
              examine the continuity and detail of ocean crustal structure in a region where
              it is exposed along steep cliffs at the sea floor.  This provides an
              opportunity to investigate both spatial and temporal continuity of tectonic and
              intracrustal petrologic processes of crustal formation, which is not possible
              to the level of detail proposed here using the "standard" techniques of
              drilling or seismic reflection profiling.  ***
