Title       : Connection of Carle Foundation Hospital and Clinics to the University of
               Illinois Campus Network and to the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1993 
File        : a9318138

Award Number: 9318138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Mintel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Krol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              9318138  Mintel  The University of Illinois College of Medicine at
              Urbana-Champaign  proposes to extend the Urbana campus fiber-optic backbone to
              Carle  Foundation Hospital, its primary teaching hospital, thus providing 
              Internet connections for university faculty, staff, and students at  the
              hospital.  Funds are requested to cover a major portion of the  cost of
              equipment and services necessary for this extension.  A  major benefit of this
              project will be the establishment of a huge  virtual medical library, with
              information from around the world  rapidly accessible to university faculty,
              staff, and students at  the Carle and the campus departments of the University
              of Illinois  at Urbana.  Several of those make use of magnetic resonance
              imaging  techniques and the analytical resources available at the National 
              Center for Supercomputing Applications, and the Biomedical Magnetic  Resonance
              Laboratory located on the Urbana campus.  A high-speed  link between Carle and
              the university campus would greatly  facilitate data and image transfer. 
              Third, the Carle Foundation  Hospital and Clinics serve as a major consultative
              resource for  physicians in the diagnosis and management of disease, being 
              particularly active in the area of rural health care.  Connection  of Carle
              Foundation Hospital with the University of Illinois  network would provide the
              final link between Carle's outlying  clinics in rural areas and the Internet,
              opening the door to  electronic world-wide collaboration in studies on the
              management  and treatment of disease.  ***
