Title       : Acquisition of SQUID Magnetometer - Susceptometer with Resistivity and Hall
               Effect Measurement Option
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1993   
File        : a9318333

Award Number: 9318333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81400              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Schweitzer JWS222@IOWA.PHYSICS.UIOWA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman C. Baenziger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9318333  Schweitzer  The SQUID magnetometer with AC susceptibility, resistivity,
              and  Hall effect measurement capabilities will be used to study the  electrical
              transport and magnetic properties of layered sulfide  alloys.  The research
              project will investigate the unusual metal-  insulator transition thansition
              that we have recently discovered  in the BaCo1-xNixS2-y system.  This
              first-order phase transition  is from a semiconducting to a metallic phase with
              decreasing  temperature.  The low temperature phase is a highly correlated 
              metal, while the high temperature phase appears to be a two-  dimensional
              antiferromagnet.  The transition temperature and  hysteresis depend on the
              chemical composition.  The thermal  bistability and positive temperature
              coefficient of resistivity  associated with the transition suggest that these
              materials could  be useful for many practical applications in materials
              research  and engineering.  The large resistance change at the transition,  the
              ability to control the properties by varying the composition,  and the
              stability of the materials are all favorable for  applications.  %%%  The
              experimental program will also involve exploratory synthesis  and
              characterization of related ternary sulfide and selenide  alloys that might
              exhibit similar phenomena or possibly  superconductivity.  The equipment
              requested will be used to  measure the DC magnetization, AC magnetic
              susceptibility,  resistivity, and Hall coefficient of all phases found.  The 
              existence of this unusual phase transition in certain layered  ternary sulfides
              is a significant discovery of previously unknown  phenomena.  Study of these
              materials can contribute to our  understanding of highly correlated electronic
              systems, metal-  insulator transitions, and perhaps high temperature 
              superconductivity.  ***
