Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9318061

Award Number: 9318061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Bloch rbloch@umaryland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318061  Bloch       Funds are requested to establish a multi-user confocal 
              laser scanning microscope (CLSM) facility for the basic  science departments at
              the University of Maryland at  Baltimore.  Such a shared instrument is not
              available.  The  applicants have been using fluorescence techniques to study 
              cell structure and function, but progress in some aspects of  their research
              has been limited by the resolution afforded  by the optical microscope.  With a
              confocal laser scanning  microscope, the resolution in the x-y plane can be
              increased  ~2-fold and in the z-axis, ~1.4 fold. The increased  resolution
              provided by the confocal microscope should  facilitate more definitive studies
              by the applicants of some  important questions in modern cell biology.  In
              particular,  the confocal microscope will be used to study the  organization of
              cellular membranes and how they change with  differentiation or during
              endocytosis; how cell populations  change during development of the brain; and
              how viruses and  microbes enter cells and alter cell structure.  All the 
              applicants hold federal grants for their research, and  several are recipients
              of grants from the NSF.              The facility will include a CLSM system
              for data  collection, and a separate workstation for image analysis.  The CLSM
              system will consist of a Bio-Rad MRC-600 confocal  laser scanning unit and an
              Olympus fluorescence microscope.  The microscope will be configured to permit
              conventional  epifluorescence and phase contrast for correlation with  confocal
              images.  The workstation, consisting of an IBM 486  running the same CoMOS
              program that controls the CLSM, is  requested to maximize the availability of
              the CLSM for data  collection.  Both the CLSM system and the workstation will 
              be provided with identical optical disk drives, to  facilitate the transfer of
              image data acquired by the  individual users.  The hardware selected for this
              facility  represents a reasonable balance between costs, our  requirements for
              the highest res olution available for  confocal microscopy, and the flexibility
              that is important  for a multi-user facility.              This equipment will
              be housed in the Department of  Physiology, School of Medicine, University of
              Maryland at  Baltimore.  It will be administered by an interdepartmental 
              Internal Advisory Committee consisting of the P.I. and two  regular users, and
              supervised by Dr. Paul Luther, a  co-investigator with experience in
              quantitative fluorescence  techniques.  The facility will be made available to
              all  members of the university community, including students and  postdoctoral
              fellows. Instruction in confocal microscopy  will be provided by regular,
              practical training sessions and  through an interdepartmental graduate course
              on imaging  methodology. Realizing the importance of confocal microscopy  to
              the research and teaching activities in the basic  sciences, the Graduate
              School, University of Maryland,  Baltimore, and the Dean of the School of
              Medicine have both  committed matching funds to help establish the CLSM 
              facility, should this grant be funded.
