Title       : An Experimental Investigation of the Determinants of Reinforcement Rate
               Maximization and Matching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1994    
File        : a9318419

Award Number: 9318419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene M. Heyman qmh@wjh12  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9318419  Heyman    A widely shared, basic idea in economics and related 
              disciplines is that choice is best described as rational  decision-making in
              which gains are maximized and losses  minimized (an optimizing strategy).
              However, the results of  the actual decisions made by organisms often differ
              from the  calculations of rational decision theory.  In many  experiments,
              these deviations appear to be the result of the  operation of some other set of
              rules than those of rational  decision theory.  One competing theory, based on 
              experimental studies, is a special case of a general  psychological principle
              known as "matching." Experimental  results supporting matching seem to
              contradict both rational  choice theory and common sense. However, the
              empirical and  theoretical relationships between matching and rational  choice
              theory have yet to be clearly described, and recent  data suggest a possible
              synthesis.  The purpose of this  research will be to explore this synthesis.   
              A number of studies indicate that how individuals  "calculate" the costs and
              benefits of their choices is an  important factor in determining matching vs.
              optimizing.  When subjects calculate costs and benefits in terms of the 
              current status of each alternative taken separately, they  match. When they
              calculate costs and benefits in terms of  the joint contribution of each
              alternative, treating each  source of reward as a component of a larger unit,
              they  optimize. Thus, the question of whether individuals match or  optimize
              can be restated as which "bookkeeping" rule is in  effect. Experiments will be
              carried out during which  matching and maximizing predict different patterns of
               behavior, producing data that will reveal the conditions  under which subjects
              learn to maximize or learn to match.  Implicit in this approach is the idea
              that it should be  possible to discover a yet more general behavioral rule, one
               that predicts which choice strategy is in effect. A  practical implication of
              this research is that it sho uld  show how to frame choice situations so that
              individuals will  choose optimally. This question is especially relevant to 
              issues involving self-control, for example, overeating and  addiction.
