Title       : Adaptive Coordination of Predictive Models with Experimental Observations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a9318166

Award Number: 9318166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3210000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Oliger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel H. Ferziger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Street  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Koseff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. Monismith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,1326,9216,9263,EGCH,HPCC,OOOO,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9318163  Bielak       The Grand Challenge Application Groups competition
              provides  one mechanism for the support of multidisciplinary teams of 
              scientists and engineers to meet the goals of the High Performance  Computing
              and Communications (HPCC) Initiative in Fiscal Year 1993.   The ideal proposal
              provided not only the opportunity to achieve  significant progress on  (1) a
              fundamental problem in science or  engineering whose solution    could be
              advanced by applying high  performance computing    techniques and resources,
              or (2) enabling  technologies which facilitate those advances.  but also
              significant interactions between scientific and  computational activities,
              usually involving mathematical, computer  or computational scientist, that
              would have impact in high  performance computational activities beyond the
              specific scientific  or engineering problem area(s) or discipline being
              studied.  The  main objective of the proposed research is to develop and 
              demonstrate the capability for predicting, by computer   simulation the ground
              motion of large basins during strong  earthquakes, and to use this capability
              to study the seismic  response of the Greater Los  Angeles Basin. The proposed
              research seeks to: 1. Develop  three-dimensional models of large-scale,
              heterogeneous basins that  take into account earthquake source, propagation
              path, and site  conditions; 2. Develop nonlinear models for sedimentary basins
              that  experience sufficiently strong ground motion; 3. Develop  unstructured 
              mesh methods and associated fast parallel solvers, enabling the  study  of much
              larger basins; 4. Develop software tools for the automatic  mapping of the
              computations associated with large unstructured mesh  problems on parallel
              computers; 5. Characterize the computation and  communication requirements of
              unstructured mesh problems, and make  a  set of recommendations for the design
              of future parallel systems.  While the proposed work is motivated by an
              interest in gaining a  better understanding of strong se ismic motion in large
              basins, the  algorithms and software tools developed will be applicable to a 
              wide  range of applications that require unstructured meshes.  This award  is
              being supported by the Advanced Projects Research Agency as well  as NSF
              programs in engineering, atmospheric and computer sciences. 9318183  Davis     
               The Grand Challenge Application Groups competition provides  one mechanism for
              the support of multidisciplinary teams of  scientists and engineers to meet the
              goals of the High Performance  Computing and Communications (HPCC) Initiative
              in Fiscal Year 1993.   The ideal proposal provided not only the opportunity to
              achieve  significant progress on  (1) a fundamental problem in science or 
              engineering whose solution    could be advanced by applying high  performance
              computing techniques and resources, or (2) enabling  technologies which
              facilitate those advances but also significant  interactions between scientific
              and computational activities,  usually involving mathematical, computer or
              computational  scientist, that would have impact in high performance
              computational  activities beyond the specific scientific or engineering problem
               area(s) or discipline being studied.  The investigators will study  the
              application of high performance parallel computing to a class  of
              scientifically important and computationally demanding problems  in remote
              sensing-land cover dynamics problems including generating  improved fine
              spatial resolution data for the global carbon cycle,  hydrological modeling and
              global ecological responses to climate  changes and human activity.  The
              research is collaborative,  including scientist from the University of
              Maryland, University of  Indiana, University of news Hampshire and NASA s
              Goddard Space  Center.   The award will combine research on       -new analysis
              procedures for remotely sensed data       -the integration of multispectral,
              multiresolution and       multitemporal image data sets into a unified global
              data  structure      based on hie rarchical data structures (i.e.,  quadtrees) 
                   -the utilization of these hierarchical, parallel data  structures for     
              the representation of spatial data (maps and  products developed  from image
              analysis) and the development of a  spatial data base   system with a
              sophisticated query language that  scientist can use to     control the
              application of biophysical  models to global data sets       -run-time support
              for constructing scalable and parallel  solutions      to problems involving
              the manipulation of irregular  data structures     such as quadtrees      
              -parallel I/O,especially novel methods for mapping large  arrays and    
              quadtrees onto parallel disks and disk systems,  and  for accessing  them using
              low overhead bulk transfers  The development work will be conducted on a 32
              processor Connection  Machine CM5, installed at the University of Maryland, and
              on an IBM  SP1 which we propose to obtain as part of the program.  This award 
              is being supported by the Advanced Projects Research Agency as well  as NSF
              programs in geological, biological, and computer sciences.                     
                                9318145  Messina       The Grand Challenge Application Groups
              competition provides  one mechanism for the support of multidisciplinary teams
              of  scientists and engineers to meet the goals of the High Performance 
              Computing and Communications (HPCC) Initiative in Fiscal Year 1993.   The ideal
              proposal provided not only the opportunity to achieve  significant progress on 
              (1) a fundamental problem in science or  engineering whose solution    could be
              advanced by applying high  performance computing techniques and resources, or
              (2) enabling  technologies which facilitate those advances.  but also
              significant interactions between scientific and  computational activities,
              usually involving mathematical, computer  or computational scientist, that
              would have impact in high  performance computational activities beyond the
              specific scientific  or engineering problem area(s) or discipline  being
              studied.  This  multi-disciplinary project will investigate and develop
              strategies  for efficient implementation of I/O intensive applications in 
              computational science and engineering.  Scalable parallel I/O  approaches will
              be pursued by a team of computer scientists and  applications scientists who
              will work together to:    * Characterize the I/O behavior of specific
              application programs  running    on large massively parallelcomputers    *
              Abstract and define I/O models (templates)    * Define application-level
              methodologies for efficient parallel  I/O    * Implement and test application
              level I/O tools on large-scale           computers  The Pablo performance
              analysis environment will provide the  foundation for the performance
              instrumentation and analysis. The  application programs are already fully
              operational on advanced  architecture  systems and their authors are all
              co-investigators in this project.  The principal computers used will be the
              Intel Touchstone Delta and  Paragon systems at Caltech, each with over 500
              computational nodes.  Five  application areas will be included: fluid dynamics,
              chemistry,  astronomy, neuroscience, and modelling of materials-processing 
              plasmas. The parallel programs for these applications cover a range  of I/O
              patterns  and volume, and the techniques that will be developed in this 
              project will be of relevance to a broad spectrum of engineering and  science
              applications. In addition, by overcoming their current I/O  limitations, the
              specific applications targeted in this award will  achieve significant new
              science and engineering results. By the end  of the project, sustained
              teraFLOPS computers will become  available. The project will  devise and
              implement general methods for scalable I/O using today's  advanced computers,
              immediately apply those methods to carry out  unprecedented applications in
              several fields, and use the
