Title       : SGER: A Prototype Database of Phylogenetic Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9318325

Award Number: 9318325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Donoghue   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              9318325 Donoghue          The rate of publication of phylogenetic studies has
              increased dramatically in recent years.  Access to phylogenetic trees, and to
              the data underlying those trees, is needed for a wide variety of purposes,
              including comparative studies of morphological and molecular evolution,
              biogeography, coevolution, and studies of the congruence of different sources
              of evidence.  Such data are also needed to monitor progress in phylogenetic
              research, to test new methods of taxometric analysis, and to address immediate
              practical problems in conservation of biodiversity.  The aim of the project is
              to establish a prototype database of phylogenetic studies designed to make
              published information readily accessible, and thereby to explore the
              feasibility of developing an internationally comprehensive database. 
              Development of a prototype will involve examination of alternative strategies
              for obtaining phylogenetic studies from the literature and from authors via
              electronic submission of data.  Consultation with colleagues will help delimit
              a core of essential information to be included in the prototype database,
              including data matrices on characters, basic information on taxa, bibliographic
              citations, and phylogenetic trees. %%%          Software will be developed for
              electronic transfer of taxonomic data sets, for data entry, for retrieval and
              manipulation of data sets and for importing and exporting data sets to
              phylogenetic and analy tical programs.  The database will be designed to allow
              flexibility to incorporate additional information and to export data to future
              implementations on other platforms or software environments.  The prototype
              will stimulate community discussion on the development of a comprehensive
              phylogenetic database for all groups of organisms.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
