Title       : The Evolution of Feeding Morphology in Rhabditida (Nematoda): Extension of the
               Caenorhabditis Paradigm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1994     
File        : a9318249

Award Number: 9318249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Baldwin james.baldwin@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9318249  BALDWIN  The objective of the proposed research is to understand how
              the feeding structures of soil nematodes have adapted with time to include
              diversity from microbivorism (primarily feeding on beneficial bacteria) to
              varying types of parasitism.  These diverse feeding adaptations have important
              ecological (e.g. bacterial feeders), agricultural (e.g. plant and animal
              parasites) implications.  Presently, different feeding strategies are
              understood in terms of crude overall structure of the buccal capsule (mouth
              region), but there is little or no explanation of phylogenetic relationships
              among the various feeding types.  Understanding the phylogeny of diverse
              feeding structures requires the resolution of conflicts about their structure. 
              These conflicts can be resolved by building upon the detailed morphological and
              developmental knowledge in the model (bacterial-feeding) nematode,
              Caenorhabditis elegans, and extending this model to close microbivorous
              relatives (Rhabditida) as well as more distant parasitic relatives. 
              Comparative detailed morphology/development will be primarily accomplished
              using transmission electron microscopy.  Phylogenetic relationships of
              morphological/developmental characters of buccal capsules in a range of
              nematodes will be interpreted in light of a parallel set of data from DNA
              sequences from the same nematodes.  Since sequences from subunits of RNA
              polymerase II seem to be particularly informative, they will be used to develop
              an independent molecular-based  genealogical tree.  This tree will be used to
              infer the simplest explanation for the pattern and direction of change of
              buccal capsule feeding structures and associated feeding adaptations.  %%% 
              Soil dwelling nematode worms are an important, unseen part of virtually all
              ecosystems.  They can be economically important as parasitic pests of plants
              and consumers of beneficial bacteria or, alternatively, these same feeding
              strategies can be beneficial if directed against pest organisms such as weeds
              and ins ect pests.  This project will investigate relationships among a variety
              of nematode species by utilizing both information from detailed studies of the
              ultrastructure of the mouth parts and feeding apparatus and from molecular
              sequencing of portions of the RNA polymerase II gene.  ***
