Title       : Correlations Among Environmental Agents: Implications for Plant Ecology and
               Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1994     
File        : a9318523

Award Number: 9318523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42282              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Miller miller@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9318523  Miller       Studies on the ways in which natural selection leads to
              the  evolution of species have demonstrated that many traits of  interest, such
              as leaf shape or growth rate, are controlled by  numerous loci (many genes),
              but that one can qualitatively predict  how traits will evolve when undergoing
              natural selection.  For  example, previous research has investigated how
              herbivory by  insects would lead to evolutionary changes in herbivore
              resistance  of a plant species.  Clearly, however, organisms are affected 
              simultaneously by multiple environmental agents.  The dune annual  Sabatia
              stellaris, for example, appears to be simultaneously  affected by resource
              competition, water availability, and  herbivory.  The proposed research asks
              how selection for one agent  (e.g. competition) is affected by the simultaneous
              action of a  second agent (e.g. herbivory).   Theoretical predictions suggest 
              that the selection by any one agent will be increased, in some  cases
              dramatically, by the presence of any second agent%%%       The proposed
              research will quantify selection for traits   related to competition,
              herbivory, and water stress in Sabatia  plants grown under a variety of
              different experimental conditions  in the field:  competition only, herbivory
              only, water stress only,  and several combinations of these three environmental
              agents.  In  each environment, a number of plant traits known to be important 
              for dealing with competition, herbivory, and/or water stress will  be
              quantified.  By counting the seeds produced by plants with these  traits under
              various conditions, selection for these traits will be  quantified in each
              environment and predictions can be tested.  The  results of this study may be
              important for understanding basic  questions about rates of evolutionary change
              of species in  different natural environments and the maintenance of genetic 
              diversity.  They may also be important for developing or  understanding
              breeding programs in agricultural systems where  factors su ch as completion
              and herbivory are commonplace.
