Title       : Cross-bridge Kinetics in Extracted/Reconstituted Muscle Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1995   
File        : a9318120

Award Number: 9318120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masataka Kawai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9318120  Kawai         The molecular mechanisms of Ca2+ regulation of the 
              contractile apparatus are investigated in mammalian cardiac  muscles. The
              cross-bridge kinetics are assessed by the method  called sinusoidal analysis,
              which changes the length of the  muscle sinusoidally at varying frequencies,
              and measures  concomitant amplitude and phase shift in tension. The length 
              change perturbs the steady state distribution of the cross-  bridges, and this
              perturbation results in the transient change in  tension. From these data, 3
              apparent rate constants are  extracted. These are further studied as functions
              of the MgATP,  MgADP, phosphate (Pi) concentrations, and 6 rate constants and 3
               association constant (kinetic constants) that characterize a 7  state
              cross-bridge model are extracted. The rate limiting step is  characterized by
              the ATP hydrolysis rate measurement. The  strength of our approach is that the
              rate constants ranging 3  orders of magnitudes can be characterized by a single
              experiment.       The role of cooperativity of the regulatory units of the 
              thin filament in cross-bridge kinetics is investigated in this  proposal.
              Skinned cardiac muscle is activated by varying  concentrations of Ca2+, and the
              apparent rate constants are  examined to see if the cross-bridge kinetics are
              affected by  Ca2+. Troponin C (TnC) is partially extracted from skinned 
              myocardium, the extracted preparation is activated in a solution  containing
              high Ca2+ concentration (40 uM), and 10 kinetic  constant that characterize
              elementary steps of the cross-bridge  cycle are obtained as functions of the
              degree of TnC extraction.  The preparation is also reconstituted with cardiac
              TnC in which  Ca2+ specific binding site is destroyed by genetic engineering to
               examine if the binding of TnC alone affects the cross-bridge  kinetics. These
              experiments will determine whether the  cooperative activation of regulatory
              units on the thin filament  affects elementary steps of the cross-bridge cycle.
              The Troponin  complex  is then placed into the turned on state regardless of 
              Ca2+, either by extracting TnI or by using  aTnC (turned on TnC),  and
              cross-bridge kinetics. at varying Ca2+ concentrations are  studied. This
              experiment will determine if there is an additional  Ca2+ binding site, such as
              in the myosin light chain 2, and if  Ca2+ binding into this site modifies the
              cross-bridge kinetics.  The degree of extraction and reconstitution of troponin
               components is quantified by using SDS polyacrylamide gel  electrophoresis, and
              phosphorylation by using isoelectric  focusing gel. The proposed research uses
              biophysical,  biochemical, engineering, and genetic engineering techniques, and
               it is aimed at understanding the basic mechanisms of contraction.  ***
