Title       : Acquisition of a Kodak Ektapro EM 1012 Motion Analyzer System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1994   
File        : a9318129

Award Number: 9318129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106564             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Biewener   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Westneat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Dickinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. LaBarbera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9318129  Biewener  Accurate imaging of animal movements underlies studies of
              the  neuromuscular control of animal movement and the biomechanics and 
              hydrodynamics of animal function. Quantitative kinematic analyses of  the
              movements of animal segments or of the animal itself can be related  to
              simultaneous recordings of nerve firing, muscle activation, force  generation
              and shortening, skeletal strain, or to visualization of flow  patterns through
              or around the animal. Often, and especially for small  animals, these movements
              occur at very rapid rates and over short time  intervals. To record these rapid
              movements with reasonable time  resolution can require imaging rates of greater
              than 1000 Hz.  High-speed film analysis represents a central component of the
              P.I.'s  and the three Co-P.I's research. For many years, we have carried out 
              such studies by relying on 16 mm film recording and analysis to obtain  imaging
              rates as high as 500 frames sec-1.  Recent developments in high  speed
              videography now make it possible to obtain even higher imaging  rates using a
              video based recording and analysis system.    This proposal therefore requests
              funds to purchase a high-speed video  system to be installed as a multi-user
              facility within the Department  of Organismal Biology & Anatomy at the
              University of Chicago. The  equipment that we seek to purchase is a Kodak
              Ektapro EM 1012 Motion  Analyzer System, equipped with an intensified imaging
              camera and  analysis workstation. This system is capable of obtaining 1000 full
               frames sec-l under low light conditions, yielding excellent depth of  field
              (essential to reliable monitoring of animal movement patterns).  By
              partitioning the memory area onto which each frame is mapped,  practical
              imaging rates of up to 6000 images sec-1 can be obtained.  This system is
              state-of-the-art and is likely to remain so for many  years. The Kodak Ektapro
              and competitive systems have been recently  acquired by other labs working in
              these areas of biology. To remain  competit ive with these groups and to
              provide a resource that will  attract students who wish to pursue graduate
              training in biomechanics  and neuromuscular biology, we believe that it is
              essential that we  obtain such a system. While the cost of the system is too
              high to  justify on a single investigator proposal, it is appropriate for use
              as  a shared facility. This system is ideal for short-term, intensive use  by
              an investigator/lab group (1 to 2 weeks), during which time  considerable
              kinematic data can be recorded and later analyzed in the  investigator's own
              lab after downloading the digitized image files onto  removable high-density
              disk media. Our goal is to not only share this  high-speed video system among
              each of our labs, but to make it  available to students and research faculty in
              other units within the  University. We also envision limited access by persons
              outside the  University. The P.I. will oversee scheduling, use and maintenance
              of  the equipment.
