Title       : Genetic and Environmental Factors that Influence Microgametophytic Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9318224

Award Number: 9318224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Stephenson as4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Winsor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9318224  Stephenson   A large portion of the genome of the microgametophytes
              (pollen) is both transcribed and translated during development, germination and
              pollen tube growth.  Consequently, the performance of pollen (speed and
              germination, pollen tube growth rate and the ability to penetrate ovules and
              achieve fertilization) can potentially be affected by its genetic composition,
              by its interactions with the pistil, by environmental conditions and by the
              resources provided to pollen by the pollen producing parent.  This proposal
              seeks support to continue our detailed investigations of the factors that
              affect pollen performance, the relationship between pollen performance and
              non-random fertilization, and the effects of non-random fertilization on the
              progeny performance.   The investigators will continue ongoing studies of
              pollen competition in Cucurbita texana, to determine if there is heritable
              variation for pollen performance and to determine if the effects of pollen
              competition on progeny vigor extend to subsequent generations.  They will also
              determine the potential for pollen competition to occur and the effects of
              pollen competition on progeny vigor in natural populations of C. foetidissima
              growing in the Jornada Long-Term Ecological Research Site near Las Cruces, New
              Mexico.  They will also determine if the growing conditions of the pollen
              producing parent affect the performance of the pollen.  They will use C. texana
              and C. foetidissima to examine the effects of leaf herbivory by cucumber
              beetles (Diabrotica spp.) on pollen production, pollen grain size and the
              ability of the pollen to sire seeds when deposited into stigmas in mixture.  
              This research will conclude studies of pollen competition and its effects on
              progeny performance and will result in the most carefully controlled and
              comprehensive set of experiments in this field of research.  The herbivory
              studies will greatly extend the now very limited understanding of environmental
              factors that affect pollen performance.
