Title       : RUI: Does Maintenance of Elevated Muscle Temperatures in Tunas Result in
               Increased Swimming Performance?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9318065

Award Number: 9318065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279746             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn A. Dickson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9183,9218,9229,BIOT,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9318065  Dickson    In addition to being the focus of important commercial 
              fisheries throughout the world, tunas are of particular  interest to biologists
              because they are the only bony fishes  known to maintain muscle
              temperatures(Tm) elevated  significantly above the temperature of their
              environment by  using metabolically derived heat; i.e., they are  endothermic.
              To do so, tunas need a source of heat (provided  by contraction of red muscle
              during continuous swimming) and  a mechanism to retain the heat within the
              muscle during  activity (blood vessels arranged as counter-current heat 
              exchangers). The goal of this research project is to test  the hypothesis that
              maintenance of high muscle temperatures  in tunas results in increased swimming
              performance. A  computerized, temperature-controlled, variable speed, 
              swimming-tunnel respirometer system will be used to measure  the maximal
              sustainable/aerobic swimming speed versus fish  size and the cost of swimming
              versus fish size relationships  for juvenile black skipjack tunas ranging in
              fork length  (FL) from ~100mm to ~250mm.  These sizes are above and below  the
              minimum size for endothermy of 207 mm FL postulated in a  recent publication by
              the Principal Investigator.   Comparisons will be made with a similar size
              range of  closely related fishes that cannot elevate Tm significantly  at any
              size to "control" for the effects of fish size. Also,  if swimming mode changes
              with fish size, the maximal speed  and/or cost of swimming may change
              independent of Tm.  Therefore, swimming mode, as well as tail beat frequencies 
              and amplitudes, will be determined from high-speed videotape  recordings of
              each fish swimming at speeds up to its  maximum, using a computerized video
              motion analysis system.  In addition, Tm in a size range of juvenile black
              skipjack  tuna will be measured as they swim in laboratory aquaria and  in the
              respirometer: these data, combined with microscopic  examination of heat
              exchanger blood vessel morphology and  red muscle amou nt in the same fish,
              will allows the PI to  test the hypothesis that the minimum size for endothermy
              in  black skip jacks is 207 mm FL.  These studies will  contribute a great deal
              to our understanding of the  evolution of endothermy and the advantages it
              confers. The  results will have implications for the ecology, energetics,  and
              both short- and long-range movements of tunas. In  addition, estimates of the
              cost of swimming obtained in the  proposal study can be used in models of tuna
              energetics and  population dynamics that are used to regulate the fishery 
              aspects of these species.  ***
