Title       : Neutron Scattering Analysis of Biological Structures: An External Users Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9318839

Award Number: 9318839
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $980000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zbigniew R. Korszun   (Principal Investigator current)
              A. M. Saxena  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dieter K. Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brookhaven Nat'l Lab
	      Building 460
	      Upton, NY  11973    631/344-3320

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9166,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9318839  Korszun  Funds are requested for the continuation of the Structural 
              Biology Users Program at the High Flux Breeder (HFBR).  These  facilities
              include three beam lines equipped with two dimensional  multi-wire area
              detectors for macromolecular crystallography,  membrane diffraction and small
              angle scattering.  The biology  user program at the HFBR has been in existence
              for approximately  15 years and has serviced academic, industrial and federal 
              researchers in the biological sciences as well as by physicists,  chemists and
              material scientists from the U.S. and abroad.   During the last grant period
              over 50 publications have resulted  from work done at these facilities and
              currently there are over  50 investigators including postdoctoral associates
              and graduate  students who are using the facility.  In addition to providing 
              hardware support for these researchers, the resident scientific  and technical
              staff provide data analysis support and educational  programs for the user
              community in order to maximize the  productivity of our neutron scattering and
              diffraction program.   During the last grant period, several major changes in
              hardware  and software, including the installation of a new detector on the 
              crystallography station were implemented.  These changes have had  the
              cumulative effect of increasing the throughput on all of the  biology
              beamlines.  %%%  Biological structural studies using neutron diffraction and 
              scattering techniques are important because they provide  structural
              information which can not easily be obtained through  other means.  These
              studies are aimed at determining the  structural basis for function of these
              systems thereby providing  fundamental information which can be used to
              understand the basis  of viable, healthy life and will provide strategies for
              the  treatment of diseases.  Because neutron structural studies are 
              exquisitely sensitive to the location of hydrogen atoms, they  have been used
              to determine the role of hydrogen in enzyme  reactions, the  location and
              delivery of drugs across cell  membranes and the organization of large
              biochemical systems such  as muscle, ribosomes and chromosome structure. 
              Because of the  successful pioneering studies on these systems at Brookhaven 
              National Laboratory, we are in a position to probe the frontiers  in structural
              biology and to further our understanding of these  systems thereby facilitating
              discoveries with biomedical and  environmental applications.  ***
