Title       : Acquisition of a Phosphorimager
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9318027

Award Number: 9318027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Pure'   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nigel W. Fraser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Rauscher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shelley L. Berger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wistar Institute
	      3601 Spruce Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/898-3700

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The disciplines of Molecular and Cellular Biology have  evolved from essentially
              descriptive and qualitative data  analysis to rigorous quantitative
              determinations of  molecular structure and function.  In order to stay at the 
              forefront of modern molecular biology, it is absolutely  necessary to acquire
              the ability to quickly and efficiently  quantify data and images.  This
              proposal seeks to acquire  "state-of-the-art" phosphorimaging capabilities to
              support  ongoing molecular biologic research projects at The Wistar  Institute.
               Each of the projects described herein is aimed  at establishing the molecular
              bases of diseases using modern  molecular/cellular biology methods with
              ultimate goals of  improving diagnosis/prognosis and treatment of diseases, 
              such as cancer, AIDS, and other immune-system dysfuncitons  and other viral
              diseases.  The molecular targets being  examined in these diseases span the
              entire route of cellular  signal transduction:  growth-factors, growth-factor 
              receptors and other cell surface receptors, cell adhesion  molecules and
              cytoplasmic structural proteins, soluble  kinases and finally nuclear-localized
              transcription  factors..    A comprehensive analysis of these molecules
              requires  sophisticated methods for accurate quantitation of each of  the
              parameters of their function.  These parameters include:  1) gene structure,
              and tpanscriptional activity (via  southern, northern and RNAse protection
              analyses) 2) Tissue  distribution of gene  activity and developmental
              expression  (via Northern blot and RT-PCR) 3. Protein expression, post- 
              translational modification and detection  of associated  proteins (via CAT -
              assay, quantitative in vitro Kinase  assays and in vitro transcription. 
              Acquisition of the  Phosphorimager will allow each of these parameters to be 
              rigorously quantitated and contribute to each of the  research projects
              described here in a fundamental way.
