Title       : Dissertation Research: The Origin of Agricultural Bench Terraces in the Colca
               Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9318884

Award Number: 9318884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11997              (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Denevan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9318884  Denevan    Under the direction of Dr. William Denevan, Ms. Sarah Brooks
              will  collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct 
              archaeological research in the Colca Valley of Peru and attempt to  date and
              determine the construction sequence of different kinds of  agricultural
              terraces located on the valley slopes. She will also  collect data which will
              permit reconstruction of climate change. To  answer the first question she will
              conduct a through survey of a 4  square km region with two terrace types and
              carry out partial or  complete excavations of 25 terraces and features
              physically  associated with them. She will also partially uncover several house
               structures and canals. Analyses will be conducted on recovered  lithics,
              ceramics and faunal remains. Dates will be obtained  through comparative
              ceramic analyses, carbon 14 analyses of organic  materials and hydration of
              obsidian artifacts. To determine climate  change, analyses will be conducted
              both on pollen and macro faunal  materials collected during excavation.    Data
              resulting from the analysis of the Quelccaya ice cap near the  Colca Valley
              have indicated wet and dry periods from AD 500 to the  present. Limited studies
              of the region's prehistory indicate that  in the early sixth century AD farming
              practices changed and people  abandoned rainfed sloping field terraces and
              began to construct  counterparts which could be watered by irrigation. Ms.
              Brooks  wishes to examine the relationship between climate change and 
              postulated human response. She wishes to determine how rainfall and  vegetation
              changed in the region and whether the new farming  practices were in fact
              related to this shift.    This research is important for several reasons. Many
              areas in the  Andes which are unused today at one time supported intensive 
              agriculture. Reconstruction of past farming practices and discovery  the
              relationship between them and environmental variables may  provide insights of
              direct use for regional development today. In  t he course of her work Ms.
              Brooks will also produce a chronological  sequence of value to many
              archaeologists who work in highland Peru.  The project will assist in the
              training of a promising young  scientist.  ***
