Title       : Quantum Mechanical Studies of Interacting Modes in Molecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1995   
File        : a9318652

Award Number: 9318652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Silbey silbey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1954,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This three-year theoretical research project  is jointly supported by the   NSF
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program and the Materials   Theory
              Program.  Theoretical models will be studied for the study of: (1)   low
              temperature thermal and optical properties of glasses, and (2)   optical and
              electronic properties and electronic and vibrational states   of molecular
              aggregates.  Topic (1) involves computer simulations to   generate a large
              sample of glass structures using an empirical force   field model.  Each
              generated structure is searched for pairs of   neighboring local minima on the
              potential energy surface with associated   double well potentials (DWP). 
              Tunneling contributions to low temperature   specific heat, thermal
              conductivity and phonon-chromophore interactions   will be computed using the
              statistical distribution of DWP parameters.    Topic (2) is a quantum and
              statistical mechanical analysis of   electronic-vibrational (phonon) coupling
              in molecular aggregates, chains,   and polyatomic molecules. Theory will be
              compared with results of optical   dephasing experiments on low temperature
              glasses.    The overall goal of this research is to understand, and eventually
              to   predict, optical and thermal properties of glasses and other disordered  
              materials in terms of their atomic structure.  At the atomic level, a   glass
              lacks the regular periodicity of a perfect single crystal.  This   disorder
              requires that one take proper account of the statistical   distribution of
              relevant structural features.  In particular, there exist   pairs of structures
              of nearly the same energy which can be converted one   into the other by a
              concerted motion of just a few atoms with small   adjustments by the many
              surrounding atoms.  The double well potential is   a mathematical
              representation of the change of the potential energy of   the glass during this
              conversion process.  The energy barrier is very   small for some pairs of
              structures, and for these, interconversion   motions persist ev en when the
              glass is cooled to liquid helium   temperatures, where other atomic motions
              have been frozen out.   Thus low   temperature experiments allow one to study
              the effects of the tunneling   motion free from complications due to other
              types of motion.  Various   measurable optical and thermal properties of the
              glass will then be   computed from the computed distribution to test the
              theory.
