Title       : Vibrational Dynamics in Weakly-Bound Complexes and Gas- Surface Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9318936

Award Number: 9318936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $513600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger E. Miller remiller@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1312,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project  in the Experimental Physical Chemistry program of the  
              Chemistry Division, Prof. R.E. Miller of the University of North Carolina   at
              Chapel Hill will continue a research program on problems of the   dynamics of
              energy transfer, specifically those present in weakly bound   molecular
              complexes and in molecule-surface interactions.  For the weakly   bound
              complexes there will be spectroscopic characterization to determine   the
              details of photodissociation dynamics and the associated potential   energy
              surfaces, as well as the state-to-state probing of the fragments   resulting
              from phtodissociation.  These experiments are extended into the   realm of
              gas-surface scattering, especially that of scattering of   non-linear molecules
              and the vibrational and rotational energies   transferred in this process.   
              The dynamics of chemical reactions stands at the forefront of   contemporary
              research in physical chemistry. The purpose is to obtain a   detailed
              understanding of  reaction processes at the molecular level.    Systems that
              are investigated include stable molecules, weakly bound   complexes composed of
              stable molecules, and molecules interacting with   solid surfaces in a
              scattering process.  Gas phase molecules or complexes   elevated to high
              electronic, vibrational or rotational states of energy   by photoexcitation
              often dissociate into fragments having characteristic   energy distributions in
              the electronic, vibrational, rotational, and   translational degrees of
              freedom.  Since there are usually several   possible paths along which a
              dissociation process is allowed to occur, it   is important to understand the
              details of these processes to allow   correct modeling of the overall reaction
              phenomenon.  Similar reasons   guide the research in scattering of molecules by
              solid surfaces,   especially those that play a role in catalytic reactions.
