Title       : Dynamics of Habitat Structure in Seagrass Landscapes; Ecosystem Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1994     
File        : a9318130

Award Number: 9318130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50018              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan S. Bell sbell@chuma1.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9189,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9318130  Bell  In models developed for marine vegetated habitats which emphasize
              ecosystem function, macrophytic vegetation is not generally considered to have
              major direct links to higher trophic levels.  Instead, plants are veiwed as
              important important trophic contributors to the detrital pool.  In the study
              proposed here we  expand the veiw  of the role of plants and consider how
              habitat structure provided by macrophytes, either as physical or predator
              refuge, or as a site of resource accumulation, might be important to ecosystem
              function.  %%%  This study is proposed to 1) explore the relationship of fauna
              known to be trophically-linked (i.e. small resident fish and epiphytal
              amphipods) to plant cover, height, and arrangement of plants across spatial
              scales and 2) develop a model depicting sedimentation processes that influence
              seagrass patch development and maintenance.  Twenty four seagrass beds of
              varying size and shape will be sampled during the Spring and Fall of 1994 and
              1995 in Tampa Bay, Florida.  Seagrass patches will be characterized for
              physical attributes on a landscape level (from aerial photographs), and on a
              sub-landscape level (i.e. within a landscape, patch level).  Regression
              analyses techniques will be used to investigate relationships between the
              physical attributes of the seagrass beds at both landscape and sub-landscape
              scales.  The relationship of faunal components and bed physical attributes will
              also be examined using regression analysis techniques.  In the same 24 seagrass
              beds, sedimentation rates will be measured at each of  the four compass
              headings and expansion/contraction of bed margin recorded monthly.  These
              combined data should allow us to determine if sedimentation plays a major role
              in defining seagrass patch characteristics, whether patch characteristics have
              important influence on fauna, and hence, ecosystem function.  %%%  Our
              techniques and results should be of general interest to ecosystem research
              programs where macrophytes are the dominant vegetat ion, including freshwater
              and salt marshes.  Given that macrophyte-dominated areas are often those
              reported to provide critical habitat for higher trophic levels as
              feeding/refuge/nesting sites, the role habitat structure plays in these
              ecosystems may be similar to that in seagrass beds.  It is  anticipated that
              results from our study can be used to build a predictive basis for determining
              the ecosystem level implications of habitat degradation.
