Title       : Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Defense Barriers of Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1997   
File        : a9318544

Award Number: 9318544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. E. Kolattukudy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                    9318544  Kolattukudy  Plant cuticle, the outermost layer of plants, plays
              a significant  role in the interaction of plants with the environment including
               pathogenic fungi.  The structural polymers of plant defensive  barriers, cutin
              and suberin, will be examined using a new  technology, atomic force microscopy,
              that gives images at molecular  dimensions and thus could directly reveal for
              the first time the  molecular architecture of these complex polymers.  The
              nature of  the enzymes and genes involved in the biosynthesis of the cuticular 
              components will be elucidated by direct isolation of the enzymes  and by
              cloning genes uniquely expressed in the epidermis, the site  of synthesis of
              the cuticular components.  Molecular mechanisms  involved in the fungal
              penetration into plants will be elucidated.   How cuticular components and the
              ripening hormone, ethylene,  trigger germination and differentiation of fungal
              conidia to form  appressorium, the infection structure, will be studied by 
              elucidating the structure, function and regulation of expression of  the unique
              fungal genes regulated by the plant signals.  How the  unique cutin monomer
              acids trigger fungal cutinase gene expression  will be studied by isolating the
              transcription factors that bind  the promoter elements and by cloning the
              kinases that activate the  transcription factor binding.  After breaching the
              cuticular  barrier the fungal pathogen penetrates the pectinaceous barriers 
              using pectin degrading enzymes including pectate lyase.  The role  of
              regulation of expression of the various members of the family of  fungal lyase
              genes in pathogenesis will be studied by elucidating  the conditions under
              which each gene is expressed and by assessing  the effect of inhibition of
              expression of the genes by gene  disruption and antisense on the virulence of
              the pathogen.  The  results of the proposed studies will help to elucidate the
              basic  mechanisms involved in the interaction of pathogenic fungi with the 
              defensive barriers of pl ants.  Manipulation of these interactions  could
              provide new approaches to plant protection.  ***
