Title       : Center for Culture of Marine Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9003244

Award Number: 9003244
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1247182            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1106      LIVING STOCK COLLECTIONS
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The Provasoli-Guillard Center contains the world's largest                
              culture collection of marine phytoplankton.  The cultures are                  
              distributed to scientists, aquaculture hatcheries, industrial                  
              firms (especially biotechnology companies), and governmental                   
              agencies throughout the world.  Marine phytoplankters are the                  
              "plants" of the ocean and they form the base of the food chain in              
              ocean systems.  Because oceans cover over 70% of the Earth's                   
              surface, phytoplankton play a dominant role in global ecology.                 
              Scientists use cultures of phytoplankton in experiments to study               
              the potential effects of global changes caused by carbon dioxide               
              increases (the greenhouse effect) and of ultraviolet light damage              
              from ozone holes, as well as searching the diversity of                        
              phytoplankton organisms for natural products that may be used to               
              cure human or other diseases.  The recent rapid expansion of                   
              marine aquaculture is largely due to the use of phytoplankton                  
              cultures as foods for larval and juvenile shellfish and finfish.               
                                                                                             
                   This project will provide partial support for the Provasoli-              
              Guillard Center's maintenance costs of the phytoplankton culture               
              collection for the next five years.  Living phytoplankton must be              
              maintained continuously in culture, since no methods have been                 
              perfected for their cryopreservation.  During the award period,                
              the Center will begin a major revision of its computer database,               
              and will provide on-line access to the database.  It will also                 
              install new culture chambers to enable a wider range of cultures               
              to be maintained.  Finally, a replacement autoclave will be                    
              purchased for sterilization of media and glassware in order to                 
              insure pure culture conditions.
