Title       : The Competitive Equilibrium Model of Legislatures: Theory and Empirical Tests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1990       
File        : a9003074

Award Number: 9003074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25922              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Koford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project investigates how legislatures determine outcomes - -the           
              level of the budget or the toughness of an environmental law, for              
              example.  There are two basic views on this question.  The first states        
              that the majority rules: a coalition develops that can pass what it            
              favors.  The second view argues that legislators compromise among              
              themselves to find a result that maximizes the net benefits to the             
              legislators as a whole.  The two perspectives have very different              
              implications for American politics. Under the first, a small majority          
              could take advantage of the minority by passing something that greatly         
              harmed them - - or their constituents. Parties and coalitions should be        
              extremely important, as they determine "who will win."  Under the              
              second view, compromise occurs based on each legislator's view of the          
              relative importance of the issue, and ideology is not important. It is         
              also possible that in reality both views have some validity.                   
                                                                                             
              In this research investigation the first task is to describe the views         
              precisely and formally, to be clear on just what each assumes and what         
              each implies.  This work leads to the second major task of the                 
              research: testing which of these views is more empirically accurate.           
              For this purpose the investigator uses a "comparative statics" approach        
              - - showing how some specific change in underlying conditions implies a        
              change in outcomes.  For example, a change in the number of Democratic         
              Senators may have an effect on the defense budget, other things held           
              constant.  The size of these effects can then be tested empirically.           
              But, most interesting, sometimes the two views have very different             
              conclusions about what will happen.  When the"status quo" changes, for         
              instance, the majority rule view often predicts that a bill will               
              replace the "status quo" with a different final outcome from the one           
              originally preferred - - even though preferences have not changed.  In         
              contrast, the compromise view invariably predicts a change back to the         
              originally preferred outcome.  The different views can be most easily          
              tested on experimental data collected previously to test other theories        
              of how committees function.                                                    
                                                                                             
              These data are a "gold-mine" of results where the preferences of the           
              "legislators" are known, and the outcomes are known.  Preliminary              
              investigation has found several cases in which comparative statics             
              results support the compromise view.  There are also several cases in          
              which the results contradict all current theories; this may lead to            
              better theories in the future.  Finally, the different views can be            
              tested on Congressional roll-call data. The researcher has chosen to           
              focus on one policy issue of the late 1970s, which provides a                  
              considerable number of roll call votes over several Congresses.  The           
              different theories predict that as members of Congress are replaced,           
              the outcome will change - - in different ways.  Therefore, this will           
              permit a fairly direct test of the two views of legislatures.  If no           
              unexpected difficulties arise, this method would allow investigators to        
              see how responsive the Congress is to changes in the views of the              
              public - shown by changes in members of Congress at election time.
