Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Pseudodifferential Operations and Local Solvability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1990      
File        : a9003412

Award Number: 9003412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daryl Geller daryl@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   About thirty-five years ago H. Lewy produced an example of a              
              first order linear partial differential equation with linear                   
              (complex) coefficients which had no solution.  A complete                      
              description of differential operators which are 'solvable'                     
              remains a challenging, but unresolved issue in mathematical                    
              analysis.  However, the search has led to many fundamental                     
              results about partial differential operators, especially in the                
              context of the theory of several complex variables.                            
                   One of the more interesting aspects of the work in this area              
              concerns the question of describing the range of an 'unsolvable'               
              operator, or, equivalently, which inhomogeneous equations can be               
              solved?  The question is reformulated in terms of the null space               
              of the adjoint: whether the projection operator onto the null                  
              space preserves real analyticity.  The tools used to investigate               
              the question in this project involve the calculus of                           
              pseudodifferential operators defined on a manifold, the                        
              Heisenberg group.  Work will be done on the specific case of the               
              Szego projection restricted to a real analytic boundary of a                   
              bounded pseudoconvex domain of finite type in two complex                      
              dimensions.                                                                    
                   Work will also be done investigating specific one-parameter               
              families of differential operators of second order to determine                
              conditions under which they will be analytic hypoelliptic and on               
              pseudodifferential operators defined on general nilpotent Lie                  
              groups.
