Title       : Roles of Chloroplast and Extrachloroplastic Amylolytic Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1990      
File        : a9003937

Award Number: 9003937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley H. Duke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia A. Henson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The relative roles of chloroplastic amylolytic enzymes in                      
              intiating leaf starch degradation and metabolizing the                         
              immediate products of starch grain degradation are unknown.                    
              The roles of the extrachloroplastic amyloytic enzymes in                       
              photosynthetic tissues have yet to be elucidated.  In species                  
              that have been examined, most of the amylolytic activity in                    
              photosynthetic tissues is extrachloroplastic, with B-amylase                   
              found primarily in the vacuole and a-amylase primarily in the                  
              apoplast.  This research identifies the chloroplast                            
              amylolytic enzymes that can directly attack leaf starch                        
              granules, and those that cannot, and determines how these                      
              enzymes might act together to degrade leaf starch; (2)                         
              characterizes chloroplastic and extrachloroplastic a-                          
              glucosidase; and (3) verifies or disproves the localization                    
              of the primarily apoplastic a-amylase, the primarily vacuolar                  
              B-amylase, and a-glucosidases by immunohistochemistry.                         
                                                                                             
              Starch, an end-product of higher plant photosynthesis, is                      
              stored in leaves, stems, roots and seeds as an energy                          
              reserve.  During the night and other periods of reduced                        
              photosynthetic rates, starch degradation is the most                           
              important source of substrates for metabolic processes in                      
              leaves of many higher plants.  Although leaf starch                            
              degradation is an important process in the regulation of                       
              plant metabolism and plant development, little is known about                  
              its regulation.  Identification of the enzymes that actually                   
              attack leaf granules is a prerequisite to elucidating the                      
              mechanisms which regulate starch degradation and, therefore,                   
              carbon metabolism in plants.***//
