Title       : Mathematical Sciences: On the Existence and Qualitative Properties of Solutions
               of Nonlinear Partical Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1990     
File        : a9003694

Award Number: 9003694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39260              (Estimated)
Investigator: Congming Li   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The focus of this work will be the study of monotonicity and              
              symmetry properties of solutions of partial differential                       
              equations.  Equations of interest include those arising in                     
              modeling vibrations and in nonlinear Schrodinger equations.  They              
              fall into the classes known as fully nonlinear elliptic and                    
              parabolic equations.  One is interested in understanding                       
              solutions where the minimal period is prescribed or the nature of              
              the singularity where a solution ceases to exist (blow up).                    
              Progress in the first case has been made; the major obstacle to                
              be overcome rests with the complexity of the infinite dimensional              
              kernel of the wave operator.  Development in the study of blow up              
              of solutions of the Schrodinger equation have advanced                         
              considerably in the past decade.  It has been shown that when the              
              spatial domain is star-shaped, solutions do blow up in finite                  
              time.  Work will continue in this vein to understand better the                
              nature of the singularity and to obtain sharper estimates                      
              regarding the time at which the blow up can be expected.                       
              Currently, many related estimates are very crude.  The onset of                
              blow up is not yet known to have physical significance because                 
              the minimal possible time may be exponentially large.                          
                   Other work will investigate the existence, uniqueness and                 
              spatial decay properties of solutions of traveling waves arising               
              from dynamics and combustion problems.
