Title       : Regulation of the Protein Glycosylation Pathway in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9003409

Award Number: 9003409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton E. Ballou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae makes a variety of                          
              glycoproteins, called mannoproteins owing to the high content of               
              mannose.  These mannoproteins contain both O- and N-linked                     
              carbohydrate chains, and differences in the structure of the                   
              carbohydrate component have been found between different                       
              mannoproteins and between mannoproteins localized to different                 
              parts of the cell.  The synthesis of mature N-linked chains                    
              involves initiation of outer chain addition to the core                        
              precursor, followed by elongation, termination, branching, and                 
              then maturation by mannosylphosphorylation and alpha 1-3-                      
              mannosylation.  The objective of this research is to investigate               
              the enzymology of the termination reaction which regulates                     
              whether the N-linked chains are of the small or large type.  A                 
              specific assay will be developed for the terminase activity so                 
              that it can be measured in the presence of other                               
              mannosyltransferases in crude extracts.  The terminase will be                 
              purified by standard procedures, and factors that modulate its                 
              activity will be studied.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae, common baker's yeast, provides a useful              
              model for studies on eucaryotic development and on the structural              
              function relationships of the carbohydrate component of                        
              glycoproteins.  This work will lead to a better understanding of               
              the developmental role of these compounds.  Yeasts are important               
              in biotechnology and the results of these studies may form the                 
              basis for developing new useful types of yeasts.
