Title       : Probing the Infra-Structure of Two Deoxynucleotide Metabolizing Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9003737

Award Number: 9003737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gladys F. Maley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NY State Dept of Health
	      66 Hackett Blvd 3rd Floor
	      Albany, NY  122091718    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A detailed study of the enzymes, deoxycytidylate (dCMP) (dCD) and              
              thymidylate (dTMP) synthase (TS), will be conducted in order to                
              further understand how the structures of these two enzymes                     
              determine their catalytic specificities.  Both enzymes are                     
              important in providing pyrimidine nucleotide precursors of DNA                 
              and are notably elevated in mitotically active tissues and cells.              
              The availability of large quantities of T4 dCMP deaminase will                 
              make possible detailed studies on locating the substrate binding               
              sites as well as the allosteric sites for dCTP and dTTP.  Site-                
              specific and random mutagenesis studies are planned to modify                  
              amino acids at the above binding sites to determine their                      
              influence on enzyme activity.  dCMP deaminase is present in very               
              low amounts in eucaryotic cells, but has been isolated and                     
              purified to homogeneity by using a modified substrate affinity                 
              column.  Our ultimate goal is to use recombinant DNA methods to                
              synthesize large amounts of the human dCMP deaminase in bacteria               
              or yeast for further mechanistic and binding sites studies                     
              similar to those described in this proposal for T4 dCMP                        
              deaminase.  Attempts will be made to crystallize T4-dCMP                       
              deaminase, as has been described by us for T2-dCMP deaminase, for              
              x-ray structural studies in collaboration with colleagues at the               
              Medical Foundation of Buffalo, Inc.  Studies of T4-thymidylate                 
              synthase will center around the additional proteins                            
              expressed by the complete gene, which is composed of two exons                 
              separated by an intron.  The significance of the Td gene encoded               
              IRF protein, which possesses a specific endonuclease activity, will            
              be studied with respect to its properties, its solubilization,                 
              processing and potential transposase activity.  In addition the                
              high level expression of the exon I and exon II genes of Td will               
              be attempted.  Continued emphasis will be placed on x-ray                      
              crystallographic comparisons of TS from different sources, of                  
              particular interest will be the structure of the phi3T phage TS.
