Title       : An Archive for the Human Genome Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1990   
File        : a9003295

Award Number: 9003295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1990   
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Cook-Deegan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anita Nolen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Doris Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The Human Genome Project burst upon the scene in the 1985.  Since              
              then, it has been a major topic of debate among life scientists.               
              The Genome Project is often touted as the first foray into Big                 
              Biology -- a biological equivalent to the Apollo and Manhattan                 
              Projects.  While much of this is mere hyperbole, proposing to                  
              examine human genetics at the cellular, organismal, and population             
              levels is nonetheless audacious.  The specific components of genome            
              projects -- genetic maps, physical maps, DNA sequence information,             
              and tools to produce and analyze these -- will be useful for the               
              future study of human biology and pathology.  The techniques and               
              instruments will be applicable to the study of all organisms.                  
                                                                                             
              The debate about genome projects has had the feel of historical                
              importance since its inception.  Those arguing for and against it,             
              but particularly the proponents, have self-consciously placed the              
              Project in a prominent position among the landmarks of biology.                
              Whether it belongs in this pantheon remains to be seen, but the                
              quality and intensity of debate and the extraordinary power and                
              character of the advocates makes the Human Genome Project a                    
              wonderful case study in how a scientific project is placed on the              
              national agenda, and what transpires once it is there.                         
                                                                                             
              The Genome Project is thus and ideal opportunity to document the               
              life sciences in transition from pure cottage industry to a mix of             
              Big and little science.  If the Project proves as important as some            
              believe it will, then document its early history will be of immense            
              interest to future historians, sociologists, philosophers, and                 
              political scientists, not to mention medical doctors and                       
              scientists.  If the Project fails to meet expectations, then it                
              will be a conspicuous failure and its early history will still be              
              of great interest.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Dr. Cook-Deegan, former Executive Director of the Biomedical Ethics            
              Advisory Committee, along with Doris Goldstein, Director, and Anita            
              Nolen, Archivist, of the Kennedy Institute Library of Georgetown               
              University, will assemble a comprehensive bibliography and create              
              an oral history resource focused on the early history of the Genome            
              Project.  Because of the evanescence of documentation and memory               
              of the individuals involved, it is essential to move quickly now.
