Title       : Professional Development Award in Studies in Science, Technology and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1990       
File        : a9003063

Award Number: 9003063
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Dinsmore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1353,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Dinsmore, a professor of anatomy at Rush Medical College,                  
              is undertaking a training/study and research program under the                 
              guidance of Dr. Robert J. Richards in the Program of History                   
              and Philosophy of Science at the University of Chicago.  He                    
              is also working with Dr. Frederick Churchill of Indiana                        
              University.  During the course of this professional                            
              development award, Dr. Dinsmore is gaining familiarity with                    
              and experience in the methods and materials of the history of                  
              science and acquiring the skills in doing research in this                     
              area.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The research component of this award is directed towards                       
              examining the transformation of zoology from an observational                  
              to a controlled experimental science.  Dr. Dinsmore                            
              hypothesizes that this transformation occurred in the 18th                     
              century and centered on the issue of animal regeneration                       
              studies.  Dr. Dinsmore has found that from the start of these                  
              regeneration studies, the simplicity of experimental execution                 
              allowed virtually anyone to repeat the observations; the                       
              network of correspondence assured that the discovery of animal                 
              regeneration would be broadcast widely and that the                            
              experiments would be replicated with varying results and                       
              interpretations; and the novelty of the results would attract                  
              wide attention from a broad range of the educated public.                      
              Dr. Dinsmore is investigating how these circumstances helped                   
              to transform what had typically been an examination of                         
              "curiosities of nature" into a systematic science.  He is                      
              carrying this research out at the University of Chicago, at                    
              Indiana University and at the Bibliotheque Publique et                         
              Universitaire in Geneva Switzerland.
