Title       : Cell Cycle Regulation of Microtubule Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1992   
File        : a9003544

Award Number: 9003544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy A. Suprenant ksupre@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The intent of this study is to identify the macromolecules                
              involved in the regulation of microtubule assembly during the                  
              interphase-to- mitosis transition in developing sea urchin                     
              embryos. Unfertilized sea urchin eggs are arrested at G1 of the                
              first mitotic cycle and have few, if any assembled microtubules                
              despite a large pool of tubulin subunits.  Following                           
              fertilization microtubules of the first cleavage mitotic                       
              apparatus are synchronously assembled.  Therefore the                          
              developing sea urchin embryo can be viewed as an inducible model               
              system for studying the regulation of microtubule assembly.                    
                                                                                             
                   It has been recently discovered that interphase-arrested egg              
              cells contain two novel inhibitors of microtubule assembly- a                  
              minus-end inhibitor and a pH-dependent plus-end inhibitor.  The                
              goal of the proposed research is to isolate and characterize                   
              these unique factors during the cell cycle.  Preliminary                       
              experiments with such diverse sources as sea urchin eggs, surf                 
              clam oocytes, mouse B16 cultured melanoma cells, squid optic lobe              
              and mammalian brain tissue suggest that these negative control                 
              factors may exist in all eukaryotic cells, particularly where                  
              cytoplasmic microtubules are rapidly assembled and disassembled                
              in a controlled manner during the cell cycle.                                  
                                                                                             
                   The interconversion of mitotic and interphase microtubule                 
              arrays during the cell cycle is a fundamental problem of cellular              
              morphogenesis.  The process is of obvious importance for cell                  
              division but also for developmental processes such as neuronal                 
              growth and plasticity.  These studies are expected to increase                 
              our understanding of fundamental mechanisms whereby microtubule                
              assembly is regulated in the living cell.
