Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology, Geometry, and Energetics ofClosed Circular DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1992       
File        : a9003298

Award Number: 9003298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37874              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. White   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this research is to understand the                       
              structure and dynamics of supercoiled DNA.  Emphasis will be on                
              the determination of the three-dimensional structure of                        
              supercoiled DNA as a function of linking number; upon the                      
              prediction of interaction of local segments that are separated by              
              a considerable distance along the contour length of the DNA; and               
              upon the elucidation of the effects on DNA structure of wrapping               
              on a protein surface.  The specific aims are divided into three                
              categories.  (1)  Description of the tertiary structure of                     
              supercoiled DNA using the finite element method.  The finite                   
              element method from nonlinear structural mechanics will be                     
              applied to the analysis of closed DNA  structure.  Energy                      
              minimization criteria will be used to predict the most stable                  
              configuration at each linking number.  The writhe and twist will               
              be calculated and the results used to predict the hydrodynamic                 
              behavior of closed DNA as well as the equilibrium distribution of              
              topoisomers.  (2)  Description of the generalized helical                      
              periodicity of supercoiled DNA.  The generalized winding number                
              and generalized helical repeat will be defined for supercoiled                 
              DNA and a formula for the linking number of the DNA developed in               
              terms of this winding number.  These results will be applied to                
              various experiments involving nuclease digestion and chemical                  
              probes in vitro and phasing in vivo.  (3)  Determination of the                
              writhe, the surface twist and the surface linking number for DNA               
              wrapped on piecewise smooth surfaces.  Writhe and the surface                  
              twist will be calculated for closed circular DNA wrapped on a                  
              connected series of proteins of various geometric shapes.  The                 
              writhe will be analyzed into its piecewise components and into                 
              the contributions due to pairwise interactions, including those                
              between the protein complexes, between the linker regions, and                 
              between the protein complexes and the linker regions.
