Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: A Study of Adsorbed Protein Interactions Using the
               Surface Force Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1990 
File        : a9003988

Award Number: 9003988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37198              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Tilton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1970,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: A Study of Adsorbed Protein                       
              Interactions Using the Surface Force Apparatus                                 
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable US scientists and engineers to                         
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or                            
              complimentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions                
              in foreign countries.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This award will support a 12 month visit by Dr. Robert D.                      
              Tilton to go to Sweden to work with Dr. Per Claesson of the                    
              Institute for Surface Chemistry on "A Study of Adsorbed                        
              Protein Interactions Using the Surface Force Apparatus."  Dr.                  
              Tilton plans to use the surface force apparatus to measure                     
              the force-distance relationships characterizing the                            
              intermolecular interactions experienced by adsorbed proteins.                  
              With this recently developed technique, forces as small as                     
              10-to-the-minus-7 N are measured between opposing crossed                      
              mica cylinders at separations resolvable to less than 1nm.                     
              The extreme sensitivity of the surface force apparatus makes                   
              it useful in the study of the forces that govern the behavior                  
              of molecular and colloidal systems.  This approach is                          
              especially useful to characterize non-DLVO forces, such as                     
              repulsive hydration and attractive hydrophobic forces, that                    
              are important in biological and colloidal systems.  Use of                     
              the surface force apparatus to quantitatively study the                        
              character of the interactions of adsorbed proteins with                        
              surfaces and with other biomolecules will improve our                          
              understanding of the basic phenomena driving protein                           
              adsorption, and thus will assist in the development of                         
              materials that contact the biological environment.                             
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
