Title       : Phosphatidylcholine Synthesis in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9003817

Award Number: 9003817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas S. Moore btmoor@unix1.sncc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The synthesis of phosphatidylcholine in plants has been                        
              thought to occur primarily through phosphorylation of                          
              choline, followed by conversion to CDPcholine, and then                        
              transfer of a phosphatidate group to the choline to give the                   
              final lipid product.  An alternate pathway has been proposed                   
              which involves three sequential methylations, utilizing S-                     
              adenosyl-L-methionine, of the amino group of                                   
              phosphatidylethanolamine.  Recent research has indicated that                  
              in some tissues, such as castor bean endosperm, the choline                    
              produced from a commonly assumed precursor, L-serine, may not                  
              be available for phosphatidylcholine synthesis.  In addition,                  
              evidence now is available that in several tissues                              
              phosphatidylethanolamine does not act as a substrate for                       
              methylation, unlike the case in yeast and mammalian tissues.                   
              Thus, either plants differ in some respects from yeast and                     
              mammalian systems in the exact pathways of methylation and                     
              their regulation, or some aspects of the methylation scheme                    
              have not been detected and examined in these other systems.                    
              The goals of this proposal are to examine these newly                          
              described initial methylation enzymes in detail, to try to                     
              determine a source of choline for the nucleotide (CDP-                         
              derivative) pathway (and for regulation of the functioning of                  
              the methylation pathway), and to continue our investigations                   
              into the enzymes of the nucleotide pathway.  We will                           
              characterize the methylation enzymes, work on their                            
              purifications, and test for regulation through allosteric                      
              and/or membrane-enzyme interactions as well as                                 
              phosphorylation/dephosphorylation.  Various plant organs,                      
              particularly leaves and roots, will be tested for a capacity                   
              to synthesize and export choline or choline-P.                                 
                                                                                             
              Phospholipids are important components of membranes of all                     
              living organisms.  They play crucial structural and metabolic                  
              role; yet their pathways of synthesis are incompletely known,                  
              especially in plants.  This project affords the opportunity                    
              to elucidate important pathways of phospholipid synthesis and                  
              regulation in a model plant system.***//
