Title       : Crystal Chemical Controls on Trace Element Incorporation in Carbonate Minerals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1990       
File        : a9003915

Award Number: 9003915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Reeder rjreeder@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Trace and minor element distributions have played a major role in              
              interpreting carbonate mineral formation and diagenesis in                     
              sedimentary environments.  Sorption and coprecipitation processes              
              involving carbonates also figure importantly in controlling trace              
              metal concentrations in near-surface waters.  However, major                   
              limitations in efforts to model such processes quantitatively                  
              result from a poor understanding of factors that influence                     
              partitioning of elements between aqueous solutions and carbonate               
              minerals, especially the abundant mineral calcite.                             
              Findings that surface crystal structure, and particularly the                  
              geometry and structure of growth steps, exert strong influences                
              on selective element incorporation, offer a means by which to                  
              examine the very surface mechanisms that cause such selectivity                
              in partitioning.  By correlating surface structural features                   
              imaged by differential interference contrast microscopy with                   
              quantitative trends of selective enrichment for various elements               
              over a range of conditions, the relative influences of growth                  
              rate and surface structure on element partitioning will be                     
              evaluated.                                                                     
              The present research project will provide insight to the most                  
              fundamental mechanisms operating during crystal growth,                        
              specifically those factors that influence trace and minor element              
              distribution.  In addition, this research  will lead to a                      
              capability of predicting differential partitioning trends that                 
              are element specific and their associated crystal growth rate                  
              effects.
