Title       : A Model for Anomaly Resolution in Scientific Change (History and Philosophy of
               Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1990      
File        : a9003142

Award Number: 9003142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lindley Darden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                Science is a problem-solving activity.  This project will explore            
              strategies for solving problems, especially strategies for forming,            
              testing and revising hypotheses.  In previous work, strategies                 
              exemplified in a historical case were analyzed, including strategies           
              for resolving anomalies for a theory and for producing an improved             
              version of the theory.  This project will test the sufficiency of such         
              strategies in a computer model, using techniques from artificial               
              intelligence.  The model will provide a method for representing a              
              biological theory (Mendelian genetics) and will incorporate reasoning          
              strategies to model changes in that theory.  Experiments with                  
              alternative reasoning strategies will be explored with the model.              
              The completion of this project will contribute to the growing body of          
              knowledge about computational methods for representing scientific              
              theories and reasoning about such theories.                                    
                Interactive activities include teaching a graduate course on                 
              computational philosophy of science, giving two departmental                   
              colloquia presentations, and, with support from the Cognitive Science          
              Center, organizing a symposium on Career Opportunities for Women in            
              Cognitive Science.                                                             
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a                     
              valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
