Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Crossed Product Algebras and Non-Commutative Duality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1991       
File        : a9003075

Award Number: 9003075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kevin Clancey                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47252              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliot C. Gootman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Professor Gootman will continue his investigations                        
              concerning the ideal structure, representation theory, and dual                
              topology of crossed product C*-algebras GxA determined by an                   
              action or coaction of a locally compact G on a C*-algebra A.  As               
              in the past, Professor Gootman will combine the three major                    
              methods for the study of such algebras: non-commutative duality                
              theory, representation theory, and spectral methods (non-abelian               
              harmonic analysis).  Following such an approach, the proposer has              
              already made progress on similar questions in collaboration with               
              Professor Aldo Lazar.  Professor Gootman will attempt to                       
              generalize a spectral characterization of simplicity of GxA which              
              came out of this collaboration to general amenable G, and also                 
              to extend his investigations concerning the duality between                    
              induction and restriction of representations.  This study should               
              yield new information on ordinary crossed products, and in turn                
              on groups, historically one of the major motivations for studying              
              crossed products.                                                              
                   The notion of a C* algebra is an abstraction of the idea of               
              a family of linear transformations on a space.  These                          
              transformations can also be thought of as having values in the                 
              states of the space, and the property of this family which is                  
              responsible for the symbol * is the fact that the algebra is                   
              generated by transformations whose values in these states are                  
              real numbers.  The fact that these objects appear naturally in                 
              many branches of mathematics and physics makes them important to               
              study.
