Title       : Reciprocal Interactions Between Herbivores and Plant Pathogens on Cottonwood
               (Biotic Systems and Resources)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1993      
File        : a9003124

Award Number: 9003124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vera A. Krischik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                It is recognized that abiotic "stress" or damage and insect and              
              disease attack on plants can change their subsequent resistance to             
              insects and diseases.  However, there is little consensus on whether           
              stress and damage have the same effects; whether abiotic and biotic            
              perturbations have the same effects; whether insects and diseases              
              produce the same effects; whether overall resistance increases or              
              decreases; and what the mechanisms and evolutionary implications are.          
              In this research, an integrated approach will be taken using                   
              experiments with a model system--cottonwood, a beetle, an aphid, and           
              rust and leaf-spot fungi--in order to determine if stress/damage               
              caused by different insects or diseases results in consistent patterns         
              of plant physical and chemical characteristics and insect and disease          
              performance.  By comparing these results with data on chemical and             
              resistance changes due to abiotic ozone induced stress, the overall            
              patterns of physical, chemical and biotic changes can be elucidated,           
              which mechanisms may be responsible can be infered, and the                    
              implications to the evolution of plant defense can be deduced.  An             
              understanding of how a plant responds to damage and stress due to              
              ozone as well as insect herbivory and pathogen-caused disease allows           
              us to predict the consequences of pollution on plant growth and                
              mortality.  These findings have direct implications to issues in               
              agriculture and forestry on the consequences of air pollution, ozone,          
              and acid rain on crop yield and forest vigor.                                  
                Dr. Krischik will teach a topic seminar in plant-insect-microbial            
              interactions and be a panel member in a full-day forum on                      
              "Opportunities in Ecology."  Through the IES Education Program, she            
              will visit area schools and encourage young women to pursue careers in         
              science and teach in a "Workshop for School Science Teachers."                 
              Dr. Krischik will also lecture in the ecology courses offered at               
              nearby Vassar College.                                                         
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
