Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry of Singularities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1992      
File        : a9003498

Award Number: 9003498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dung Trang Le   (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Massey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terence J. Gaffney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Gaffney, Le and Massey will continue their study of the                   
              singularities of complex analytic spaces and mappings.                         
                   Gaffney will investigate the equisingularity of families of               
              mappings using analytic invariants, extending his results to C-                
              zero finitely determined germs, and he will continue to develop                
              an infinitesimal theory of Whitney equisingularity using integral              
              closure operations.  With Massey, he will investigate the                      
              correct generalizations of the Le cycles to the complete                       
              intersection case.  Using blowing up operations, he will study                 
              the topology of maps between low dimensional spaces.                           
                   Le will investigate the relation between algebraic depth and              
              rectified homotopical depth, continuing his study of Lefschetz                 
              type theorems for singular spaces.  Le also plans to give a new                
              proof of the Le-Ramanujam theorem using vector fields, and he                  
              plans to study the canonical decomposition of the local monodromy              
              of complex hypersurfaces and its links with the resolution of                  
              singularities and the geometry of polars.                                      
                   Massey will investigate questions concerning a topologically              
              invariant decomposition of a constructible function, the Euler                 
              characteristic of the Milnor fibre of f-f(p) at p, and the                     
              related question of how the sheaf of vanishing cycles of a map                 
              decomposes as a perverse sheaf.  The machinery of the derived                  
              category should allow for a powerful attack on the structure of                
              non-isolated hypersurface singularities.                                       
                   Understanding singular spaces is important for realistic                  
              models of physical phenomena.  Perhaps the most widely known                   
              singularity is the cosmologists' "big bang."
