Title       : Novel Techniques for the Synthesis and Coupling of Peptide Segments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1992        
File        : a9003192

Award Number: 9003192
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Carpino cjhorton@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              This research is being funded by the Organic Synthesis                         
              Chemistry Program.  New techniques for the synthesis of                        
              naturally occurring medium or long chain peptides are being                    
              developed which will make them rapidly available in multi-gram                 
              quantities for testing purposes.                                               
                                                                                             
              New synthetic techniques based on base- and solvent-sensitive                  
              amino-protecting groups promise to make available quickly                      
              multi-gram quantities of shorter peptides and to markedly                      
              improve the synthesis of small quantities of longer peptides.                  
              Methods for the synthesis of long peptide chains of 100 or more                
              amino acid units which involve the coupling of segments enjoy                  
              significant advantages over those involving stepwise                           
              approaches.  Three methods for assembling the appropriate                      
              segments will be studied:  (a) the FMOC/Polyamine solution                     
              technique, (b) the two polymer ("inverse merrifield") approach                 
              and (c) the standard Merrifield solid phase method.  In all                    
              three approaches the applicability of newly-discovered FMOC                    
              amino acid fluorides as rapid-acting, inexpensive coupling                     
              agents will be studied.  Such reagents are now available for                   
              all but four of the common amino acids.  Synthesis of                          
              appropriate acid fluoride reagents for these four compounds                    
              (Arg, Asn, Gln, His) will be developed.  To facilitate solid                   
              phase syntheses two special resin supports will be                             
              investigated:  (a) tertiary alcohol resins which should                        
              completely inhibit loss of peptide from the resin due to                       
              diketopiperazine formation at the depeptide stage, especially                  
              in the case of C-terminal or penultimate proline or glycine and                
              (b) resin supports bearing tertiary aminoalcohol functions                     
              which should serve to catalyse loading of the first amino acid                 
              and thereby promote complete on-line automated syntheses from                  
              the first to the last amino acid.  Once rapid, routine methods                 
              for the synthesis of protected segments are available, both                    
              solution and solid phase methods of segment coupling will be                   
              examined.  A novel method of effecting racemization-free                       
              segment coupling involving protection of the C-terminal amide                  
              bond by FM-bar or a related amide protectant will be pursued.                  
              The model chosen to study the application of these techniques                  
              is a 19-unit segment of a silkworm prothoracicotropic hormone,                 
              PTTH-II-(1-19).
