Title       : Application of Accelerators in Research and Industry, International Conference,
               Denton, TX Nov 5-8, 1990, Group Travel Award in U.S. and Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1990       
File        : a9003846

Award Number: 9003846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 15,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome L. Duggan hall@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              Description: This project provides support for participation by                
              eight scientists from India and one from Egypt in the 11th                     
              Conference on the Application of Accelerators in Research and                  
              Industry to be held at the University of North Texas, Denton, TX               
              between November 5 and 8, 1990.  The purpose of the  conference is             
              to review current research and the wealth of industrial                        
              applications that are in progress throughout the world with                    
              accelerators.  The conference is composed of two symposia which run            
              in parallel, the Research Symposium, and the Industrial                        
              Applications of Accelerators.  Some of the sessions are of common              
              interest and will be open for both groups.  Areas where papers have            
              been accepted include:  Atomic physics and related phenomena, Trace            
              & Surface Analysis with Ion Beams, Electron Beam Processing,                   
              Nuclear Physics, CTR & Related Phenomena, Neutron Activation                   
              Analysis & Bulk Analysis with Accelerators, Radiological Safety                
              Aspects of Accelerators, Ion Implantation with particular emphasis             
              on Semiconductors & Metallurgical Applications, Geosciences and                
              Related Phenomena, Charged Particle Microprobes, Super SIMS, Carbon            
              Dating, Computer Tomography, Synchrotron Light Source experiments,             
              Insitu Beams, Radiation Interaction with Ion Beams, Accelerator and            
              component Design & Automation, Targetry, Detection & electronics,              
              Medical, Biological & Chemical Applications, Material Analysis with            
              Ion Beams, Channeling, Stopping Power & Radiation Effects.  The                
              conference is a topical conference of the American Physical Society            
              and the abstracts will be published in the September 1990 issue of             
              the Bulletin.  Over 150 scientists from India, and 18 from Egypt               
              have expressed interest in attending.  A selection committee from              
              academia, industry and government will select those to receive                 
              support.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Scope:  Past participation of foreign scientists in this series of             
              conferences has proved to be quite beneficial to all concerned.                
              This is the only conference in the world that addresses itself to              
              research and industrial applications of accelerators.  Participants            
              get to hear "state-of-the-art" papers, and to discuss common                   
              problems with world experts.  Most participating countries have                
              obtained accelerators from U.S. manufacturers, and the interaction             
              of user scientists with scientists in the accelerator manufacturing            
              industry is important.
