Title       : Binding Protein Medicated Membrane Transport Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1992     
File        : a9003012

Award Number: 9003012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Hermodson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The structure and function of the components of the binding                    
              protein mediated membrane transport system for ribose in E. coli               
              will be probed by two main approaches.  First, site-directed                   
              mutagenesis studies on the ribose binding protein will be                      
              continued in order to define the surfaces on the ribose binding                
              protein which interact with the chemotaxis (trg) and the ribose                
              transport receptors on the cytoplasmic membrane.  Our recant                   
              studies of this type located one site near the "hinge" of the                  
              binding protein which eliminated chemotaxis when an Ile residue                
              was changed to Arg.  Further probing of this site and residues                 
              near it are planned as well as sites near the cleft of the                     
              binding protein which appear to affect transport.                              
              Second, overexpression, isolation, and characterization of the                 
              components of the membrane transport complex for ribose will be                
              continued.  Two of the three proteins in the complex have been                 
              purified, one of which has been shown to be homologous to a                    
              family of ATP-binding proteins including the eukaryotic multiple               
              drug resistance proteins and the newly identified cystic                       
              fibrosis-related protein.  Physical and biochemical studies will               
              be performed on the purified transport protein, and attempts to                
              overexpress the third will be continued.  Once all three are                   
              produced, reconstitution of the transporter in vitro will be                   
              pursued.  A reconstituted system, along with the information                   
              related to the surface of the binding protein which interacts                  
              with the transported, will allow future biochemical studies of                 
              the mechanism of transport,  A related objective is to                         
              overexpress the repressor for the rbs operon, a molecule which                 
              was shown to be homologous both to a family of repressors and                  
              also to the family of binding proteins to which ribose binding                 
              protein belongs.  This led to a model for the repressor mechanism              
              which will be testable biochemically and structurally once                     
              significant amounts of the pure repressor are obtained.
