Title       : Experimental Determination of the Partitioning Behavior Of First Transition
               Series and High Field Strength Elements Between Oxide Phases and Basaltic and
               Intermediate Magmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1990      
File        : a9003930

Award Number: 9003930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. Nielsen rnielsen@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin R. Fisk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The information derived from this investigation will be                        
              applicable to such diverse problems as the origin of island arc                
              volcanic series and the trace element characteristics of the                   
              mantle as well as being applicable to the understanding of the                 
              formation and evolution of the majority of volcanic rocks on                   
              earth.  In addition, this data will be used to calculate mineral-              
              liquid expressions to improve our existing model for the                       
              simulation of igneous differentiation.                                         
              To understand the evolution of natural volcanic magmas, we must                
              understand the chemical relationship between the magmatic liquid               
              and the minerals that crystallize from it.  At present, there is               
              not enough data to define this chemical relationship for major                 
              and trace elements for several important minerals in basalt                    
              magmas.  The focus of our proposed two-year project is to                      
              determine experimentally the mineral-liquid relationship for                   
              magnetite and ilmenite in natural silicate liquids that range in               
              composition from basalt to dacite.  Our knowledge of trace                     
              element behavior in magmas that crystallize magnetite and                      
              ilmenite is largely restricted to a few experiments and to                     
              measurements on mechanically separated oxides.  The published                  
              results of these studies can vary by a factor of 100 for a given               
              element.  Our two objectives are to define magnetite and                       
              ilmenite-liquid phase equilibria, and to determine the                         
              geochemical behavior of several trace elements between magnetite,              
              ilmenite and magmatic liquid.  The trace elements to be studied                
              include members of the first transition series (V, Ti, Ni, Sc)                 
              and the high field strength elements (Hf, Zr, Nb, Ta, Th, U).  We              
              will determine the major and trace element compositions of the                 
              magnetite and co-existing glass by electron microprobe.  The                   
              concentration of the trace elements will be raised above the                   
              detection limits of the microprobe by adding pure oxides of those              
              elements to the samples in the O.5-1.O% range.  In addition, low               
              concentration dopant (10-200 ppm) experiments will be conducted                
              and analyzed by ion probe.  Most experiments will be done at 1-                
              atm.  However, to test the effect of pressure, experiments will                
              be conducted at 5, 10, 15, and 25 kb on three of the starting                  
              compositions.  The range of oxide saturation and oxide                         
              composition will be extended by Ti and Fe addition, and by using               
              a range of oxygen fugacities.
