Title       : Dissertation Research: Ethnic Groups, Mobility, and the Material World in an
               Emergent Market Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1990     
File        : a9003961

Award Number: 9003961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7080               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Deagan deagan@nervm.nerdc.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of his advisors Drs. Kathleen Deagan and                   
              Elizabeth Wing, Mr. James Cusick will analyze material from the                
              archaeological site of St. Augustine.  The resulting data will                 
              provide the basis for his doctoral dissertation.  St. Augustine,               
              located in Florida, is one of the oldest European settlements in               
              the New World.  It was founded by the Spanish but also occupied                
              by Minorcans as well as other ethnic groups.  Because of its age               
              and cultural complexity, the site has been extensively excavated.              
              Its importance rests not only on the amount of archaeological                  
              material which has been recovered but also on the detailed                     
              archival records which contain information on individual                       
              families.  Mr. Cusick will focus his attention on a sample of                  
              nine households of both Spanish and of Minorcan origin.  Not only              
              is archival information available for all but the living sites of              
              each have been carefully excavated.  Mr. Cusick will integrate                 
              the documentary evidence with information derived from analysis                
              of material objects, floral, and faunal remains.  He will examine              
              how the economic and social strategies of these families changed               
              over time and how these shifts are related to ethnic, economic,                
              and status factors.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to examine the role which ethnicity                
              plays in shaping household adaptation strategies.  Minorcans were              
              a minority group in St. Augustine, and with joint archaeological               
              and archival data it will be possible to determine how such                    
              groups reacted, in comparison with the dominant Spanish majority,              
              to changing economic and political conditions.  One major                      
              theoretical question debated in the sociological literature                    
              concerns the extent to which response follows ethnic lines.  Some              
              argue it is more closely correlated with cross cutting economic                
              distinctions.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  First, it                     
              provides a unique insight into mechanisms for ethnic adaptation                
              and assimilation and, thus, is directly relevant to social issues              
              faced by the United States today.  Secondly, it will assist in                 
              the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
