Title       : Designing a Computer System to Support an Electronic Scientific Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1990       
File        : a9003540

Award Number: 9003540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43920              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Schatz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Professor Schatz is undertaking a one-year investigation to                    
              understand and outline the design of a computer system to                      
              support an electronic scientific community.  While later                       
              proposals will be submitted to support the system, this                        
              project is to lay the necessary groundwork to enable the                       
              implementation to proceed as planned.  When implemented, this                  
              system should be a new form of biological instrumentation                      
              which can effectively manipulate scientific databases.                         
              Appropriate community knowledge will be identified to be                       
              collected into a digital library and the design will                           
              incorporate the systems technology necessary to manipulate                     
              this library over nationwide networks.  The community chosen                   
              is the group of scientists studying the nematode worm                          
              Caenorhabditis elegans, a major model organism in molecular                    
              biology.  The "worm community" consists of some 500 members                    
              worldwide, with an unusual degree of open communication and                    
              sharing of unpublished information.  The community knowledge                   
              includes formal data, such as published literature and                         
              experimental results, and informal data, such as newsletters                   
              and experimental methods.  The designed system will capture                    
              a significant portion of this knowledge in electronic form and                 
              encode it into a "worm information space" which can be                         
              transparently browsed by scientists anywhere on nationwide                     
              scientific networks.  Preparation of the system design                         
              requires understanding user needs and available technology.                    
              this will be accomplished by working with researchers who will                 
              be the system's initial users and who are experts on the                       
              available data and technology.  Such investigation should                      
              enable the design to ensure that the system will contribute                    
              to making valuable scientific discoveries.
