Title       : Porphyrin Sponges: Programmable Lattice Clathrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9003933

Award Number: 9003933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Strouse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank A. Anet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9239,
Abstract    :
              This award is made in the Materials Chemistry and Chemical                     
              Processing Initiative in support of the collaborative research                 
              of Professors Strouse and Anet at the University of California                 
              at Los Angeles. Joint funding is provided by the Divisions of                  
              Chemistry and Materials Research. The thrust of the research is                
              the synthesis, characterization and applications of                            
              programmable lattice clathrates prepared from metalloporphyrins.               
                                                                                             
              Crystalline metallotetraphenylporphyrin complexes represent a                  
              class of lattice clathrates in which the axial coordination                    
              sites of the porphyrin metal atoms are directed into                           
              hydrophobic channels. This feature provides a simple means for                 
              programming the clathrate lattice which will be the basis for a                
              new strategy for molecular recognition, to exercise control                    
              over the metal atom environment, or to manipulate the structure                
              of the porphyrin lattice. Applications will be sought which                    
              will take advantage of the rich chemistry of metalloporphyrins,                
              the accessibility and selectivity provided by the channel                      
              structure, and the rigidity of the clathrate lattice. Materials                
              characterization and synthetic modification studies will be                    
              directed toward applications which range from chemical                         
              separations to energy conversion.  Parallel chemical studies                   
              and computational analyses will be designed to provide a more                  
              fundamental understanding of the dynamics and energetics of                    
              clathrate binding. The database afforded by the combined                       
              investigations will allow efficient exploitation of these                      
              materials in a broad range of scientific and technological                     
              applications.
