Title       : Theoretical Studies of Heme Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a9817028

Award Number: 9817028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danni L. Harris dannil@purisima.molres.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gilda H. Loew  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Molecular Research Inst
	      2495 Old Middlefield Way
	      Mountain View, CA  94043    650/210-0310

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Loew 
MCB 9817028

The computational studies will focus on two peroxidases,
              horse radish peroxidase-C (HRP-C), and chloroperoxidase (CPO), with the most
              disparate structures and functions thus far observed for this ubiquitous family
              of metabolizing heme proteins. One type of study will focus on the role of the
              heme unit itself in the formation of the common catalytically active species of
              the two enzymes. To this end, the electronic structure and spectra of each of
              the four key CPO heme species proposed to participate in its enzymatic cycle
              will be calculated using the semi-empirical quantum chemical method,
              INDO/ROHF/CI successfully used in similar past studies. A second type of study
              will focus on understanding how the different protein environments in the two
              enzymes can nevertheless lead to the formation of the same enzymatically active
              species. This question will be addressed by performing molecular dynamics
              simulations of the full precursor protein-peroxide complex of both HRP-C and
              CPO using the empirical energy based Amber 4.1 suite of programs. The
              catalytically active enzyme species will then be used to characterize
              enzyme-substrate complexes to identify and compare substrate binding sites and
              the modes of binding of typical substrates of the two enzymes. These new
              insights will allow continued resolution of other challenging unresolved
              aspects of metabolic activity. Chief among these are the identification and
              characterization of the molecular determinants of substrate and product
              specificities in the two disparate metabolic pathways observed in both
              enzymes.

Multidisciplinary studies are required to elucidate enzyme
              structure-function relationships on a molecular level. Computational
              biochemistry can play an important role in this effort. The computational
              methods to be used here are applicable to the elucidation of unresolved aspects
              of the function of any enzyme for which a 3D structure has been determined,
              either by experimental or computational techniques. It is important however
              that insights obtained from these computational simulations of enzyme-substrate
              complexes be assessed by further experimental studies. The planned
              collaborations will ensure that this goal is achieved. Specifically, mutations
              at sites predicted as important for function will be made and their effect
              assessed in the laboratories of Paul Ortiz de Montellano and Andrew Smith for
              HRP-C and of Lowell Hager for CPO. These integrated collaborative efforts
              between structural, computational and molecular biology should provide
              significantly enhanced understanding of the relationship between structure and
              function of these two disparate peroxidases and the origin of both similarities
              and differences between them. Moreover, this integrated
              experimental/computational approach can be generalized to structure-function
              studies of other enzyme families.




