Title       : RUI: Role of Promoter Structure in Promoter Escape by RNA Polyemerase ll
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9817004

Award Number: 9817004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arik Dvir dvir@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    313/377-2100

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dvir

Ample evidence indicates that RNA polymerase II, immediately after
              initiating transcription and before becoming engaged in elongation, undergoes a
              significant physical transition. During this early stage, referred to as
              promoter escape, the transcription complex is relatively unstable and
              transcription is characterized by a significant extent of premature termination
              (abortive transcription). Recently it was discovered that early elongation
              complexes are susceptible to promoter-proximal arrest in the absence of ATP or
              the general transcription factor TFIIH. In addition, it was found that a
              downstream DNA region extending to position +35 to +45 relative to the
              transcription start site is required for promoter escape. The mechanism by
              which either of the above cofactors facilitates promoter escape remains to be
              determined. The principal objectives of the project are to analyze the effect
              of promoter DNA sequences on promoter escape and to examine the capacity of
              downstream promoter-DNA sequences to interact with specific proteins of the RNA
              polymerase II transcription complex. These goals will be accomplished by
              conducting site-directed mutagenesis of promoter sequences and by studies that
              include chemical crosslinking between the DNA template and DNA-bound proteins.
              This research will be carried out entirely in vitro using a purified,
              reconstituted enzyme system. These studies will increase our understanding of
              the biochemistry of mRNA synthesis, and will provide new insight into the
              evaluation of class II promoters.

Messenger RNA is copied from DNA by an
              enzyme complex including RNA polymerase II, and the beginning of this process
              can be divided into distinct initiation and elongation phases. The purpose of
              this project is to examine the role of a particular protein, TFIIH, in
              facilitating the transition from initiation to elongation. In addition,  the
              role of DNA sequences on both sides of the initiation site will be examined.
              These studies will increase our understanding of an important process which is
              required for the expression of all eukaryotic genes.

