Title       : Monitoring Technology: An Examination of the Regulatory Interface in the
               Implementation of Pollution Control Regulations, 1970 to 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9817913

Award Number: 9817913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88836              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh S. Gorman hsgorman@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
This study examines the regulatory interface that has been constructed between
              the operators of industrial plants and agencies responsible for implementing
              pollution control regulations passed since 1970. The purpose of the project is
              twofold: first, to better understand the technological and organizational
              challenges that firms and regulators faced in constructing this interface and
              second, to evaluate the limits of the existing regulatory interface in
              accommodating regulatory innovations such as emissions trading, the business
              desire for consistency, and the public desire for transparency.

In the
              1970s, Congress constructed the legislative framework on which our existing
              system of pollution control regulation rests. Much has written about the
              politics of getting this legislation passed and transformed into regulations,
              but relatively little systematic research has focused on the implementation of
              those regulations. The process by which a general piece of pollution control
              legislation eventually affects the operation of an industrial plant is quite
              complex, and a key step in this process is the development of an effective
              regulatory interface. Furthermore, to be effective in the long term, pollution
              control regulations must not only change industrial practices but also
              influence the way in which industrial technology develops. In general, such
              technological systems evolve as innovators seek to improve measures of system
              performance that they see as important. From this perspective, the
              effectiveness of pollution control regulations depends on the extent to which
              they are translated into measures of performance that firms accept as
              legitimate and actively seek to manage.

Specifically, this project will
              anchor its analysis in the regulatory histories of six petroleum refineries in
              the Great Lakes region. The purpose will not be to evaluate the compliance
              record of these refineries but to examine the specific interactions of specific
              regulatory agencies with specific industrial plants. The effort to construct
              the regulatory history of each refinery will be integrated into a year-long
              group practicum taken by students in the M.S. Environmental Policy Program at
              Michigan Technological University. One or two students will be assigned to each
              refinery, and the class will be guided through the research process as a team.
              In addition to assembling a general and regulatory history of each refinery,
              the students will determine what regulators and refinery operators currently
              measure and monitor, the flow of information between regulators and operators,
              how regulators decide whether or not action is necessary, and what type of
              action is possible.

After this first component of research is complete, the
              principal investigator will examine three of the six cases in more detail,
              focusing on the degree to which the measuring and monitoring systems in place
              have come to be integrated into the operation of these industrial plants.
              Through a survey and follow-up interviews, the PI will examine the problems and
              frustrations that various people associated with operating and regulating these
              plants have encountered over the years and the degree to which these problems
              have been addressed by technological, organizational, or regulatory changes. To
              help place these case histories in perspective and to account for changes over
              time, the PI will also trace industry-wide innovations relevant to the
              regulatory interface that have occurred over the last thirty years. Of special
              interest will be technological and organizational innovations that allow firms
              and regulators to measure and monitor discharges into the shared environment
              more systematically. Also of interest will be innovations that integrated
              production improvements with efforts to reduce or better manage effluents,
              emissions, leaks, spills, and discharges to the shared environment.

In the
              end, the regulatory interface that has been constructed over the last three
              decades influences numerous policy and business decisions being made today.
              Knowing more about how this regulatory interface has evolved informs current
              attempts to refine and reform various aspects of this interface.

