Title       : Urban Research Initiative: Shopping for Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1999  
File        : a9817790

Award Number: 9817790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285709             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Schneider   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Edelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1349      URBAN RSCH INITIATIVE PROPOSAL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research investigation, supported under the Urban Research Initiative,
              deals with a central issue of American school systems: school choice.  School
              choice has become a central tool in attempts to improve education and provide
              options to low-income parents.  But critics argue that because information
              about schools is difficult to obtain and hard to interpret, low-income parents,
              if given choice, will not choose well if they choose at all.  Many studies,
              beginning with those on the Alum Rock demonstration school choice program, have
              found that parents usually know very little about the alternatives available to
              them - - and this is especially true for minorities and lower SES parents. 
              Indeed, one group has argued that the low level of parent information is the
              "Achilles Heel" of choice plans.

School choice seeks to improve schools by
              introducing market-like reforms into an historical arrangement in which
              centralized school bureaucracies determined which schools children attended and
              in a system where parental input was minimal.  Many analysts have argued that
              in this monopoly-like situation, schools have no reason to perform well. 
              Choice, according to its proponents, will create a more competitive market for
              education, unleashing pressure on the schools to perform better.

But markets
              require information to function well.  Seizing on this well-known fact, critics
              of choice argue that education is a complex good, difficult to describe in a
              way that people understand, and that less-educated parents (who can probably
              benefit most from choice) are the least able to access and analyze information.
               In turn, given the lack of good information in the hands of
              "parent/consumers," the success of choice reforms is unlikely.

Working with
              two stakeholder groups with considerable experience working with both public
              and charter schools in Washington, DC, the research team investigates how
              school choice embodied in the creation of charter schools in Washington, DC,
              affects parent behavior.  In addition, the researchers use modern technology to
              provide a low-cost way of providing information on education choices to a
              population of inner-city parents.  The researchers assess the effects of these
              lower information costs on parent choice behavior, and develop a knowledge base
              on how to disseminate school information effectively and efficiently.

This
              study addresses directly one of the main objections raised by critics of choice
              who argue that, because of the costs of information, even if choice works it
              will help those who are better off rather than the poor.

