Title       : Colloidal Interactions of Latexes Stabilized with Tethered Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9817735

Award Number: 9817735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Mayes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9817735
Mayes
The objective of the proposed study is to develop a new
              experimental technique to directly measure force-distance profiles between
              interacting colloidal particles.  To accomplish this, model colloidal systems
              will first be synthesized by free-radical dispersion polymerization in
              water-based medium utilizing amphiphilic comb polymers as stabilizing agents. 
              The product of such a synthesis is a nearly monodisperse suspension of latex
              spheres, stabilized by the hydrophilic side chains of combs that become
              physically tethered to the latex particle surfaces.  By spreading a
              sub-monolayer of these spheres at the air-water interface of a Langmuir trough
              and compressing the surface, a signature of the force-distance profile between
              latex particles is recorded in the pressure-area isotherm.  As the particles
              are forced into close contact, the recorded pressure is governed by the
              interactions between pendant chains of the anchored combs.  Thus,
              molecular-level information of the grafted layer interactions is retrieved. 
              This "compressed latex" approach may be adapted to a 3-D solution cell that
              records osmotic pressure as a function of cell volume.  Guided by
              self-consistent mean-field model predictions, we will use this scheme to probe
              the influence of  relevant system parameters such as the size, dispersity, and
              glass transition of the latex particles, chemistry, length, and surface density
              of the stabilizer pendant chains, and solvent quality and temperature on
              particle-particle interactions.  The compressed latex studies will be
              complemented by studies using proven structural and surface characterization
              methods, such as dynamic light scattering, neutron scattering, neutron
              reflectivity, and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, to support the
              interpretation of pressure-area or pressure-volume profiles.
%%%
Results from
              this investigation could have widespread impact from both a scientific and
              technological viewpoint.  First, this study will document a new, relatively
              simple and inexpensive method to measure forces between colloidal particles. 
              Although colloids are ubiquitous in nature and important to numerous
              industries, scientists have surprisingly little experimental capability at
              present to directly quantify colloidal forces.  How the structure and chemistry
              of polymer stabilizers influence colloidal interactions is a topic of great
              interest.  The proposed experiments will test recent theories on colloidal
              stabilization, and provide insights that might be directly applied to
              industrial processes where controlling colloidal particle aggregation is highly
              desirable, e.g., in wastewater treatment, oil recovery, drug delivery, coating
              and binding operations, etc.  Moreover, materials developed for this study,
              namely the amphiphilic comb polymers and the water-based latexes, could prove
              useful for a broad range of commercial applications where stable hydrophilic
              surfaces are sought to improve surface wettability to inks, paints and glues,
              improve biocompatibility, reduce biofouling, and eliminate static charge
              build-up.
*** 

