Title       : Agency and Dynamics in Political Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a9817727

Award Number: 9817727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory N. Price                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Avinash K. Dixit dixitak@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The political process of economic policymaking involves several principal-agent
              relationships, where an agent takes an action or decision on behalf of a
              principal, and the principal offers incentives to induce the agent to act in
              the principal's best interest. Most notably, there are common agencies where
              several principals acting non-cooperatively try to influence the choices of the
              agent. The process also extends through time. This requires the political
              actors to make choices under uncertainty. It also allows some cooperation
              cooperation in conflicts like prisoners' dilemmas. The proposed research builds
              on and applies these two broad themes to several questions of theoretical and
              practical interest.

1. The European Central Bank - The formal constitution
              of the ECB is similar to that of the Bundesbank - independent and dedicated to
              price stability. But in practice it can be influenced by the member
              governments. The Germans fear that such politicization will lead to excessive
              inflation. It is proposed to examine this question by theoretical modeling of
              two aspects of politicization. The first deals with non-cooperation, so the
              governments act as separate principals influencing their common agent.
              Preliminary analysis shows that this does not cause excessive inflation if the
              governments can commit to their incentive schemes for the ECB. The second deals
              with lack of commitment. This raises the usual problem of time-consistency in
              monetary policy, now compounded by a prisoners' dilemma among the several
              governments. Preliminary analysis shows that the results of this model conform
              well to intuition. Further research will examine the design of the optimal
              sustainable tacit cooperation in this dilemma game.

2. Common Agency with
              Informed Principals - The European governments have private information on
              matters of common interest when they deal with the ECB; then their incentive
              schemes can reveal this information to the banker, and each government faces a
              situation formally like that of the winner's curse in its interaction with
              other governments. This observation suggests the need for a more general theory
              of common agency with informed multiprincipals. Such a theory will also find
              other useful applications. Most notably it can compare and reconcile two rival
              views in the theory of lobbying - one view holds that lobbies make
              contributions to "buy" policies, and the other argues that lobbies' main
              function is to provide information.

3. Dynamics of Political Positioning -
              Some parties leave their policy positions vague; others take a clear and firm
              stand on issue positions. It is proposed to model this as a game of
              irreversible choices under uncertainty about voter preferences. The conjecture
              is that the party currently enjoying more popularity will keep its platform
              vague, while smaller parties take firm positions in the hope of entrenching
              themselves in the vote-rich part of the political spectrum.

4. Other work -
              This consists of extensions and modifications of recent work, and includes the
              following. [i] A model of lobbying where the government acts as the principal
              and announces its policy as a response to contributions. [ii] A model oftacit
              compromise among several parties to split the available economic spoils as
              their political support fluctuates. [iii] Explaining the credibility of
              government's promise to repay its debt in terms of a correlation between
              political power and the propensity to hold government bonds.


