Title       : Symposium: Function and Evolution of the Vertebrate Axis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9817134

Award Number: 9817134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3926               (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Long   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Koob  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              According to the fossil record, from worm-like ancestors some 500 million years
              ago a group of animals evolved with a new kind of body, one with a bony
              internal backbone sporting an extended muscular tail.  The animal group, of
              course, we now recognize as oour own -- vertebrates (from "vertebrate," the
              bones that make up the backbone).  Less clear, however, is how the vertebrate
              body works and what difference its unique features have made to the
              evolutionary history of living fish, frogs, lizards, birds and mammals.  These
              questions are the focus of a group of scientists gathering at the Annual
              Meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology in Denver in
              early January, 1999.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     While all vertebrates have a backbone,
              which is evidence of their shared evolutionary history, all have different
              versions built, much like the various models of cars and trucks made for
              defferent driving conditions, for different kinds of support and movement in
              different environments.  The backbone forms the framework for the body's axis,
              which also consits of muscles, skin, and nerves.  This complex system of bone,
              ligaments, tendons and muscle generates bending motions that allow a fish to
              swim, a lizard to run, and a dolphin to leep.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       Bringing together
              scientists from fields in biomedicine, mathematics, and biology, the symposium,
              sponsored by the Society's Division of Vertebrate Morphology, plans to
              highlight many of the new findings in this scientific field.  Presentations
              will focus on three areas -- the skeletal support system, locomotion, and the
              design of the axial systems in general.  Axial systems in various model
              organisms will be discussed, including hagfish, bony fish, amphibians, reptiles
              and mammals.
