Title       : Catalase Expression to Study Information Flow To and From the Circadian Clock
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a9817603

Award Number: 9817603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Robertson McClung Mcclung@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Most organisms exhibit temporal organization with respect to the
environmental
              oscillation of day and night and, thus, express diurnal
rhythms.  Many of
              these rhythms persist in constant conditions, indicating
that organisms have
              the capacity to measure time and to use this time
information to temporally
              regulate their biology.  Circadian rhythms are a
subset of endogenous rhythms
              with periods of approximately 24 hr that
persist in the absence of
              environmental time cues.  Increased understanding
of plant responses to
              environmental input and to endogenous temporal cues
will have broad
              agricultural importance for several reasons.  Both
environmental cues and the
              circadian clock contribute to the photoperiodic
decision to flower, with
              obvious implications for crop production.
Additionally, it has become
              increasingly clear that the circadian clock
gates the responses of plants to a
              variety of biotic and abiotic stresses;
that is, the response to stresses
              varies as a function of circadian phase
(time of day).

Circadian phase is
              an integral aspect of circadian rhythmicity, yet little
is known of the
              molecular mechanisms by which phase information is
imparted.  The Arabidopsis
              CAT2 and CAT3 catalase genes provide molecular
hands of the circadian clock
              with which to investigate the molecular basis
by which the clock gates gene
              expression to specific circadian phases.  The
circadian clock gates mRNA
              abundance of CAT2and CAT3 to distinct circadian
phases, and each is distinct
              from the phase of maximal CAB mRNA abundance.
At least some of the components
              of the output pathway from the circadian
clock to each of these three genes
              must, by definition, be distinct.  A
second goal is to investigate the
              interaction between the circadian clock
and light.  Illumination with
              continuous blue (but not with red) light
allows the detection of circadian
              oscillations in CAT2 and CAT3 mRNA
abundance.  In addition, there is a role
              for blue light signaling in the
damping of CAT3 mRNA oscillations in extended
              dark.  Ecotype RLD fails to
damp and apparently carries a mutation that
              defines a new component of this
damping pathway.  

The specific
              experimental objectives are:

1.  The characterization of the cis-acting
              elements required for CAT
expression.  A comparison of these morning-specific
              (CAT2) and
evening-specific (CAT3) genes will allow insight into the
              mechanisms of
phase determination.  This will entail the construction of
              series of
transgenic lines carrying CAT-LUC fusionsin order to define
              circadian
response elements and light response elements controlling CAT
              expression. 

2.  The characterization of the blue light photoperception
              system required
for initiation of circadian oscillation in CAT2 and CAT3 mRNA
              abundance.
This will entail the analysis of known mutants with defects in blue
              light
perception and signaling as well as the identification of novel
              mutants
defective in the initiation of circadian oscillations in CAT3-LUC
              expression.

3.  The investigation of the mechanism of damping of the
              circadian
oscillations of CAT3 mRNA abundance seen in extended dark.  If the
              defect
in damping seen in ecotype RLD is inherited in a genetically
              tractable
fashion, the mutated gene will be cloned and characterized.  New
              loci
required for damping the oscillation in CAT3 mRNA abundance in
              extended
dark will also be identified.

