Title       : Contextual and Person-Based Determinants of Category-Based Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9817554

Award Number: 9817554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Lambert alambert@artsci.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this project is to gain greater insight into the processes
              underlying prejudice and discrimination. In particular, the proposed research
              seeks to gain insight by which people use their expectations about social
              groups (e.g., Blacks, women, Hispanics) as a basis for responding to single
              individuals who belong to these categories. An organizing assumption of the
              project is that such stereotyping effects depend on at least three factors,
              including characteristics of (a) the perceiver who may potentially apply these
              stereotypes, (b) the situation in which the stereotype is activated, and (c)
              characteristics of the person who is being judged by the perceiver. For
              example, the extent to which a perceiver may, or may not, stereotype a
              particular minority person is likely to depend on (a) the values and attitudes
              of the perceiver, (b) the specific context in which the person is being judged,
              and (c) the individuating features that are known about this particular
              minority member. A major focus of the research is on the extent to which these
              stereotyping effects are mediated by conscious or unconscious processes.
              Psychologists have just recently begun to explore the possibility that
              stereotyping effects involve mechanisms about which people may only be dimly
              aware, if at all. This perspective is vitally important, because it provides a
              way of understanding an apparent contradiction in present-day American society.
              For example, although many Whites realize that stereotyping Blacks is
              inappropriate, there is a wealth of evidence showing that stereotypes
              nevertheless continue to exert a powerful effect on social behavior, even among
              the very same Whites who believe that stereotyping is wrong. A major aim of the
              present project is to gain clarity into these and other important aspects of
              the processes underlying prejudice and discrimination.


