Title       : Subcellular RNA Localization in Drosophila Oogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  2000   
File        : a9817089

Award Number: 9817089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tulle Hazelrigg tulle@cubsps.bio.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Localization of RNAs to specific subcellular compartments occurs in a wide range
              of cell types, in diverse species ranging from yeast to humans. Cells localize
              RNAs to achieve high local concentrations of their protein products.  RNA
              localization is required for morphogenesis of polarized cells, and cell fates. 
              Maternally contributed determinants are localized in both vertebrate and
              invertebrate embryos by prior localization of their mRNAs during oogenesis. 
              One example is the Drosophila bicoid (bcd) gene product.  Localization of bcd
              mRNA to the anterior pole of the developing oocyte produces an anterior
              concentration gradient of Bicoid protein, a transcription factor required for
              determining anterior cell fates in the embryo.  The goal of this research is to
              understand the mechanisms responsible for localizing bicoid (bcd) mRNA.  These
              experiments will lead to a better understanding of how RNAs are localized to
              specific cellular compartments, and will also contribute to a more general
              understanding of RNA and protein transport in cells. 

An essential gene for
              bcd mRNA localization, exuperantia (exu), encodes a protein that is localized
              to particles. The central working hypothesis of this research is that the Exu
              particles are RNP complexes that transport bcd mRNA to its anterior anchor in
              the oocyte.  Light and electron microscopy will be used to examine the nature
              of these particles.  A major aim of this work is to investigate not only the
              accumulation of bcd mRNA, but the dynamic events of bcd RNA transport.  This
              will be accomplished using a novel method in which the RNA is labeled with
              Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP).  The contributions of the cytoskeleton, other
              genes, and elements within the mRNA itself, will be determined.  A final goal
              of this work is to identify other essential components of the Exu particles,
              and determine their role in RNA localization.  One candidate RNA localization
              factor that will be studied is an RNA-binding protein, identified previously in
              this laboratory by its ability to interact with Exu protein.




