Title       : MGE: Minority Graduate Education Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a9817296

Award Number: 9817296
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2491428            (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis Dale ldale@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. McClintock  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9817296
Louis Dale

The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB), a
              doctoral degree granting Research I
University, will join in a consortium with
              seven Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCU) in Alabama and
              Mississippi for the purpose of significantly increasing the number
              of
underrepresented minorities receiving doctoral degrees in the science,
              mathematics, and engineering (SME) fields and entering the professorate.  All
              proposed consortium members are also members of the Alabama Alliance for
              Minority Participation (AAMP) Program, an NSF sponsored alliance with the goal
              of increasing the number of underrepresented minorities receiving Bachelors
              degrees in SUE disciplines.  The Alabama AMP program has produced a large pool
              of minority students who are potential graduate students.  The HBCU consortium
              members and the AW program will serve as "feeder institutions" for the Alabama
              Minority Graduate Education (AMGE) Program.  More precisely, the AMGE Program
              will do the following:

1. Provide graduate school awareness activities on
              each HBCU campus. These activities
    will include seminars, guest speakers,
              and a SNE Annual Graduate Education Day.
2. Establish a Graduate School
              Preparation Program on each consortium campus. This
    program will include a
              GRE Preparation Short Course, graduate school assistance
    activities, a
              travel assistance program to encourage SNE undergraduates to attend
   
              professional meetings with faculty, and a Graduate Bridge Program.
3. Provide
              recruitment and admission activities that will lead to guaranteed admission
  
               for MGE recruited students.
4. Establish a coordinated mentoring and advising
              program with assistance from the
    newly appointed Director of MGE Student
              Support Services.
5. Provide a supportive environment by means of a vigorous
              retention effort and use of
    the UAB Black Graduate Students
              Association.
6. Leverage NSF funds and MGE efforts with the UAB funded
              Comprehensive
    Minority Faculty and Student Development Program.
7.
              Increase the number of underrepresented minorities enrolled in SME Ph.D.
   
              programs at UAB from the current 41 to a minimum of 100 by the year 2003.
8.
              Provide innovative support to MGE participants to insure that each MGE
              participant
    receives the Ph.D. degree in SME fields within a reasonable
              period of time.

The University of Alabama at Birmingham has a documented
              track record of supporting minority
students.  The university will provide up
              to four $15,000 Fellowships each year to MGE
recruited students as cost
              sharing.  The fellowships will be renewable each year for four years,

The
              Alabama MGE Program will have enrollment goals and doctoral degree conferral
              goals.
During the first year it is expected that at least 16 students will
              enroll in graduate school in SME
departments.  After the first year the
              program will be fully established and it is expected that
graduate enrollment
              numbers will increase by at least 20-25 per year.  Retention efforts are the
              key
to degree conferral.  Consequently, program expectations are that each MGE
              student enrolled will
receive a Ph.D. degree within a reasonable period of
              time.  The MGE Program will assist graduates
with finding suitable faculty
              positions at colleges and universities.


