Title       : Urban Research Initiative: Information Technologies and the Future of Urban
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a9817778

Award Number: 9817778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499281             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell L. Moss mitchell.moss@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid Ellen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rae Zimmerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Gregory  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bhubaneswar Mishra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1349      URBAN RSCH INITIATIVE PROPOSAL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1371,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The economic future of cities will be defined by their capacity to generate,
              process and distribute information.  With the emergence of the Internet, the
              diffusion of personal computers and the advent of telecommunications
              deregulation, cities face unprecedented requirements to compete as centers of
              economic activity, culture, and civic activity.  Urban Researchers must
              understand and explain the way in which information and telecommunications
              technologies are transforming the cities and metropolitan areas where people
              live and work.  This project, supported under the Urban Research Initiative,
              establishes a new conceptual framework in which to study and analyze these
              patterns of urban change.

The project is designed to achieve four
              objectives:  1) formulate new indicators of urban activity, based on the
              production, organization, and movement of information between and among
              metropolitan regions; 2) identify and analyze emerging spatial patterns of
              household locations in central cities and metropolitan regions with regard to
              education, professional skills, and access to computers; 3) assess the
              long-term impact of telecommunication systems on the transportation
              infrastructure and physical environment of cities and metropolitan regions; and
              4) determine how information technologies can be used to strengthen the
              economic and social structure of inner-city communities.  Taken together, these
              objectives provide a new perspective on the future of urban environments that
              can inform research and policy in the next century.

With information and
              telecommunications technologies transforming urban regions, the project has an
              interdisciplinary team that brings together expertise in urban planning,
              environmental science, engineering, computer science, anthropology, and public
              policy.  The project is based at New York University's Taub Urban Research
              Center.  It is conducted in collaboration with the Institute for Civil
              Infrastructure Systems, drawing upon scholars from Cornell University,
              University of Texas at Dallas, University of Delaware, University of California
              at Irvine, and the University of Southern California.

This research promises
              to enhance substantially our understanding of this important topic.

