Title       : Fundamental Predictions of Tryptophan Emission Spectra in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9817372

Award Number: 9817372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrik R. Callis pcallis@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Callis
MCB 9817372

This study combines experimental and theoretical
              approaches aiming at an unprecedented understanding of the parameters
              determining the widely used fluorescence from the amino acid tryptophan (Trp)
              in proteins at room temperature. The proposal revolves about two broad goals: 
              (1) A precise understanding of what determines the wavelength of Trp
              fluorescence. The hypothesis (novel as applied to Trp) that the spectral
              maximum is determined almost entirely by an internal Stark effect, i.e., by the
              local electric field working against the charge transfer accompanying the
              ground to 1La transition will be tested. It is argued that this effect includes
              solvation and "exciplex" formation in addition to fields from the protein; (2)
              An understanding of the spectral shapes of the 1La and 1Lb transitions under
              various conditions (broadening) will to be established semiempirically with the
              aid of vibronically resolved spectra (some already in hand) and ab initio
              excited state calculations. It will be shown how such information may be used
              to clarify the underlying reasons for nonexponential fluorescence decay.
              Credibility of the (partially established) internal Stark effect model will be
              tested by comparing predictions from hybrid quantum chemical-molecular
              mechanics modeling of increasing quality for proteins with known structure with
              experimental fluorescence wavelengths. Of top priority experimentally are
              careful measurements of fluorescence spectra as a function of pH and comparison
              of mutants that differ by a single charged amino acid. Such measurements are
              expected to give direct insight into the controversial effective interior
              dielectric of proteins and the effect of external solvent on screening of
              charged groups with the protein. In particular, a number of charged groups in
              the models by themselves create predicted shifts of 30 nm (a field of about 3 x
              107 V/cm). At least some of these are titratable histidines, aspartates, or
              glutamates. Some of these, as well as certain lysines and arginines appear to
              be in locations where they might be mutated without changing the protein
              structure significantly. Aspects of the model to be explored are the impact of
              the number of waters, the length of time of trajectory, the quantum mechanical
              model, the effective dielectric constant (or inclusion of atomic
              polarizability), and the empirical force field used. A few remaining
              experiments on model indoles under cold jet and cold crystalline matrix
              conditions will complete the data base for establishing accurate theoretical
              band shapes. More accurate ab initio calculations on these models are also
              proposed. The significance and value of this work stem from the current absence
              of an accurate, widely embraced view of the fundamental principles underlying
              fluorescence from this important intrinsic chromophore, and an unique viewpoint
              at a basic level of experiment and theory is desired. Structural information
              tends to be of higher quality for Trp than for extrinsic probes, which is why
              it is worthwhile to clear up the objections to Trp over certain extrinsic
              probes. If the electrostatic model proves accurate, Trp fluorescence
              wavelengths will provide excellent tests for the important task of accurately
              predicting electrostatic fields and potentials in proteins. If detailed
              knowledge of the band shapes leads to an understanding of the causes for
              nonexponential decay, a large amount of good lifetime data will become more
              valuable.


The primary aim of this study is to use computer modeling and
              theory to reliably predict the wavelengths emitted by the amino acid tryptophan
              during UV irradiation. Tryptophan fluorescence wavelengths and relative
              intensities are widely used by biological scientists as an indicator of the
              nature of the protein interior near the tryptophan, and to monitor rapid
              changes in a protein, such as folding and unfolding. Such information provides
              an essential complement to the primarly structure methods, x-ray
              crystallography and NMR, for fleshing out important details. For example, the
              position of a key lysine in the protein thioredoxin is still uncertain, despite
              the existence of excellent x-ray and NMR structures. This work centers on
              testing the hypothesis that tryptophan fluorescence wavelengths are determined
              by the electric field strength and direction caused by the protein and solvent.
              Initial results are very promising, and more detailed calculations and
              experiments centered around changing the charges by changing pH are planned.
              The significance of this work lies in the importance of electrostatic effects
              in the functioning of the myriad proteins that mediate life processes.
              Electrostatic energies and forces have been notoriously difficult to predict
              for proteins, and for that reason the ability to use electrostatics to predict
              fluorescence wavelengths would be an important milestone.

