Title       : U.S.-Czech Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program in Discrete
               Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a9817956

Award Number: 9817956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred S. Roberts froberts@dimacs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 0000,5930,9178,9250,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              INT 9817956
Roberts


This U.S.-Czech cooperative effort supports a limited
              exchange of students from the United States and the Czech Republic within the
              basic context of the National Science Foundation's Research Experiences for
              Undergraduates Program (REU).  The U.S. organizer is Fred S. Roberts of Rutgers
              University's Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science
              (DIMACS).  His counterpart is Jaroslav Nesetril of Charles University's Center
              for Discrete Mathematics, Theoretical Computer Science and Applications
              (DIMATIA) in Prague.  The planned REU program for undergraduate students: 1)
              features combinatorics, logic and complexity theory, and computational geometry
              and 2) involves U.S. and Czech faculty mentors who oversee junior participant's
              directed study and research.  This award permits three international REU
              sessions, one held each summer during 1999, 2000 and 2001.  Both sides share
              costs.

Collaboratively, Roberts, Nesetril, and appointed faculty program
              coordinators will manage a DIMACS-based international REU program that
              accommodates five U.S. students for a total of nine weeks.  To facilitate
              project definition and research initiation, paired mentors and students begin
              communication via Internet prior to each REU session. During the first six of
              nine weeks, Czech faculty and two Czech students participate at the Rutgers
              site in DIMACS' domestic RUE program.  Next, five U.S. students who have been
              selected competitively for this international "research experience for
              undergraduates," go with the DIMACS mentor to spend three weeks in Prague for
              the DIMATIA-hosted phase of the program.  There the U.S. participants join
              Czech mentors and student counterparts to work on predetermined projects and
              attend tutorials as well as a special midsummer workshop.  Results should
              produce a number of jointly authored scientific papers, student presentations
              suitable for scientific meetings, and potentially long-lasting professional
              networks. 

The overall intent of this U.S.-Czech undergraduate exchange is
              to add an international dimension to the standing objectives for REU programs
              which encourage career choices in math, science and engineering.  Success will
              mean that the future careers of these junior participants are enhanced by
              exposure to research excellence abroad and early experience with collaboration
              in an increasingly global research enterprise.

Such international research
              experience for undergraduates, anchored by two centers of excellence, fulfills
              the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in
              the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share
              research and education resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
              competence.
