Title       : Molecular Characterization of Autophagy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1999   
File        : a9817002

Award Number: 9817002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Dunn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Eukaryotic cells adapt to environmental changes by altering their protein
              complements through synthesis and degradation. Much is known about, and many
              laboratories are investigating, the regulation of transcription and translation
              during nutrient adaptation and stress. However, the molecular mechanisms
              responsible for the degradative removal of superfluous or damaged proteins have
              not been resolved. It is well known that mammalian cells adapt to amino acid or
              serum starvation by sequestering proteins and organelles for lysosomal
              degradation via a process called autophagy. Given the difficulty in
              manipulating mammalian genetics, the molecular events of autophagy have yet to
              be defined. Dr. Dunn's laboratory has developed a yeast model, Pichia pastoris,
              for studying autophagy and lysosomal proteolysis of peroxisomes. Two
              morphologically distinct kinds of autophagy, microautophagy and macroautophagy,
              can be regulated in this yeast by nutritional factors. The P. pastoris model
              offers arguably the best opportunity to investigate the molecular events of
              peroxisome degradation because the degradation is rapid and because mutants
              unable to degrade peroxisomes can be easily identified by a sensitive
              colorometric direct colony assay. It is proposed that glucose-induced selective
              autophagy of peroxisomes proceeds through four events: glucose signalling;
              early sequestration events, including peroxisome recognition and vacuole
              membrane invaginations; late sequestration events, including homotypic membrane
              fusion; and vacuolar degradation. Dunn has identified eight glucose-induced
              selective microautophagy mutants (gsal- gsa8) which are defective in the events
              upstream of vacuolar degradation. The first aim of this project is a molecular
              characterization of autophagy involving the identification of the GSA genes and
              the subcellular location of the GSA gene products.  Initially, Dunn will
              identify and characterize three genes that are required for three different
              events, GSA1 (glucose signalling event), GSA4 (peroxisome recognition), and
              GSA7 (homotypic fusion of the vacuolar membrane); GSAl and GSA7 have already
              been cloned and sequenced. Dunn will then utilize cellular, molecular, and
              genetic approaches to define functional domains and motifs and to identify
              interacting proteins of GSAI p, GSA4p, and GSA7p.  The expectation is that
              these studies will provide insights into the functional roles of these proteins
              in peroxisome autophagy. Dunn's working hypothesis is that GSAlp, GSA4p, and
              GSA7p are functionally unique proteins required for three different events of
              the micro-autophagy pathway of degradation of peroxisomes during glucose
              adaptation. 

GSA4 will be cloned and sequenced following procedures that
              have been used successfully to identify GSA1 and GSA7. The GSA4p will be
              verified by comparing the phenotypes of gsa4-1 and delta-gsa4 (i.e., deletion)
              mutants. Then, the subcellular locations of GSAlp, GSA4p, and GSA7p will be
              determined in methanol- and glucose-adapting cells by first expressing an
              HA-epitope tagged GSAp in the yeast followed by immunolocalization of fixed
              cells and Western blotting of specific subcellular fractions using an antibody
              to the HA-epitope.

The functional motifs and molecular associates of these
              proteins will be characterized.  First, the minimal functional unit of each of
              these proteins will be defined by deletion analysis. Putative functional
              domains within the minimal functional unit (i.e., enzymatic active sites,
              protein binding motifs, and phosphorylation and myristylation sites) that may
              be involved in autophagy will then be mutated and the ability of the mutated
              gsa protein to rescue the delta-gsa phenotype will be evaluated. Second, in
              order to better define the amino acid (or amino acids) that confers autophagy
              activity, we will perform random PCR mutagenesis of the GSAp, clone the mutated
              GSAp by its inability to rescue the delta-gsa phenotype, and sequence the
              mutation. Finally, candidates for molecular associates of these proteins will
              be identified by two-hybrid and "high-expression" suppressor analyses and
              verified by co-immunoprecipitation.
 

