Title       : Regulation of Plant Fatty Acid Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9817882

Award Number: 9817882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Ohlrogge ohlrogge@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ohlrogge

The biosynthesis of fatty acids is a primary metabolic pathway which
              is essential for all plant cells. In most vegetative tissues, fatty acids are
              used primarily for membrane synthesis and constitute 5-10% of the cell dry
              weight. In oil storing seeds and epidermal cells fatty acids serve additional
              storage and protective functions and can constitute 60% or more of the carbon
              flow of such cells. A molecular understanding of how cells regulate these major
              differences in fatty acid synthesis is not yet available and remains a central
              challenge for plant lipid research. Fatty acid production in the plastid
              appears to be tightly coupled to the utilization of acyl chains outside the
              plastid. Control over the pathway is likely to occur at multiple levels
              including short-term biochemical regulation over enzyme activities and
              longer-term regulation of enzyme expression levels. This project will examine
              control at both biochemical and expression levels with thrusts in two areas. A)
              Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACCase) is one enzyme whose activity is tightly
              regulated to provide control over the flux of carbon into fatty acids. Analysis
              of this enzyme and its role in regulation of fatty acid synthesis will be
              examined at the biochemical level by addressing the questions: 1) What is the
              role of phosphorylation in regulation of ACCase. 2) What is the nature of the
              multisubunit ACCase complex? In particular, are other proteins part of the
              complex and is membrane association important for ACCase regulation? B) Second,
              in some cases the supply of carbon to fatty acid synthesis in the form of
              acetyl-COA may regulate flux into the pathway. The predominant pathway which
              produces acetyl-COA in plastids has remained a major unanswered question of
              plant biochemistry. This question will be re-examined by detailed kinetic
              analysis of the in vivo flow of carbon from C02 into acetyl-CoA. The
              understanding to be derived from the above two thrusts should help to define
              the short- and long-term controls which determine how much fatty acid each
              plant cell produces and provide avenues toward future manipulation of this
              pathway in transgenic plants.

Plant oils are a major source of calories in
              American diets and represent an agricultural commodity worth $70 billion
              dollars per year worldwide. Metabolic engineering of plant pathways has the
              potential to transform crop plants from their traditional role of providing
              low-cost food and fiber toward a more profitable role of producing an array of
              high-value chemicals. We now have the capability to metabolically engineer the
              composition of plant seeds, and there has been major success in altering seed
              oil fatty acid composition. However in most cases, we do not yet understand
              which genes may be most useful to modify the quantity of seed based products or
              to alter carbon partitioning. This research will provide the information needed
              to genetically engineer plants to produce more oil and thus increase the value
              of agricultural products.

