Title       : Dissertation Research: Social Norms and Group Cooperation in an Agro-Pastoral
               Region of Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2001    
File        : a9817248

Award Number: 9817248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10920              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Richerson pjricherson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9817248
Richerson  /  Paciotti
	This project supports the dissertation
              research of an anthropology student from the University California-Davis,
              studying how social norms produce sanctions that affect the propensity of
              community members to cooperate in a rural area of Tanzania.  The student will
              interview members of agro-pastoral communities about the types and frequencies
              of social incentives that motivate individuals to participate in cooperative
              grass-roots protection organizations or vigilante groups.  The behavior of
              people in different communities will be studied to assess the local variation
              in social norms and institutions affecting the propensity to cooperate in this
              form of activity.  Attention will be paid to the conditions affecting
              free-riding such as gossip and to the social status of individuals. The student
              will study in two ethnic communities using ethnographic techniques and in-depth
              interviews on a random sample of households.  After a primary set of interviews
              to establish the prevalence of a set of incidents of vigilante behavior, the
              student will draw a second random sample to report personal involvement in the
              incidents. This research is valuable because cooperation involving large groups
              is of fundamental interest in democratic society, as well as relevant to
              applied problems such as environmental degradation and common resource
              management. This project will advance our knowledge of the function of social
              norms and institutions that function to provide trust in local communities.  In
              addition the project supports the training of a young social scientist, and
              advances our knowledge of this important area of the world. 

