Title       : LExEn: Water Stress Dynamics in Anhydrophilic Microbial Mats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1998  
File        : a9817822

Award Number: 9817822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm Potts geordie@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5418      OCE SPECIAL PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1075,4444,9117,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The most fundamental criterion for the existence and proliferation of life is
              the presence of water. Extremophiles (thermophiles, pychrophiles, barophiles,
              acidophiles, halophiles, alkalphiles) can colonize and grow actively in
              environments, albeit harsh ones, as long as water is abundant. In contrast,
              anhydrophiles, exhibit a high tolerance for both intermittent exposure to
              liquid or gas-phase-water, and long term water stress where cellular components
              lack a  monolayer coverage of water. Under these conditions cells may also be
              subjected to extremes of temperature, solar irradiation, and hypersalinity. The
              survival and recovery responses of extant anhydrophiles to acute desiccation
              may provides information critical to understanding key controls of life
              processes on other planets and moons where various forms of water may exist
              (i.e. Mars and Europa). This study will investigate and characterize the
              ability of microbial mats, which are believed to be modern day analogs of
              Earth's first extant biotic communities, to survive water stress in the form of
              desiccation. Microbial mats are ubiquitous, self-sustaining, features in
              terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and are often the only functional biotic
              communities in some of the most extreme (i.e. temperature, irradiance, nutrient
              deplete) environments on Earth. Using an interdisciplinary (ecology,
              physiology, molecular biology) and collaborative team approach, we will
              determine how water availability and water deficit determine the distribution,
              activities and structure of mat communities in extreme environments subject to
              a global climatic gradient, ranging from polar to temperate to tropical clines.
              The results from this research will be applicable to ecological, molecular and
              biogeochemical studies aimed at understanding the limit of planetary life based
              on development, survival and evolution under water-deprived conditions.
