Title       : Continuing and Expanding the Graduate Research Ethics Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9817880

Award Number: 9817880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Schrag BSCHRAG@INDIANA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vivian Weil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Pritchard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Aarne Vesilind  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen M. T. Muskavitch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In collaboration with leading scholars, scientists, engineers, and educators
              from university-based centers and fields with expertise in the ethics of
              scientific research, the Association for Practical and Professional Ethics will
              provide instruction in ethical issues in scientific research, training in
              teaching research ethics, and an opportunity for research collaboration for a
              selected group of graduate students and post-doctoral fellows in engineering
              and the natural and physical sciences.  The project will nurture a community of
              young researchers who show promise of leadership and an interest in research
              ethics, providing them with skills in ethical thinking, understanding of the
              historical context of scientific misconduct, and an awareness of the
              mutidisciplinary nature of major ethical issues in science and engineering.  A
              related objective is to train them in teaching research ethics.  The goal is to
              enhance the ethical quality of participants' own research careers, that of
              their colleagues and of the generations of students they will teach.  The
              project will also exploit the resources already created in previous work, by
              collaborating with prior participants to:  1) Develop a set of more effective
              teaching materials and techniques for instruction in research ethics, with an
              emphasis on best practices. 2) Produce a set of narratives that capture the
              ethical environment and ethical problems of graduate students and postdoctoral
              fellows, and a set of recommendations for improving graduate research ethics
              education, from the perspective of participants trained in ethics. 3) Produce
              scholarly papers on issues in research ethics, especially those encountered in
              the graduate education experience.  Finally, the project will provide a network
              of support to assist the students in providing leadership in ethical issues in
              the scientific community.  The first project component will involve 15
              participants a year, for each of three years, in eight months of activity,
              including an intensive 4.5 day workshop on research ethics, a 1.5 day teaching
              seminar, the development of a case and commentary on a topic in research
              ethics, and experience in teaching research ethics at their home institution. 
              The second component will involve collaborating with up to 51 former
              participants of the program to develop more effective teaching materials in
              graduate research ethics, including a focus on best practices; to develop
              recommendations for improving the research ethics experience in the graduate
              setting; and to engage in scholarly work on issues of research ethics,
              particularly those related to the graduate school environment.  This component
              will involve work over four years and include four 1.5 day working conferences.
               This project will directly impact the understanding and teaching of research
              ethics for 96 young researchers and will indirectly affect their peers,
              students, graduate departments and universities.  It will contribute to
              understanding of the task of graduate research ethics education and provide
              some tools for that effort.	
