Title       : Developmental Regulation of Axon Pathway Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a9817076

Award Number: 9817076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332031             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine E. Beattie beattie.24@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    The formation of appropriate connections between motoneurons and their
              target muscles is essential for animals to carry out their normal behavioral
              repertoire.  Motoneuronal axons navigate through the developing embryo towards
              target muscles in a highly stereotyped manner making few navigational errors. 
              The precision of this event is astonishing considering the complicated
              environment of a developing embryo and the distances many axons travel. 
              Research over the past two decades has demonstrated that axon pathfinding is
              directed by interactions between the tip of the growing axon and guidance cues,
              either positive or negative, present in the environment.  Although our
              knowledge of the cellular and molecular aspects of axonal guidance has
              increased, numerous questions remain unanswered.  In particular, it is unclear
              how axons interact with different pathway environments and how axon pathways
              are established during development.
      Using zebrafish as a model system,
              Dr. Beattie will address how a set of identified motoneuronal axons locate
              their correct target muscles.  The zebrafish neuromuscular system offers a
              unique opportunity for studying this issue.  Individually identifiable primary
              motoneurons pathfind along and innervate distinct muscle regions, thus enabling
              analysis of single motoneurons.  Using a combination of mutational analysis,
              cell transplantation and molecular analysis, the experiments outlined in this
              proposal will reveal how axons interact with cells along their pathway, how
              motoneuronal pathways are established during development and how myotomes
              develop regions displaying unique properties with respect to growing axons. 
              This investigation will impact the field by uncovering the events that control
              this essential component of axon guidance. 

