Title       : Site-Specific Probing of Folding and Unfolding of Yeast Iso-1-Cytochrome c By
               Dielectric Resonator-Based Flow and Stopped-Flow EPR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9817598

Award Number: 9817598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles P. Scholes cps14@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Scholes
MCB 9817598

The objective of this study is to develop and apply the
              unique kinetic spin label
EPR (electron paramagnetic resonance) methods
              developed in this laboratory to
observe the early millisecond folding of
              globular proteins. An immediate focus is
on the globular protein, yeast
              iso-l-cytochrome c. The apparatus to be employed
involves dielectric
              resonator-based flow and stopped-flow EPR. The spin label
method has the
              advantage that the label can be attached to any position in a protein that
can
              be mutated to cysteine, and the expression system for making such
mutations
              has been established. To date the two common methods for studying
early
              folding events have been pulse label NMR spectroscopy and rapid
              flow
fluorescence spectroscopy. This spin label method is dependent on
              neither
hydrogen bonding (as is the NMR method), nor the existence of
              the
single fluorescing tryptophan in cytochrome c. While the pulse label
              NMR
and fluorescence results will provide a background, the combination of
              time
resolution of stopped-flow and flow physical methods and label placement
              at
previously unstudied positions presents a singular opportunity to resolve
              a
fundamental controversy concerning the early events in protein folding.
              The
controversy is whether the early folding is a general hydrophobic
              collapse
or whether early folding progresses through a sequence of
              substructures.
This controversy is of course not limited to cytochrome c; it
              is simply
best delineated so far in cytochrome c. The general hydrophobic
              collapse
would be reported similarly by spin probes at numerous positions;
              whereas a
progression of folding substructures at different locations would
              be
reported differently and sequentially by probes at different locations.
              To
test the generality of this finding in cytochrome c, the plan for
              the
future will be to probe other protein systems for their early
              folding
events.

This study applies a new biophysical technique that relies
              on new
microwave (electron paremagnetic resonance) and kinetic equipment
              to
understand in a unique way how protein folding occurs in its early
              stages.
A protein is a linear sequence of amino acid building blocks, and
              there is
no consistent explanation yet for the time course for proteins to
              fold to
their biologically functional 3-dimensional structure. A labeling
              procedure
is used which puts probes at individual amino acid sites to tell if
              the
sites are involved in folding. The apparatus will then be used to
              examine
quickly within milliseconds after folding starts whether the
labeled
              amino acid is indeed already folded. The specific goal of this
study, using
              probes at separate protein-engineered sites, is to resolve the
question of
              whether a protein undergoes a universal collapse when folding
starts or
              whether folding progresses in a sequence from one part of the
protein to the
              next. It is presently not known whether the collapse model
versus the
              sequential folding model is the proper one, and this kinetic
method combined
              with localized probes is intended to determine what
actually happens.

