Title       : Effects of Large-Scale Flow on the Core Structure of Hurricanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2001      
File        : a9817946

Award Number: 9817946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211866             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Frank frank@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research program will examine the manner in which large-scale circulations
              control thc structure and intensity of the intense core regions of Atlantic
              hurricanes.  The project will focus on diagnostics, but will contain a
              numerical modeling component.  The observational study will use data from
              research aircraft to analyze symmetric and asymmetric features of the
              distributions of wind, rain and vorticity in the hurricane eyewall region. 
              Data sources will include in-situ measurements along the flight path, radar
              reflectivity and Doppler radar measurements, and dropwinsonde data.  The
              dropwinsonde data are crucial as they will allow the analyses to be extended
              outward from the core to 1,000-2,000 km radius, a region in which the flow
              differs significantly from that resolved by global analysis fields due to
              storm-environmental interactions.

The numerical modeling portion of the
              study will primarily be a pilot effort and will use the nonhydrostatic version
              of the Penn State NCAR Mesoscale Model (MM5) with triply nested grids.  The
              innermost mesh size will be 5 km (with some final runs at 3 km), and moist
              convective processes on this mesh will be resolved with the explicit moisture
              scheme.  The simulations will be initialized with data from a subset of the
              cases analyzed as part of the observational component of the study.  The
              interactive use of numerical simulations and diagnostic analyses of aircraft
              and large-scale data will allow detailed study of the nature of interactions
              between the large-scale flow and the intensity and structure of the hurricane's
              core. Since the large-scale flow is becoming increasingly well predicted over
              time scales of interest to hurricane forecasting (0-5 days), determining the
              manner in which the large-scale flow controls the intensity and the
              distribution of wind, rain and related phenomena in the core should lead to
              improved predictability of these important quantities.

