Title       : Dissertation Research: Pilgrimage and Power: Temple Districts at Vijayanagara
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9817802

Award Number: 9817802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7320               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Redman charles.redman@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Charles Redman, MS Alexandra Mack will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her work is to understand the forms
              of social and political organization which gave rise to early state level
              societies and allowed the integration of large numbers of individuals within
              the constraints of a relatively simple technology. To accomplish this goal she
              will focus on the archaeological site of Vijayanagara which is located in
              Karnataka, southern India. Vijayanagara was the capital of an empire which
              flourished from the 14th to 16th centuries AD. It was established around 1336
              and although there had been settlement in the area for hundreds of years,
              Vijayanagara was the first city at that location. It was abandoned in 1565
              after the empire was defeated in war by a confederacy of northern states and
              the area has remained largely depopulated. Thus, because of its relatively
              brief occupation and lack of confounding archaeological material, it provides a
              well preserved snapshot of a capital city. Relevant written documents and
              inscriptions provide valuable supplementary data. Vijayanagara was a pilgrimage
              center and has several large temple districts in addition to monumental
              buildings which served as the center of secular power. Based on comparative
              data from other regions of India, it is likely that an ongoing tension existed
              between the secular and religious authorities and MS Mack plans to examine the
              interactions among them. There are several ways to achieve this goal. First she
              will analyze inscriptions which list the donors to major temple complexes and
              thus determine the constituencies each represented. Secondly, Vijayanagara was
              a planned city and work both here and at other sites suggests that the basic
              aspects of social and political order are reflected in the arrangement of
              districts, buildings and roads and walls which connect and separate them. MS
              Mack has begun and will continue a GIS analysis of this patterning. Pilgrimages
              form an important component of traditional religious life and MS Mack will
              attempt to reconstruct the ways large numbers of pilgrims were incorporated
              into the religious and social life of the city. She will do this through the
              collection and analysis of surface ceramics, especially serving vessels, at the
              site since it will be possible to determine which were used for public vs.
              private purposes. In this way she can gain insight into spatial patterning.
              This work will be supplemented by study of modern day pilgrimage sites as well
              as archival research.

This project will provide new insight into the rise
              and functioning of early states. It will set modern India into a broader
              historical context and assist in training a promising young scientist.

