Title       : Molecular Genetic Studies of Bdelloid Rotifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a9817885

Award Number: 9817885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew S. Meselson msm@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bdelloid rotifers are common fresh water invertebrates classified among 4
              families, 19 genera and some 350 species. Males, hermaphrodites, and meiosis
              are unknown within the Class. Eggs are produced from oocytes by two mitotic
              divisions with no chromosome pairing and no reduction in chromosome number.
              Studies of four different bdelloid species, representing three different
              bdelloid families, have shown that individual genomes of bdelloid rotifers
              contain highly diverged gene copies of each of four genes examined: hsp82, tbp,
              tpi, and RNApolIII. This unusual finding could result from a long standing
              absence of meiosis during which former alleles have greatly diverged, so that
              nuclei no longer contain closely homologous chromosome sets. Alternatively, it
              could mean that despite morphological, cytogenetic and molecular observations
              to the contrary, bdelloids are meiotic diploids or polyploids with an unusual
              predilection for gene duplication and with an occasional and unrecognized
              meiotic cycle that maintains homology between chromosome sets. In order to
              determine whether bdelloids are meiotic diploids (or polyploids), bdelloid
              metaphase chromosomes will be labeled by fluorescent in situ hybridization,
              using genomic cosmid and YAC clones as probes. Homologous chromosomes, if
              present, will be revealed by their homologous patterns of labeling. While the
              absence of homologous chromosome pairs in bdelloid rotifers would show that
              bdelloids are not meiotic diploids or polyploids, such a result would leave the
              possibility that they are female haploids, a condition unprecedented among
              metazoans, and that syngamy and meiosis occur in some infrequent and
              unrecognized sexual phase. Such unconventional sexual reproduction, as well as
              any other form of genetic exchange, would generate recombinant genotypes. In
              order to investigate this possibility, natural bdelloid populations will be
              screened for evidence of recombination between the mitochondrial gene COI and
              the nuclear genes hsp82 and tpi by determining the nucleotide sequences of
              these genes in numerous individuals of the bdelloids Philodina roseola and
              Macrotrachela quadricornifera, collected from an ancient glacial pond. In
              addition to providing a sensitive test for any form of recombination, the
              population studies will provide information on the genetic diversity of
              bdelloid rotifers that may be unique to ancient asexual taxa.
Rigorous tests
              of the possibility that the Class Bdelloidea of the Phylum Rotifera has evolved
              apomictically, reproducing without meiosis or syngamy, will be undertaken.
              Demonstration that bdelloids have evolved asexually would challenge the
              prevailing view that sexual reproduction is essential for evolutionary success
              and would provide a unique system to test hypothesis that seek to account for
              the almost universal maintenance of sexual reproduction in animals and
              plants.

