Title       : Fine Structure Genetic and Molecular Characterization of a Primitive
               Allorecognition Locus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1999   
File        : a9817380

Award Number: 9817380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460649             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo W. Buss leo.buss@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hydractinia symbiolongicarpus displays an unambiguous and well-characterized
              allorecognition response.  It has recently been established that  the
              allorecognition response segregates as a single co-dominant Mendelian trait.
              Two inbred lines and a line near-isogeneic for fusibility for each inbred line,
              heretofor unavailable, have been developed in this laboratory and using them, a
              genetic and molecular characterization of the chromosomal region that includes
              the locus will be done. That information will yield sufficient positional
              information to clone the gene encoding allorecognition determinants from this
              lower metazoan. The near-isogenic animals will be used to generate pools of
              offspring homozygous for different alleles at the fusibility locus. These
              offspring pools will allow identification of amplified fragment length
              polymorphisms (AFLP) linked within a 1cM interval containing the locus of
              interest (arl). A high resolution genetic map of these markers will be
              generated and the markers most tightly flanking arl will be determined in a
              large recombinant test cross. A bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) library
              will be generated, screened for positives using flanking marker sequences and a
              high resolution  map of the set of contiguous BAC's generated. BAC clones will
              be shed of the highly repetitive fraction by reverse Southerns and resulting
              fragments will be used to probe a cDNA library to isolate candidate gene(s). 
              The ability to confer fusibility phenotype by transformation in a simple
              adhesion assay will be preformed to confirm the isolation of the correct
              locus.

Colonial animals typically display the capacity to discriminate
              between their own tissues and those of unrelated members of their own species,
              with the recognition event culminating in either fusion or rejection. Such
              allorecognition systems are often claimed to reflect the evolutionary origins
              of the vertebrate immune response and, for unrelated reasons have played a
              prominent role in problems in evolution theory. Despite their widespread
              occurrence and importance, the molecular basis of invertebrate allorecognition
              remains obscure. The products of this effort, novel genetic lines, a DNA
              collection derived from a large recombinant test cross and a BAC library, will
              be available to the community and the demand is expected to be high. The
              genetic map and large insert library emanating from this research will be the
              first such resources for any eumetazoan animal.

