Title       : Coding of Global Image Features by the Visual System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2000   
File        : a9817643

Award Number: 9817643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Satoru Suzuki satoru@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the goals of vision research is to understand how neurons at various
              levels in the visual processing stream (the eyes, the primary visual cortex-V1,
              and the higher cortical areas) code progressively more complex aspects of an
              image. This project concerns the coding of shape. Previous research established
              that initial shape coding occurs in the primary visual cortex (V1) where the
              retinal image is analyzed by "feature detectors" which determine the dominant
              orientations and spatial frequencies at each position on the image. The next
              level of coding involves shape. Since we are able to see whole shapes (e.g.,
              see a triangle as  "triangle" rather than as "a collection of 3 oriented
              lines"), global shape attributes must also be coded in the brain. Because we
              can recognize shapes regardless of where they are located, the coding must
              achieve some level of position-independence. Some neurons in the higher
              cortical areas, such as inferotemporal cortex, have been shown to be
              selectively activated by various geometric shapes, almost regardless of where
              those shapes are presented. To determine what perceptual qualities these
              neurons are coding,  a new behavioral paradigm will be used that examines what
              are called "shape contrast effects."  Two shapes are presented successively, a
              prime shape followed by a visual mask and a test shape. When these stimuli are
              presented at optimum timing, the test shape appears distorted in such a way
              that it seems to be more dissimilar to the prime shape than it actually is. For
              example, a tall prime shape makes a test shape appear flatter, and a prime
              shape tapered in one direction makes a symmetric test shape appear tapered in
              the opposite direction. Importantly, such global shape-contrast effects occur
              even if the two shapes are presented at separate locations, suggesting that the
              effects are tapping into position-independent coding of global shape
              attributes. Perhaps, overall aspect ratio (taller/flatter) and taper may be two
              such global shape attributes systematically coded by the neurons in the higher
              cortical areas. One goal of this research is to understand the distinction
              between the type of shapes that produce shape-contrast effects and the type of
              shapes that do not. Such an effort will help determine what global aspects of
              shapes are selectively coded by the visual system. To complement this
              exploratory approach, experiments will be conducted to test the hypothesis that
              shape-contrast effects may tap into a specialized processing "module" that
              encodes a specific family of image transformations. Coding of such
              transformations may be a part of the mechanism underlying our ability to
              recognize objects from different points of view. Additional experiments will be
              conducted to determine how shape-contrast effects are modulated by various
              stimulus and cognitive factors such as visual context, quadrants of the visual
              field, various forms of attention, experience, conscious awareness, central vs
              peripheral vision, and the degree of shape similarity between the prime and the
              test item. The proposed research will evaluate this new technique and use it to
              explore the image-coding structure of a global shape representation
