Title       : The Ultrafast Dynamics of Coherent and Incoherent Electrons and Phonons in
               Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9817828

Award Number: 9817828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Stanton stanton@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9817828
Stanton
This is a grant for theoretical research on the ultrafast
              dynamics of coherent and incoherent electrons and phonons in solids.  Tunable
              femtosecond lasers now make it possible to study dynamical information about
              solids in great detail.  Femtosecond lasers probe these systems on the same
              time-scale as that of scattering processes.

Improvements in femtosecond
              laser technology within the last decade have led to the rapid development of
              new capabilities.  Pulses shorter than five femtoseconds are now possible.  In
              addition, improvements have occurred in tunability, peak power, and the ability
              to perform programmable pulse shaping.  This has opened up new opportunities
              for study including probing carrier dynamics; creating coherent electron/phonon
              states; pulse shaping and quantum control; and, optoelectronic/photonic
              applications.

This research will extend previous theoretical work in the
              above areas to further study new and fundamental properties of coherent and
              incoherent electrons and phonons in condensed matter systems.  Specifically, we
              will investigate four-wave mixing and differential reflectivity spectroscopy in
              new materials such as GaN (both coherent and incoherent effects); coherent and
              incoherent spin relaxation in dilute magnetic semiconductors; extend our work
              on the theory of coherent phonons to superlattices and superconductors and
              include the effects of dissipation; and, study wave packet dynamics/quantum
              control in superlattices and further investigate how a correlated wave packet
              loses its coherence.
9817828
This is a grant for theoretical research on the
              ultrafast dynamics of coherent and incoherent electrons and phonons in solids. 
              Tunable femtosecond lasers now make it possible to study dynamical information
              about solids in great detail.  Femtosecond lasers probe these systems on the
              same time-scale as that of scattering processes.

Improvements in femtosecond
              laser technology within the last decade have led to the rapid development of
              new capabilities.  Pulses shorter than five femtoseconds are now possible.  In
              addition, improvements have occurred in tunability, peak power, and the ability
              to perform programmable pulse shaping.  This has opened up new opportunities
              for study including probing carrier dynamics; creating coherent electron/phonon
              states; pulse shaping and quantum control; and, optoelectronic/photonic
              applications.

Studying these effects is solids should provide new basic
              understanding of coherent and incoherent processes in solids and open the door
              for applications in optoelectronic devices and, possibly, quantum
              computing.
***

