Title       : MGE: MU-Minority Graduate Education Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a9817233

Award Number: 9817233
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2401784            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brady J. Deaton deatonb@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9817233
Brady Deaton

This proposal outlines a detailed plan by the
              University of Missouri-Columbia (MU) to recruit, and
train 32 students as
              future faculty in higher education institutions, and to provide two
              8-week
summer-readiness programs for 40 students, to encourage and prepare
              them for admission to
graduate school.  This program, entitled the MU Minority
              Graduate Education Project (MU-MGE)
provides a unique opportunity for us to
              consolidate and coordinate on-going programs designed to
recruit and train
              talented underrepresented students, and several programs that offer
              unique
enrichment or development services to students at MU.  Equally
              important, it will enable us to
implement innovative program activities, some
              previously-discussed and others designed
specifically for this project, and to
              institutionalize those that are effective.  The program will
provide a model
              for how large research institutions, such as MU, can provide the
              necessary
components to advance the career goals and opportunities for
              underrepresented minorities to enter
the professorate in higher education
              institutions.

The MU-MGE project described here will have a total budget of
              $5,423,872, with $2,401,784
requested from NSF, and $3,022,088 in cost-sharing
              by the University of Missouri-Columbia.  The
plan includes requesting funding
              from NSF to support the future faculty participants during the first
two
              years, with MU providing supplemental funding during this time, and then MU
              providing
support to them for the remaining three years for a total of five
              years of support for each.  In
addition, funding for administrative costs--a
              Project Manager, Recruitment/Retention/Career
Planning Specialist, Secretary
              and 17 Graduate Assistants--is requested from NSF plus some
modest funding to
              support the 8-week summer readiness program and miscellaneous other costs
such
              as supplies, telephone, travel, and publications to advertise the project
              during recruitment and
to disseminate information about it once NSF funding
              terminates.

Because MU is committed to continuing the project by assuming
              responsibility for financing the
project for four additional years beyond the
              five-years supported by NSF, this project will continue
beyond the NSF funding
              period.  It is our expectation that additional internal and external
              funding
will be found to expand the program offerings and the time period even
              beyond the total nine-year
commitment of MU.

This project includes an
              ongoing evaluation system of every program offering and continual
monitoring
              of student progress.  With the collection and careful evaluation of such
              detailed data this will enable us to make necessary adjustments as needs arise,
              and especially for improving the
program offerings from year to year.  It will
              provide an opportunity for MU to coordinate the efforts for the MU-MGE project
              with those of many others on campus, and to collaborate in developing new
              offerings with other program officers.  And through the Visiting Faculty
              Development component, relationships will be developed by these participants
              and MU faculty with faculty from minority-serving institutions.  These changes,
              in campus climate and expanded relationships, will ensure even greater success
              with MU's efforts to advance the opportunities for underrepresented minorities
              to obtain doctoral degrees and to become future faculty.




