Title       : Statistics Out on a Limb? Strategic Interaction and the Statistical Analysis of
               International Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9817947

Award Number: 9817947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis S. Signorino sign@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Why do nations go to war?  For over thirty years, scholars have attempted to
              develop and test general theories explaining why nations engage in armed
              conflict.  Both the theories and the statistical methods used to test them have
              become increasingly sophisticated over time.  However, current general theories
              still do not explain international conflict very well.  Moreover, there is now
              reason to believe that past conclusions reached through statistical testing may
              not be valid.
	One important reason for this is the failure to incorporate
              strategic interaction into statistical analyses.  Historians and political
              scientists long have considered strategic calculation to be one of the defining
              characteristics of international politics.  Yet, this crucial element has been
              generally missing in statistical analyses of conflict - especially those where
              the outcomes are "discrete" or "finite."  In a very real (and negative) sense,
              past statistical analyses of international conflict are "out on a limb." 
              Nonstrategic statistical tests are not correct tests of strategic theories. 
              Moreover, failure to account for strategic interaction is a form of
              specification error that can lead researchers to the wrong
              conclusions.
	Fortunately, strategic interaction may be incorporated directly
              into statistical models in a very intuitive way.  This proposal identifies a
              broad research program that attempts to bridge the gap between international
              conflict theory and statistical analysis.  By merging game theory and
              statistical methods, this proposal shows how to calculate statistics "out on a
              limb" of an extensive form game tree - and thereby derive a statistical model
              that is consistent with one's theory of conflict.
	The proposed research has
              four main components:  (1) to adapt, develop, and generalize statistical
              methods for analyzing strategic finite choice models; (2) to address a number
              of important statistical issues related to those models, such as strategic
              specification error, multiple equilibria, and dynamic games; (3) to apply these
              methods to the study of international conflict; and (4) in addressing the first
              three issues, to make available user-friendly statistical software for the
              broader research community.
	The attainment of many of these goals is crucial
              not only for the social scientific study of international conflict, but for the
              statistical analysis of any political phenomenon involving strategic choices
              over discrete sets of options.  If a statistical test is not derived from the
              theoretical model, then one cannot be assured that the theory is truly being
              tested.  Without general results concerning strategic specification error, one
              cannot speak to the validity of past (or future) conclusions.  Moreover, to
              model more realistic situations, complex issues such as multiple equilibria and
              choices over time must be addressed.  Finally, since most political scientists
              are not programmers or mathematicians, the availability of statistical software
              allows these techniques to be exploited by a large community of scholars.  

