Title       : Phonetic Structures of Endangered Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a9817345

Award Number: 9817345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $652393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Maddieson ianm@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              MADDIESON
9817345

This project is to further the collection of data on the
              sound patterns of selected languages whose survival is threatened. Phonetic
              descriptions need to contain detailed accounts of articulation and acoustics
              that cannot be represented in a simple transcription. The P.I. is a member of a
              team which has built a particularly strong track record in conducting work of
              this type over a period of years, as well as in developing techniques for field
              phonetics and analytical frameworks for describing the sounds of
              languages.

The particular target languages selected will be ones where
              preliminary field reports indicate that they possess properties of particular
              phonetic interest. In many cases, these properties will be ones that are rare
              in the world's languages; for example specific types of vowels or consonants
              that are unusual, systems of vowels with a particularly small number of
              contrasts, or patterns of syllable structure which permit unusually rich
              sequencing of consonants. In others the properties will be ones whose better
              understanding is of particular importance to reconstructing the history and
              relationships of languages. The languages selected will also be ones that have
              not previously received much attention from specialist phoneticians. 

Each
              language will be documented by recording word lists which illustrate all the
              consonants and vowels used in the language. The recordings will include a
              number of different speakers representing both sexes. These recordings will be
              used to make quantitative acoustic analyses of the segmental properties of the
              languages. In addition a variety of articulatory and aerodynamic investigative
              techniques which can be adapted for use in the field situation will be employed
              to obtain data on the speech production mechanisms used. In certain cases,
              field experiments on speech perception will also be carried out.

This
              research will provide much-needed information on each of the endangered
              languages selected for investigation. It will provide documentation of
              particular sound types and patterns including some that have never been
              described before. And it will also greatly enrich the data base of material on
              which generalizations about the phonetic nature of human language can be
              made.


