Title       : Density-Coupled Transport in Heterogeneous Porous Media: Ob servations and
               Comparison to Stochastic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9817823

Award Number: 9817823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire Welty weltyc@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9817823
Welty

During her 1997-98 sabbatical leave, the PI has worked at
              University of Kassel in Germany to build a large-scale experimental vessel
              containing structured, correlated, random porous media that can be used for
              observations of any fluid flow or mass transport problem of interest under
              controlled laboratory conditions.  This effort has been carried out in
              collaboration with Dr. Tissa Illangasekare of the Colorado School of NEnes, who
              has nearly twenty years of experience in building such vessels and in carrying
              out large-scale laboratory experimental research.  Dr. Manfred Koch, Director
              of the Department of Geohydraulics and Engineering Hydrology at University of
              Kassel, has provided equipment, supplies, lab technician time, and student
              support for the work.

The principal objective of the research described in
              this proposal is to carry out, as a first set of experiments in the new
              apparatus, a series of runs to quantify the interaction between permeability
              heterogeneity and high solute concentrations and the effect of this interaction
              on macrodispersion in saturated porous media.  In doing so, the apparatus
              developed during 1997-98 will be tested and will continue to undergo
              refinement, as a further step in developing a dedicated porous media
              observational facility available to researchers from around the world at the
              University of Kassel.

The set of proposed experiments will test the
              hypothesis that macrodispersion in densitydependent transport can be predicted
              by existing stochastic theory.  Although it is well known that the density of a
              solute plume can affect its mean motion, the effect of fluid density on fluid
              mixing or effective dispersion in statistically-characterized heterogeneous
              porous media has not been systematically documented from an observational
              standpoint.  Qualitative experimental evidence and theoretical predictions
              indicate that interaction of the density gradients with degree of heterogeneity
              affects dispersion: the permeability heterogeneity can damp out or enhance the
              effects of the density gradients on solute spreading depending on the
              solute/solvent flow configuration.

The experiment is to be conducted in the
              laboratory to ensure isothermal conditions and to avoid unwanted geochemical
              reactions.  Fluids of contrasting density (laboratory-grade water and NaCl
              solutions) will be displaced through the constructed tank in (1) a step-input
              horizontal displacement, and (2) a density-stratified, horizontal flow
              configuration.  The horizontal displacements will be run for both stable and
              unstable flow configurations; the stratified flow configuration will be run for
              a stable configuration.  Each fluid displacement scenario will be run for two
              mean pore velocities and three salt concentrations.  Measurements of solute
              concentration made using solution samplers over time and space will be compared
              to predictions of macrodispersion of dense, miscible fluids based on existing
              stochastic theory previously developed by the PI.  The results will either
              serve to confirm previous theoretical work, or will provide impetus for further
              theory development in this area.  Such an approach, together with ongoing
              numerical simulations, will contribute to knowledge needed for a unified
              understanding of this coupled process to aid in predicting large-scale
              transport of dense, miscible fluids in aquifers.  This knowledge base can then
              serve as the foundation for evaluating the effect on dispersion of additional,
              realistic non-ideal processes typically associated with density-coupled
              miscible transport, such as then-nal processes and heterogeneous geochemical
              reactions.

The work is proposed to be carried out at University of Kassel
              due to the unusually generous resource base that will continue to be available
              there for student and lab technician support. (Similar facilities at the
              Colorado School of Mines would not be available during the period of interest
              to carry out proposed work.) The budget in this proposal is to cover salary and
              related expenses of the PI to continue her collaborative effort at University
              of Kassel for an additional two years to further develop the porous media
              observational facility and to carry out a first set of experiments in this
              facility.

