Title       : Epigenetic Effects of DNA-Associated Kinetochore Proteins in Centromere
               Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a9817147

Award Number: 9817147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383298             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. Warburton peter.warburton@mssm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A role for centromeric alpha satellite DNA in the formation and function of
              human centromeres is strongly implicated by chromosome fragmentation and
              re-introduction studies and by its association with CENtromere Protein-A
              (CENP-A) and CENP-C.  However, neocentromeres, found in mitotically stable
              rearranged marker chromosomes, have no detectable alpha satellite DNA at
              inactive centromeres in stable dicentric chromosomes, and in artificially
              created ectopic alpha satellite DNA arrays, do not form functional centromeres
              and do not bind CENPs.  Thus, these paradoxical findings suggest that
              centromere formation:  1) may not be strictly sequence dependent, 2) is
              reversible and plastic, and 3) requires the presence of certain CENPs.  Thus,
              the following three objectives are designed to further examine the epigenetic
              chromosomal modifications involving centromeric DNA and associated proteins
              that are required to form and propagate centromeres.  1) Mini-chromosomes
              obtained by a novel in vivo strategy for the mitotic rescue of acentric
              chromosomal fragments will be characterized, and more efficient vectors will be
              developed.  Mitotic rescue vectors containing alpha satellite DNA sequences
              with cloned telomeric DNA at one end and selectable markers on the other are
              designed to fragment chromosomes efficiently by Telomere Associated Chromosome
              Fragmentation (TACF).  Acentric chromosomal fragments will become mitotically
              stable if the integrated DNA forms a centromere.  At least one HeLa cell line
              is being characterized with small mitotically stable chromosomal fragments that
              contain the integrated DNA and kinetochore proteins.  Modified mitotic rescue
              vectors will be made that incorporate a gene expressing Green Fluorescent
              Protein (GFP) in order to more efficiently obtain mini-chromosomes.  The
              relative frequencies of mitotic rescue and other predicted integration and TACF
              events will allow quantitative assessment of the frequency and relative
              efficiency of minichromosome formation.  2) The ability of CENP-A to enhance
              the efficiency of de novo centromere formation will be investigated. 
              Endogenous expression of human CENP-A is limited to late S/G2 phase of the cell
              cycle.  The mitotic rescue vectors developed in objective 1 will be transfected
              into HeLa cells that contain an epitope-tagged (HA) human CENP-A gene under
              Tetracycline-regulated expression control.  Thus, providing a pool of available
              CENP-A for incorporation into the nucleosomes of transfected DNA may allow
              formation of centromeric chromatin and an increased frequency of
              mini-chromosomes.
3) The ability of DNA-associated centromere proteins such as
              CENP-A and CENP-C to establish kinetochore structure will be investigated.  DNA
              coding for these proteins will be fused to DNA coding for the alpha satellite
              DNA binding domain of CENP-B.  Chimeric fusion proteins will be transiently
              expressed in mammalian cells containing ectopic alpha satellite DNA or
              dicentric chromosomes, thereby targeting the kinetochore proteins to inactive
              and ectopic alpha satellite DNA.  The formation of kinetochores at these
              locations will be detected by aberrant chromosome behavior during mitosis,
              monitored by immunofluorescence to epitope tags in the chimeric
              proteins.

Investigation of centromere functions will provide information on
              the fundamental process of chromosome segregation and cell division.  Since
              telomeres have been cloned and shown to be functional when reintroduced into
              cells, and origins of replication appear to be abundant and easily provided,
              the centromere remains the least characterized functional component of
              chromosomes.  Only when the functional components of the centromere are defined
              will it be possible to readily construct artificial human chromosomes, which
              will prove invaluable to understanding chromosome dynamics during cell
              division.  Furthermore, since chromosomes, by definition, contain all the
              elements necessary for their own maintenance during cell division, artificial
              chromosomes may be extremely valuable mitotically stable gene expression
              vectors for use in cultured cells or dividing tissues such as stem cells.  

