Title       : Identifying Genes that Restrict Cell Proliferation During Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1999  
File        : a9817161

Award Number: 9817161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iswar K. Hariharan hariharan@helix.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Regulated growth during normal development is contingent on generating the
              appropriate number of cells.  Mechanisms must exist that restrict cell
              proliferation in vivo.  A genetic screen has been devised in Drosophila that
              allows the identification of loss-of-function mutations that give cells even a
              subtle growth advantage over their neighbors.  Mutations are induced on a
              paternally derived chromosome arm that includes a proximally located FRT
              element.  The FLP recombinase is expressed from the eyeless promoter, which
              induces mitotic recombination at high frequency in the eye primordium.  The
              wild type chromosome (inherited from the mother) also contains an FRT element
              and a mini-white gene.  Thus, following mitotic recombination, the mutant clone
              is white and the twin-spot generated by the same recombination event is red. 
              Mutations that result in increased proliferation give rise to eyes, which
              contain more white tissue than red tissue.  A pilot screen has been conducted
              of more than 20,000 chromosomes; mutations were identified that cause a
              relative overproliferation of mutant cells.  Mutations recovered from the
              screen include alleles of net, N-cadherin and nerp1, a novel complementation
              group.

This proposal outlines strategies for conducting a comprehensive
              screen of the second chromosome for mutations of this nature.  Mutations will
              be classified by complementation analysis and by testing for interactions with
              mutations in genes encoding known cell cycle regulators.  Those mutations that
              are lethal or have a visible phenotype will be localized by a combination of
              deletion mapping and meiotic mapping strategies.  A detailed molecular and
              phenotypic characterization of three of the loci identified in the screen will
              be conducted.  net and N-cadherin have already been cloned by others. The nerp1
              locus will be cloned.  In each case, it will be determined whether the
              overproliferation phenotype is due to a loss-of-function or whether it requires
              specific alterations in those genes. For each of these three loci, the patterns
              of cell divisions will be examined in mutant embryos and in mutant tissue in
              the imaginal disc.  The effects of these mutations on the expression patterns
              of known cell cycle regulators will be investigated and alterations in the
              kinetics of cell cycle progression in mutant tissue will be studied.  Finally,
              the effect of overexpressing each of these genes on progression through
              specific phases of the cell cycle will be analyzed.  These studies will
              potentially identify a number of negative regulators of the cell cycle and will
              provide insights into the mechanisms by which three of these loci regulate cell
              proliferation.


