Title       : Tracking Footprints Through an Information Space: Leveraging the Document
               Selections of Expert Problem Solvers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a9817492

Award Number: 9817492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $649997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Gorman gormanp@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Maier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lois M. Delcambre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 6857      SPECIAL PROJECTS (IIS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1086,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to help expert problem solvers find needed
              information in a large, complex information space.  The focus is on one example
              of expert problem solving; the health care field.  Sorting through such a
              heterogeneous collection of electronic and other media materials to find needed
              information, sometimes under time duress can be formidable. This project
              proposes to capture the trace of information used by experts - to monitor the
              paths taken and collection resources used by, in this case physicians, in
              moving from observation, to information gathering, to solution of a given
              health care problem.  By capturing the artifactual trace information associated
              with information seeking and selection, it is hypothesized that greater insight
              can be gained into behaviors of users and patterns of usage.  This knowledge
              can then be fed-back into the design and development of new information
              environments. The work will be conducted by a cross-disciplinary team comprised
              of an MD focusing on information seeking behaviors of physicians, and a group
              of computer scientists focussing on extracting and using regulary structured
              information.  The usefulness of the approaches will be tested in domains other
              than health care, in particular the aircraft design industry through the active
              support of the Boeing Corporation.
