Title       : Molecular Characterization of the Ethylene Receptor ETR1 From Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a9817311

Award Number: 9817311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony B. Bleecker bleecker@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The plant hormone ethylene regulates many aspects of growth and development.  A
              family of proteins that act as receptors for ethylene have been identified from
              Arabidopsis.  This research is focused on gaining an understanding of the
              mechanism by which this family of receptors perceives and transduces the
              ethylene signal.  Expression of the ETR 1 receptor protein in yeast provides a
              model system in which to study the structure/function relationships of the
              ethylene binding site.  Site directed mutagenesis of the ethylene binding
              domain of ETR1 and assessment of effects on ethylene binding activity in yeast
              provides a method for testing and refining a structural model of the ethylene
              binding domain.  Expression in yeast will also continue to provide a source of
              the ETR1 protein for direct biochemical analysis of receptor function,
              including continuing analysis of the involvement of copper as a co-factor for
              binding and investigations into the relationship between ethylene binding and
              signal output by the transmitter domain of the receptor.  Co-expression of
              different isoforms of the receptor in the same yeast line will allow the
              investigation of whether heterodimerization of receptor isoforms plays a role
              in signaling The work in yeast will be complemented by experiments performed in
              mutant and transgenic plants that will provide a functional context for testing
              hypotheses concerning receptor function.  Dominant effects of introduced
              mutations in receptor isoforms will be assessed by transferring altered forms
              of the receptor into wild-type plants and evaluating the effects on the
              ethylene signaling in vivo using a seedling growth-response assay. 
              Receptor-null mutant backgrounds provide a method for evaluating the effects of
              recessive mutations in a similar way.  Ethylene binding assays in plant tissues
              in the receptor-null genetic backgrounds will provide information on the
              contribution each isoform makes to the overall binding activity of plant
              tissues. These experiments will be supported by the development of
              isoform-specific antibodies. This research on the first available plant hormone
              receptor will provide novel information on how ethylene works as a hormone
              signal and will provide a model for the investigation of other hormone
              receptors in plants.
