Title       : RUI: The Flash-Quench Technique as a New Method for Inducing DNA-Protein
               Crosslinks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9817338

Award Number: 9817338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249333             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Stemp estemp@msmc.la.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Saint Mary's College
	      12001 Chalon Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900491526    213/476-2237

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Stemp
MCB 9817338
1. Technical:  A new method is proposed for the generation
              of covalent bonds
between DNA and protein (DNA-protein crosslinks). These
              covalent adducts
are a potentially lethal form of DNA damage, and can be
              formed from attack
of proteins on oxidatively damaged DNA. Using a
              photochemical method called
the flash-quench technique, a powerful
              ground-state oxidant will be
prepared on the DNA by oxidative quenching of a
              photoexcited intercalator.
The oxidized intercalator selectively oxidizes
              guanine bases.  Given that
DNA is typically associated with proteins in the
              cell, and that proteins
have many nucleophilic sidechains, one likely outcome
              following guanine
oxidation is the formation of DNA-protein crosslinks. 
              Current experimental
approaches to DNA-protein crosslinking reactions produce
              either a myriad of
nonspecifically crosslinked products or specific products
              that are not of
physiological relevance.  In contrast, the flash-quench
              technique offers a
way to produce specific crosslinks between DNA and protein
              that may have
physiological relevance.   The specific aims of this study are
              to i) define
and optimize the parameters important for generating
              nonspecific
DNA-protein adducts by the flash-quench technique and ii) create
              specific
DNA-protein crosslinks to obtain one adduct in high yield for
              chemical
characterization.  The successful establishment of this approach
              would help
to elucidate one consequence of oxidative damage to DNA at the
              molecular
level. This research experience will be shared with the
              students.

2. Non-technical: A new method is proposed for the formation of
              strong
bonds between DNA and protein, known as DNA-protein crosslinks.  
              Oxidative
damage to DNA is thought to play a role in many diseases, and many
              people
take antioxidants to counteract the free radicals that can cause
              such
damage.  Free radicals are electron-deficient species that can
              oxidize
(take electrons from) DNA, leaving an "electron hole" on the DNA.  It
              is
thought that this  "electron hole" can be filled  by amino acids
              of
proteins that are electron-rich, resulting in a bond between DNA
              and
protein.  Because DNA must be free to interact with many different
              proteins
in the body, the formation of a permanent bond with one given protein
              could
be lethal.  Here, the flash-quench technique is used to make electron
              holes
on DNA.  In this method, a "flash" of blue light excites a small
              molecule
nestled between the DNA bases, and this excited molecule is then
              "quenched"
by giving an electron to another small molecule nearby the DNA. 
              The
quenched molecule then behaves like a free radical and oxidizes the
              DNA,
which in turn leads to DNA-protein crosslinks.  The advantage of
              the
flash-quench technique is that it only oxidizes one type of group on
              the
DNA, the guanine base, whereas most other approaches heretofore
              cause
indiscriminate damage all over the DNA molecule.  This selectivity
              should
allow for the detailed study of DNA-protein crosslinking reactions
              with
guanine, and should elucidate one consequence of oxidative damage to DNA
              at
the molecular level. This research experience will be shared with
              the
students.



