Title       : Tissue Distribution and Roles of ATP-Specific and GTP-Specific Succinyl-CoA
               Synthetases in Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9817172

Award Number: 9817172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David O. Lambeth dlambeth@mail.med.und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lambeth

For over 40 years, the widely accepted model for the Krebs cycle in
              animals assumes that GTP is produced by the succinyl-CoA synthetase reaction,
              which is then used to produce ATP by the transphosphorylation catalyzed by NDP
              kinase. Recently published evidence (Journal of Biological Chemistry 273
              (1998), pp.27573-27579 and 27580-27586) demonstrates that higher eucaryotes
              possess the genes to express an ATP-specific succinyl-CoA synthetase (A-SCS) as
              well as the long-known GTP-specific succinyl-CoA synthetase (G-SCS). The two
              enzymes use the same type of a-subunit, but have different b-subunits that
              impose nucleotide specificity. The evidence also indicates that A-SCS and G-SCS
              are differentially expressed in various tissues. These results suggest that
              some cells use G-SCS to generate a mitochondrial pool of GTP that is used for
              purposes other than augmenting the ATP produced by oxidative phosphorylation.
              The overall goal of this project is to understand the metabolic implications of
              either enzyme being found in a particular tissue. This goal will be met by
              addressing the following objectives, using the mouse as a model: (1) Determine
              the tissue and cellular distribution of each SCS isoform. (2) Determine the
              genetic elements that control tissue and cellular expression by characterizing
              the promoter for the gene encoding the b-subunit in each type of SCS. (3)
              Determine the factors which alter expression of A-SCS and G-SCS. Work on these
              three objectives will use PCR-based methods and gene-walking techniques to
              obtain the sequences of the promoters, reporter assays to define the structures
              and properties of the promoters, Northern and Western blots to quantitate RNA
              and protein, immunohistochemical techniques to localize each enzyme in various
              tissues, and HPLC-based assays of enzyme activity to further determine tissue
              and cellular distribution of the enzymes. Antipeptide antibodies will be made
              to each of the subunits of the two enzymes for use in Western blots and
              immunohistochemistry. Changes in cellular and tissue expression of the enzymes
              will be assessed as a function of development, experimental diabetes, and
              chemically-induced porphyria. A fourth objective is to understand the
              structural basis of nucleotide specificity by locating the residues which are
              responsible for determining nucleotide specificity. This will be accomplished
              through molecular modeling and site-directed mutagenesis. The anticipated
              results will lead to new insights into the advantages and consequences of
              generating ATP vs. GTP at the substrate phosphorylation level in the Krebs
              cycle. Generation of GTP may provide a distinct pool of high-energy phosphate
              that is used for purposes either within or outside of mitochondria that cannot
              be met by the ATP pool formed by oxidative phosphorylation.
