Title       : Engineering Emerging Urban Systems: Competing Land Uses, and the Effects on
               Built and Natural Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9817698

Award Number: 9817698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359902             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debbie A. Niemeier dniemeier@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jessica M. Utts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0000908   Urban Problems                          
Program Ref : 1057,1349,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9817698 
Niemeier 
Traditionally, disciplined-based science and
              engineering has long governed the generation of new knowledge about the built
              and natural environments.  This knowledge has led to dramatic and compelling
              changes in understanding of the inter-relatedness between these environments. 
              However, to date, there is little knowledge, nor working models to aid in
              understanding how this relationship, in its entirety, changes over time and how
              to incrementally adapt to increase long-term sustainability of both the built
              and natural environments.  This study will begin by compiling the first
              integrated engineering and science assessment for the San Joaquin Valley, "The
              SJV Synthesis of Science and Engineering Issues: An Assessment for Entering the
              21st Century" (SJV Assessment).  The Assessment, aimed at characterizing the
              current state of knowledge regarding interactions between the built and natural
              environments, will include three major efforts:  a compilation of the current
              scientific and engineering knowledge, and gaps in knowledge on the existing
              built and natural environment conditions and interactions in the SJV;
              identification of the ways that brokering of natural resources is undertaken to
              support the current land use configuration and infrastructure services; and
              finally, a summary of needed research in strategies, techniques, and resources
              which would further the likelihood of a more "holistic" sustainability between
              the competing land uses and the built and natural environments.   

Changes
              in the built system are clearly accompanied by trade-offs in the health and
              performance of both the natural and built environments.  Some of these
              trade-offs will be reflected in the spatial distributions and some will be
              reflected in temporal distributions.  Understanding the effects of changes,
              sometimes through policy, on the entire system requires the development and
              assessment of indicators of system performance with both a spatial and temporal
              context.  The second task of this study will be to develop a suite of health
              and performance indicators that can be used to assess the effects of
              perturbations in the system, given current conditions as a baseline.  As part
              of this effort a new database will be established that facilitates on-going and
              dynamic inventorying and monitoring of the newly developed natural and built
              performance and health indicators.  The data will be maintained by the new
              Center for Science, Cities, and the Land currently housed in the John Muir
              Institute on the Environment at UC Davis. 
***




