Title       : FACES(Facilitating Academic Careers in Engneering and Scien ce): Changing the
               Faces of the Engineering and Science Pro fessoriate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a9817632

Award Number: 9817632
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Wayne Clough wayne.clough@carnegie.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9817632
G. Wayne Clough
  
The attached proposal describes the
              Facilitating Academic Careers in Engineering and
Science (FACES) program, a
              collaborative effort between the Colleges of Engineering and
Science at the
              Georgia Institute of Technology, -Morehouse College, and Spelman
              College
designed to significantly increase the number of African American
              students receiving doctoral
degrees in engineering and science fields and
              ultimately increase the number of these individuals
entering the professorate.
               At steady state, we expect the FACES program to produce
ten additional
              African American doctoral recipients per year, thereby doubling Georgia
              Tech's
current output.  A major advantage of FACES will be the intimate
              involvement of Georgia
Tech's African American faculty in all aspects of the
              program.

The FACES program is comprised of several inter-related components,
              each of which
addresses critical steps along the path to an academic career. 
              First, undergraduate students
who have completed their junior year will be
              provided summer and academic year research
experiences as a means of promoting
              their interest in research and graduate school attendance.
These students, as
              well as other worthy candidates, will then be encouraged to enroll in
              graduate
programs using a series of recruitment efforts at national events
              such as the National
Society of Black Engineers Annual Convention, campus
              visits and tours, and a
lecture/workshop series on the merits of graduate
              school and careers in academia.  Admitted
graduate students will then be
              supported as FACES Doctoral Fellows throughout their matriculation through
              graduate school.  A portion of these funds will be used to support travel
              to
technical meetings for research presentations.  Finally, senior doctoral
              students will compete
for faculty coupons which they may use to assist them in
              establishing their research programs
in their initial academic
              appointments.

Institutionalization of the FACES program will be facilitated
              by the establishment of
endowed faculty chair positions at each of the
              participating institutions.  These chairs, which
will be filled on a rotating
              basis with a five-year term, will serve as directors of the FACES
management
              team and eventually be responsible for supervision of FACES activities,
              planning
new initiatives, program evaluation, and student tracking.  The
              chairs will be assisted in program
management activities by the staff of the
              Office of Minority Educational Development
(OMED) office at Georgia Tech.  The
              chaired positions will provide the long-term leadership
necessary to continue
              oversight of FACES after NSF funding ends.

As demonstration of institutional
              commitment to the success of the FACES program,
Georgia Tech will provide
              $380,000 over the five-year period of the NSF award to enable the
FACES
              Doctoral Fellows to complete their degree requirements.  Georgia Tech,
              Morehouse,
and Spelman will also cost-share by performing the tasks necessary
              to solicit sufficient funds
for the establishment of four chair positions
              (approximately $1.5M per chair).  Thus, the total
level of institutional
              cost-sharing over the life of the program will be
              approximately
$6,380,000.

 


