Title       : Master of Science in Product Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9817954

Award Number: 9817954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn Preston                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren P. Seering wps@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Kochan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Magnanti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,9178,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award funds a joint education project between the Engineering Research
              Center for Innovation in Product Development at the Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology, the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), and the University of
              Detroit Mercy (UDM).  This consortium is developing a Product Development
              Leadership Program that will confer a Master of Science degree in Product
              Devlopment.  The MS will be a duel degree between engineering and management,
              and is designed to help experienced technical professionals move into product
              development leadership and management positions.  The ultimate goal of this
              project is to deploy the MS in Product Development degree in many universities
              across the nation in order to have a significant impact on the American product
              development workforce.  Each institution offering such a degree, including the
              three institutions currently involved in the project and those to be added
              later, must share a common vision, definition of concepts, and language.  A
              successful collaboration between the three schools involved will ensure that an
              MS in Product Development from MIT is comparable to one from UDM, which is in
              turn comparable to one from RIT.  The Master's degree program is 24 months
              long, and will allow enrolled students to continue to work at their companies. 
              Students will attend classes at the campus in which they are enrolled for short
              periods of time, and will complete most of the course work through distance
              learning.
