Title       : Applications of Field Theory to Condensed Matter Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2000  
File        : a9817941

Award Number: 9817941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $471000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo H. Fradkin eduardo@buenosaires.physics.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports theoretical research in condensed matter physics.  In
              particular, the research is aimed at advancing the theoretical understanding of
              condensed matter systems involving many strongly correlated degrees of freedom.
               Attention will be focused on the following:  phases of doped Mott insulators,
              including electronic liquid crystal phases, their smectic-nematic-isotropic
              transitions and superconductivity; quantum critical behavior of Kondo
              impurities in d-wave systems, the quantum Hall effect, including strong
              coupling behavior of quantum Hall tunnel junctions; Ginzburg-Landau theory for
              Pfaffian states; and superfluids and superconductors, including d-wave spectral
              flow and vortex motion in dirty systems, and tunneling of magnetization in
              mesoscopic spin systems.  The underlying theme, which unifies this entire
              research program, is that the problems of statistical physics raised by such
              systems are best attacked using the ideas and concepts of field
              theory.

Theoretical research will be conducted on a variety of problems of
              great interest in condensed matter physics.  The methods of field theory will
              be used which are particularly relevant to dealing with these problems
              involving strongly interacting electrons.  Among the problems to be addressed
              are the high temperature superconductors and the quantum Hall states.
