Title       : SGER: Development of a Novel Approach for the In Situ Analysis of Transcription
               Factor-DNA Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1998 
File        : a9817820

Award Number: 9817820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99976              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Arias   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9817820
Arias

It is well established that DNA-binding factors modulate
              transcription in eukaryotes. It is thus of interest to know how and where these
              factors interact with promoter DNA. To date, such information has largely been
              obtained from investigations with protein extracts and nucleosome-free DNA
              templates. Future advances in our understanding of transcriptional processes
              will require new tools for evaluating the validity of in vitro results and
              determining how transcription complexes operate in vivo. The overall goal of
              this research is to develop a novel method for characterizing in vivo
              interactions between nuclear transcription factors and their binding sites in
              cellular promoters. The strategy relies on the ability of formaldehyde to
              rapidly and efficiently cross-link proteins with their DNA-binding sites in
              vivo. Fixed chromatin is then isolated mechanically or enzymatically-cleaved
              into smaller fragments, and immuno-enriched for the covalently-linked protein
              and DNA complex of interest. Cross-links in complexes are reversible at 65C,
              thus yielding individual protein and DNA components for Western blot or PCR
              analysis, respectively. Although untested as yet with living cells, preliminary
              results with a basic/leucine-zipper transcription factor and plant chromatin in
              vitro suggest that the proposed methodology is technically feasible. A
              successful outcome to this work will result in a significant paradigm shift in
              our ability to probe the molecular mechanisms of gene expression. Important
              biological questions that may be addressed by this work include: 1) identifying
              in vivo promoter-binding sites for a transcription factor, 2) isolating new
              genes that are regulated by a transcription factor, 3) analyzing changes in the
              DNA-binding activity of a factor at a known promoter site, and 4) identifying
              which member of a multi-gene family of factors binds to a common target site in
              vivo.

This research is expected to provide new tools for understanding how
              genes are regulated in cells. As genes underlie fundamental events in an
              organism's development, homeostasis, and defense, we envision that work here
              will advance our understanding of how multicellular organisms orchestrate these
              processes.


