Title       : Precipitation Processes in Convection and over Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9817700

Award Number: 9817700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $795681             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Houze houze@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra E. Yuter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Under prior NSF support, the Principal Investigator has advanced scientific
              understanding of precipitation processes in mid-latitude, Great Plains,
              mesoscale convective systems.  In addition to continuing this research, the
              Principal Investigator will focus on precipitation processes in orographic
              convective storms.  Such storms are known for their potential to produce
              extreme flooding events, but due to complexities of the atmospheric dynamics
              and the difficult environment for field work, much is still unknown about these
              systems.  

Polarimetric radar data from already completed field projects
              will be analyzed to identify microphysical processes occurring in the buoyant,
              entraining, expand-ing, bubbles ("particle fountains") that constitute the
              building blocks of most convective systems.  Ongoing studies have developed a
              con-ceptual model that helps explain the convective precipitation process and
              serves as a basis for testing numerical forecast models.

In addition to
              advancing and refining the convec-tive precipitation system conceptual model,
              this project will focus on precipitation processes in orographic set-tings.
              Field observations in research meteorology have tended to emphasize
              precipitating cloud systems in non-orographic situations, to simplify the
              observations by eliminating the difficulties of carrying out radar and
              air-craft studies in complex terrain and to simplify the anal-ysis  by 
              eliminating  the  complex orographic modifications of the airflow,
              precipitation growth, and fallout.  This study addresses the orographic problem
              by using all of the above-mentioned advances in radar meteorology and by taking
              advantage of the sophisticated theory and modeling of dry flow over terrain,
              which has developed over the last several years. 

One regime to be studied
              is coastal northern California.  Within the mountain ridges are important river
              valleys known for their flooding.  Using both operational and special data
              sets, the Principal Investigator will construct composites of the reflectivity
              and radial velocity data which will lead to identification, on a
              climatologi-cal basis, of the orographic modification of the dynamics and
              microphysics of frontal rainstorms moving onshore from the Pacific.

The
              studies of orographic precipitation processes will be furthered by the field
              phase of the Mesoscale Alpine Programme (MAP) in northern Italy and
              sur-rounding countries in the Fall of 1999.  This region is a natural
              laboratory for studying orographic precipitation and the Principal Investigator
              will benefit from the data to be collected by other researchers. 
              

Successful completion of this research should lead to a better
              understanding and forecasting of very heavy, localized precipitation in
              mountains. 

