Title       : Paleoanthropology of the Kibish Formation, Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9817950

Award Number: 9817950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48085              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Fleagle jfleagle@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick E. Grine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the past ten years, no topic in human evolution that has attracted more
              attention from both the public and the research community than the origin of
              anatomically modern humans. It has been the subject of numerous conferences and
              edited volumes and has attracted the attention and efforts of scientists in a
              wide range of disciplines, including geology, paleontology, archeology, and
              genetics as well as paleoanthropologists. This project will contribute
              important new information to this issue by clarifying the chronometric position
              of a series of fossils collected several decades ago that have become critical
              documentation for an early appearance of anatomically modern humans in Africa,
              and will provide a broad framework for environmental and faunal change in East
              Africa during the past 130,000 years. In view of the previous finds from the
              
Kibish Formation and the extent of unexplored deposits, this project has the
              potential of providing new skeletal and archeological remains of modern humans
              during this critical time period that involved major cultural, and probably
              cognitive, advances in our species. 

A two month field season will be
              undertaken in January and February of 1999 with team composed of geologists,
              geochronologists, paleontologists and archeologists. The goals of this research
              will be to clarify the stratigraphy of previously collected hominid remains
              from the Kibish Formation and solidify the age of the different members through
              collection and subsequent analysis of datable materials, including volcanic
              ashes, wood or animal remains, and to survey for new paleontological and
              archeological sites.

