Title       : Mechanisms of Androgen-Mediated Immunoccompetence in House Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a9817008

Award Number: 9817008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigella M. Hillgarth   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne K. Potts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1160,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Hillgarth,N.

Project abstract

The goal of Drs. Hillgarth and Potts
              research is to better understand how androgens play a role in regulating
              immunological defenses and reproductive behaviors.   High testosterone is
              associated with high social and mating success in males, and yet this steroid
              is immunosuppresive.  Why does testosterone have this paradoxical effect?  One
              possible explanation is that testosterone plays a role in allocating energy and
              resources between reproductive and immunological functions.  For example, if a
              male becomes infected, then he must initiate an immune response to survive. 
              However, since immune responses are metabolically expensive, infected males
              must divert energy from less vital needs, such as maintaining social status and
              costly mating displays.  This reallocation may be accomplished by adjusting
              testosterone levels, since males exhibit a decrease in testosterone levels
              during infection.  Previous studies by these investigators on mice living in
              naturalistic enclosures,  found that dominant males were successful in all
              mating attempts with  females and they exhibited the highest levels of
              testosterone; however it is unclear if this was due to increased exposure or
              reduced immunity.  To address these problems, Drs. Hillgarth and Potts propose
              to conduct experiments in which they manipulate testosterone levels and immune
              competence to determine (1) whether testosterone increases dominance or vice
              versa; (2) whether dominant males are immunologically impaired; (3) whether
              increasing testosterone increases susceptibility to parasites; and (4) whether
              males adaptively adjust their testosterone levels and social status if they are
              immunologically challenged.  Besides allowing us to determine if testosterone
              modulates immune and behavioral functions, this work will provide an
              interdisciplinary link between the traditionally separate fields of behavior,
              immunology and endocrinology. 


