Title       : Behavioral and Neurophysiological Effects of Circadian Pacemaker (SCN) Deletion
               in a Wild Population of Rodents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a9817096

Award Number: 9817096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. DeCoursey decoursey@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1160,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT
Proposal #: IBN-9817096
PI Name: Patricia J.
              DeCoursey

Behavioral and Neurophysiological Effects of Circadian Pacemaker
              (SCN) Deletion in a Wild Population of Rodents.

The research will examine
              the importance of the neural pacemaker, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN),
              which regulates circadian (daily) behavioral and physiological functions in all
              mammals. The study will follow survival and behavior of a population of
              free-living ground squirrels at a remote Cascade mountain site over a 3-year
              period. Part of the population will be left neurologically intact as control
              animals, and the remainder of the population modified by surgical deletion of
              the circadian timing system. Mortality, reproductive success, hibernation
              performance, and neuroendocrine patterns will be monitored. A uniquely coded
              radio collar will be attached to each study animal to facilitate radio tracking
              and wintertime radio data-logging.
Circadian pacemakers have been shown to
              play a vital role in many important daily rhythms of animals including humans,
              such as sleep/wake cycles, efficiency cycles, timing of reproduction,
              temperature regulation, levels of hormones in the body, or response to
              medications. In spite of the great significance of circadian pacemakers in
              mammals, prior studies	have used chiefly domesticated small nocturnal rodents
              such as mice, rats, and hamsters. Research projects have beencarried out almost
              exclusively in the laboratory under completely sheltered, stress-free, often
              sterile conditions. As a result, very little evidence is available for wild
              species living under truly natural conditions in normal ecological niches. The
              new "ecological brain research" information accrued should aid in problem
              solving for a range of questions from optimizing survival of
              threatened/endangered wild species to improving health and welfare of
              humans.


