Title       : Urban Planning with Multidisciplinary Competing Objectives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a9817690

Award Number: 9817690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Balling balling@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mitsuru Saito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Walters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0000908   Urban Problems                          
Program Ref : 1057,1349,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9817690 
Balling
This Urban Research Initiative (URI) project develops a
              new approach to urban planning for the future.  The urban planning endeavor is
              complicated by the existence of multiple competing objectives that require
              trade-offs based on the relative importance of objectives.  However, it is
              difficult for planners to numerically quantify the relative weight that the
              public places on each of the objectives.  In this research, a new approach will
              be taken to search for a set of plans which are pareto-optimal.  The beauty of
              the pareto set is that it is independent of the relative importances of the
              objectives.  A non-pareto plan will be noncompetitive regardless of the
              relative importances of the objectives since a pareto plan exists which is
              better in every objective.  This project will develop a genetic algorithm to
              search over millions of plans to obtain a pareto set.  With the computing and
              modeling power that exists today, urban planners can consider many plans and
              this approach eliminates the vast number of non-pareto plans from consideration
              by decision-makers. 

Many of the research ideas were initially developed in
              a previous NSF-supported project in which a genetic algorithm was used to
              obtain pareto-optimal urban plans for a single high-growth city in Utah.  There
              are five goals for this current project:   
   1) obtain pareto plans for a
              multi-city metropolitan region.  Application to a region (the Wasatch Front
              metropolitan region) rather than a single city is a significant conceptual leap
              because regional planning must allow the individual cities to exercise a
              certain degree of planning autonomy.  A two-level approach will be investigated
              in which macro-planning occurs at the regional level while micro-planning
              occurs at the city level.   
   2) expand plans to include additional regional
              objectives from the human environment.  In addition to minimizing traffic
              congestion, cost, and change, metrics will be developed for the maximization of
              affordable housing and the maximization of economic development.   
   3)
              include regional objectives from the natural environment.  In particular,
              metrics will be developed for the control of air pollution and the preservation
              of natural and open spaces in the planning process.   
   4) develop a
              graphical way in which information from the pareto plans may be assimilated by
              decision-makers.  The project will use slider-bars and real-time graphics to
              convey the planning trends in the pareto set that are implied by the various
              competing objectives.  
   5) develop procedures based on formal decision
              theory to assist decision-makers in narrowing the pareto set to a final plan or
              plans. 
***




