Title       : Kinetics of Structural Transformations in Metal and Ceramic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9817235

Award Number: 9817235
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Armen G. Khachaturyan khach@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9817235
Khachaturyan
This theoretical award addresses the problems of
              evolution of the coherent microstructure formed in phase transformations.  The
              long-term goal is development of virtual prototyping of microstructure
              evolution for future integration of computer simulation in materials
              design.

There are two overall objectives.  The first is to further develop
              simulation models with applicability to elastically inhomogeneous anisotropic
              materials with diffusional and diffusionless phase transformations and with
              complex crystallography producing multi-variant microstructure.  This will
              require a significant advancement in the theory of elasticity of elastically
              and structurally inhomogeneous systems, in the theory of phase transformations
              and in computational techniques.

The second objective is to conduct three
              dimensional simulations of technologically important systems, the Ni-Al
              superalloys and the Ti-Al (45-52% Al) alloys.  The effect of applied stress and
              variation of input parameters on the microstructure will be investigated with
              the goal of finding optimal regimes for maximum slowdown in coarsening kinetics
              and microstructure control.  
%%%
This theoretical award addresses the
              problems of evolution of the coherent microstructure formed in phase
              transformations.  The long-term goal is development of virtual prototyping of
              microstructure evolution for future integration of computer simulation in
              materials design.

There are two overall objectives.  The first is to further
              develop simulation models with applicability to elastically inhomogeneous
              anisotropic materials with diffusional and diffusionless phase transformations
              and with complex crystallography producing multi-variant microstructure.  This
              will require a significant advancement in the theory of elasticity of
              elastically and structurally inhomogeneous systems, in the theory of phase
              transformations and in computational techniques.

The second objective is to
              conduct three dimensional simulations of technologically important systems, the
              Ni-Al superalloys and the Ti-Al (45-52% Al) alloys.  The effect of applied
              stress and variation of input parameters on the microstructure will be
              investigated with the goal of finding optimal regimes for maximum slowdown in
              coarsening kinetics and microstructure control.  
***

