Title       : Mathematical Modeling of Neural Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9817194

Award Number: 9817194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence F. Abbott abbott@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              L.F.Abbott 
IBN 98-17194
Mathematical Modeling of Neural
              Populations

ABSTRACT

The proposed research is part of a general program
              that uses mathematical modeling and computational analysis to reveal how the
              functional characteristics of neuronal circuits arise from basic cellular
              mechanisms. The research is theoretical, but it is based on anatomical and
              physiological data, and the results suggest directions and provide predictions
              for future experiments. The proposed work focuses primarily on the visual
              system. The goal is to determine how the circuits of the primary visual cortex
              generate responses to visual images, and to study how the necessary circuit
              elements could develop on the basis of activity-dependent processes.
Much is
              known about how neurons in the primary visual cortex respond to the spatial
              pattern of a visual image, but less is known about the temporal characteristics
              of responses to changing images. One project in the proposed research will
              address this issue by constructing models that accurately duplicate visual
              responses to transient, moving, and oscillating images. A number of mechanisms
              that affect temporal response characteristics will be studied, compared, and
              contrasted. Responses of cells in primary visual cortex often depend on the
              direction that a visual image is moving, and a model of this phenomenon will be
              developed and investigated in depth.
Some cells in the primary visual cortex
              exhibit an interesting property that may represent the first stage in our
              ability to identify objects irrespective of their position in the visual field,
              so-called invariant object recognition. Another research project proposes a new
              model for how transitionally invariant visual responses are generated by
              cortical circuitry. The model is based on the structure and strength of
              interconnections between cortical cells and makes definite predictions about
              what happens if these connections are modulated or disrupted. The predictions
              of the model can be tested experimentally. The development of the synaptic
              interconnections needed in the model through activity-dependent processes will
              also be studied.
The proposed research serves an important educational
              function by training graduate students to apply mathematical and computation
              techniques to the analysis and understanding of neuronal circuits of the brain.
              This education is cross-disciplinary, involving skills in mathematics, physics,
              computer science, and neurobiology.
 

