Title       : Using Simulations to Explore Genetic Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1999   
File        : a9817081

Award Number: 9817081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Garrett M. Odell odellgm@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Computer software being developed takes a non-mathematical description of a gene
              network, converts it into a set of differential equations, and then solves the
              equations to reveal how concentrations of network components change over time.
              The program includes facilities to search for values of these parameters that
              cause the network to produce the desired spatio-temporal pattern. A short cut
              which greatly speeds up the search has been found. Starting with a simple model
              involving products of just five of the segment polarity genes of Drosophila, it
              has been found that the best-characterized interactions between those genes
              could not account for the segment polarity pattern. This initial failure
              pointed to several unexpected experimental results and the resulting network is
              surprisingly robust to changes in parameter values. The network can also
              readily produce, with different parameter values, a few characteristic patterns
              other than the biological segment polarity pattern. Both of these results may
              have evolutionary implications. This preliminary work will be extended to
              encompass the following objectives: a) to find out how and if the
              transcriptional control and post-transcriptional modification mechanisms so far
              discovered combine to explain the observed spatio-temporal patterning behavior
              of this network in wild type and mutant fly embryo blastoderms, b) to
              experimentally measure the values of certain parameters that affect crucially
              this model's behavior, c) to experimentally test certain transcription
              regulation steps pinpointed by the model as all important links, d) to
              comprehend how, later in development and modified by participation of other
              genes, the same network establishes the anterior/posterior compartment boundary
              in imaginal discs.

A computer simulation approach for integrating known
              interactions among cross-regulatory genes into a quantitative mechanistic model
              has been developed. Further refinement and experimental testing will be done.
              Software that will serve as a tool for developmental biologists in both
              research and teaching will be continued to be developed and made available in a
              timely fashion.

