Title       : RUI: Regulation of Reproduction In An Insect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a9817340

Award Number: 9817340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300305             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Rankin srankin@alleg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny College
	      520 North Main Street
	      Meadville, PA  16335    814/332-5380

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Insects have been widely used as model systems to study basic mechanisms of
              hormone production and action.  Study of the regulation of hormone production
              in insects by key regulatory proteins holds promise in the development of new
              biorational pesticides.  Recent work on one major group of regulatory proteins
              (allatostatins) demonstrates that they are found in many species, but that they
              vary considerably in function (and hence in potential practical utility).  Such
              work emphasizes that insects are a large and diverse group, with a long
              evolutionary history and diversity in regulation of reproduction.  The general
              objective of this proposal is to understand the basis of reproduction in an
              insect that is strategically situated on the evolutionary tree to provide
              connections between major insect groups (and hence regulatory features that may
              be broadly applicable).  This investigation will utilize the ring-legged
              earwig, Euborellia annulipes.  This insect is an excellent model system for
              investigating the regulation of egg development because it exhibits precisely
              timed cycles of ovarian development and cycles of juvenile hormone production
              that are highly correlated with the reproductive cycle.

Our recent work
              suggests that earwigs have allatostatins (inhibitors of juvenile hormone
              production) and that earwig allatostatins differ from those isolated thus far
              from other insect species.  In preliminary studies we found that extract of
              brain tissue of earwigs suppresses juvenile hormone production by earwig
              corpora allata in vitro indicating the presence of an earwig brain allatostatin
              and providing a bioassay (test) for its isolation and identification.  The
              goals are to (1) isolate and characterize earwig allatostatins, using
              sequential chromatographic fractionation in combination with an in vitro
              bioassay for juvenile hormone synthesis to identify the inhibitory fractions
              (s).  following amino acid sequence analysis, we will determine the degree of
              similarity (if any) to other neuropeptides.  If earwig allatostatins are
              unique, we will (2) generate antibody probes for use in localization and
              quantitation of these substances within the nervous system.  These
              inter-related goals capitalize on existing chemical isolation procedures,
              bioassays, and immunochemistry, and exploit the history of earwigs exploration
              of the evolution of insect hormone biosynthesis. Regulation and function.

