Title       : Structural Determinants of the Biological Activity of Ryanodine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2000      
File        : a9817605

Award Number: 9817605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272364             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Welch welch@unr.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ryanodine receptor, situated in the triad junction of muscle cells, normally
              functions as the calcium-release channel that couples depolarization of the
              sarcolemma with calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum to trigger
              sarcomere contraction.  The receptor is also found in several other cell types
              where its function in not as clear.  The receptor is so-named because of its
              ability to bind the plant alkaloid, ryanodine, which stabilizes the open
              channel.  The wide distribution of the receptor in muscle and other tissues and
              the complexity by which channel activity is modulated by a variety of agents
              strongly suggest a fundamental role for the receptor in cellular function.  At
              present it is not known (a)what the molecular mechanisms are that control
              channel activity of the receptor, (b) the physiological significance of the
              receptor in non-muscle cells, and (c) whether there are endogenous ligands that
              bind to the ryanodine site and affect the channel.  The long-term goal of this
              project is to understand the molecular mechanism of ryanodine modulation of
              channel activity and the role of the receptor in the intact cell.  The basic
              strategy is to combine directed chemical synthesis of ryanodine analogs, the
              testing of these analogs for their biological activities, and the
              computer-assisted modeling of the molecular structure of the receptor based on
              these activities.  The specific aims of the project are the following:

1. To
              synthesize and test ryanodine analogs to determine the minimal structural
              factors that define their agonist and antagonist properties.
2. To map the
              known high and low affinity ryanodine binding sites and to test their
              functional properties.
3. To map those loci of the binding sites that induce
              the open and closed states of the channel.

The project is a continuing
              collaborative effort of four laboratories, which will contribute expertise in
              organic synthesis, membrane electrophysiology, pharmacology and computer
              modeling.

