Title       : Discovery of Mechanisms in Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9817942

Award Number: 9817942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lindley Darden darden@carnap.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mechanisms are what is discovered in much of science, especially in molecular
              biology.  This work proposes a new analysis of the concept of a mechanism,
              which includes the activities of mechanisms, as well as their component parts.
              Types of activities important in molecular biology are geometrico-mechanical,
              e.g. an inducer fitting into a groove of a repressor protein and changing its
              shape;  electro-chemical, such as covalent bonding between amino acids or
              hydrogen bonding between nuclei acid bases;  and energetic, such as active
              consumption of ATP or passive diffusion across a membrane. When mechanisms are
              proposed, the scientist must specify the activities, as well as the components
              parts, the set-up conditions, a continuous transition of steps, and the
              termination conditions, such as the production of a product.

Questions to be
              addressed are the following: How are mechanisms represented? How are mechanisms
              discovered, evaluated, and revised? What reasoning strategies are sufficient
              for mechanism discovery, evaluation, and revision? What experimental strategies
              are used for testing hypothesized mechanisms?

The primary case study to be
              examined is the mechanism of protein synthesis represented by the "central
              dogma" of molecular biology in the period from 1953 until about 1970 (plus some
              anomalies still problematic). The mechanism's historical development through
              cycles of discovery, evaluation, and revision illustrates the process of
              anomaly-driven mechanism redesign, one of several important reasoning processes
              in contemporary molecular biology.

This work thus contributes to the
              questions in philosophy of science about the nature of theory structure in
              molecular biology -- a set of mechanisms-and the reasoning in scientific
              change--reasoning strategies for discovering, evaluating, and improving
              mechanisms.


