Title       : Signal Recognition Particle RNA Nuclear Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a9817104

Award Number: 9817104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241367             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard M. Fried refried@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The transport of RNA and protein molecules out of and into the nucleus is
              essential for gene expression and the proper functioning of a myriad of
              eukaryotic cellular activities. All nuclear transport occurs by way of the
              nuclear pore complex, a massive structure within the nuclear envelope that
              contains an aqueous, gated channel. Transport is selective, since only specific
              molecules enter or leave the nucleus. Selectivity is achieved through
              interactions between a variety of molecular signals in the transported
              materials and an equivalent variety of soluble transport receptors that bind
              these signals, thereby defining different transport pathways. Nuclear import
              and export are also interdependent activities, since factors that move cargo
              into one compartment must be recycled back to the opposite compartment to begin
              the process anew. A GTPase called Ran maintains circularity and directionality
              by regulating interactions between transport factors in the nucleus and
              cytoplasm. Interestingly, besides the particular receptors by which they are
              defined, transport pathways can be distinguished by whether they merely depend
              on Ran in a GTP-bound state or also require GTP hydrolysis by Ran.

As a
              model nuclear transport system, Fried is determining the in vivo mechanism of
              assembly of the signal recognition particle (SRP), a cytoplasmic complex
              consisting of a 300 nucleotide RNA and six SRP polypeptides. To date, neither
              the pathway for nuclear export of SRP RNA, nor the requirement for Ran in SRP
              RNA export, nor the factors that mediate SRP RNA export are known. This project
              will answer these questions. Specifically, transport competition assays will be
              carried out with a number of RNAs and ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) known
              to utilize different export pathways, to determine if SRP RNA export occurs by
              a known or novel pathway. The requirement for RanGTP and Ran-mediated GTP
              hydrolysis in SRP RNA export will be determined by microinjecting into nuclei
              mutant derivatives of Ran that either deplete the nuclear pool of RanGTP or
              interfere with Ran-mediated GTP hydrolysis. Finally, preliminary evidence
              suggests that SRP proteins are transported into the nucleus to bind SRP RNA and
              mediate its export. Thus, the association between SRP proteins and RNA in the
              nucleus will be determined directly by immunological methods. Also, the rate of
              SRP RNA export will be measured in the presence of excess SRP proteins in vivo;
              a change in rate will be direct evidence that these proteins mediate SRP RNA
              export. Lastly, cell microinjection and in vitro transport assays will be used
              to test SRP proteins for the presence of nuclear import and export signals, as
              would be required if these proteins mediate SRP RNA export.

SRP is but one
              of many RNPs whose in vivo mechanism of assembly has not been delineated. Given
              its rather modest molecular complexity (only seven components), determining how
              SRP assembles in vivo -- which is largely equivalent to determining how the
              components of SRP are transported into and out of the nucleus -- is well within
              reach and will add to our understanding of nuclear transport and RNP biogenesis
              in general. In addition, SRP is essential for cell viability, so that
              deciphering how SRP assembles could provide a new entry point for controlling
              cell growth.
 

