Title       : RUI: Learning the Rules that Govern the Folding and Stability of Coiled Coils.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9817188

Award Number: 9817188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Fairman rfairman@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Fairman
MCB-9817188:


Coiled coils are motifs which involve the interaction
              of sets of a-helices
and are stabilized largely through hydrophobic amino
              acids that line the
interface of the structure. This study focuses on a
              natural four-chain
coiled coil model motif from Lac repressor to quantitate
              sequence-structure
relationships in a systematic fashion.  A mutational
              approach is used to
study the effects of different amino acid sidechains at
              specific positions
in the Lac repressor coiled coil.  Experimental strategies
              involve
synthesis of peptides by solid-phase synthetic methods, purification
              by
reversed-phase chromatography, and biophysical characterization. 
              Coiled
coil stability is measured by the oligomeric states during temperature
              or
chemical denaturation, peptide concentration titrations using
              circular
dichroism spectropolarimetry and   analytical ultracentrifugation. 
              Using
such approaches, a series of experiments will systematically explore
              the
relationship between coiled coil stability and several
              defining
characteristics of coiled coils. Sequences chosen for study will test
              the
relationship between helix length and stability, the role of
              hydrophobic
amino acids on stability and oligomerization, the importance of
              side-chain
interactions at other heptad positions on tetramer stability, and
              the
ability to design simplified sequences based on rules so learned.

With
              an understanding of the determinants that define coiled coil
structure, it
              will be possible to design novel structures that may be of
use in
              nano-engineering, particularly for the synthesis of long
"nanoropes", and with
              appropriate modifications, may even be converted into
conducting materials
              such as "nanowires."  This project is well-suited for
an undergraduate
              laboratory since the synthesis and characterization of
each peptide described
              herein is a project unto itself and can be
accomplished easily within the
              constraints of a one-year senior research
project. Important skills that will
              be learned by undergraduate students
include rigorous quantitative methods in
              protein biochemistry using
biophysical methods and cross-cutting
              interdisciplinary methods that span
from biology and chemistry to physics and
              mathematics.


