Title       : Effect of Self-Esteem on Relationship Enhancement Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9817282

Award Number: 9817282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212224             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Murray smurray@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People with high self-esteem generally report more satisfying and stable marital
              and dating relationships than do people who are troubled by self-doubt. Despite
              the importance of satisfying relationships for both physical and mental health,
              little is known about the mechanisms linking self-esteem to relationship
              well-being. This research is based on the assumption that reflected appraisals
              - perceptions of a partner's regard for the self - mediate the link between
              self-esteem and the processes of attachment and relationship-valuing that are
              critical for relationship well-being and stability. The primary goals of the
              research are to: (1) demonstrate that people who have low self-esteem react to
              acute personal and relationship threats by doubting their partners' continued
              positive regard and by self-protectively finding less value in their
              relationships; (2) demonstrate that people high in self-esteem compensate for
              self and relationship threats by increasing the value of their relationships;
              (3) examine the short- and long-term consequences of these dynamics on
              relationship well-being and stability; and (4) examine how self-protection
              motives that interfere with relationship-enhancement processes for people low
              in self-esteem are activated by working models that stress the contingencies of
              acceptance and a sense of self that is overly enmeshed in the relationship. A
              longitudinal daily experiences study with married couples is being conducted.
              The study provides a day-to-day examination of the links among chronic
              self-esteem, acute self and relationship threats, reflected appraisals, and
              relationship-enhancement processes. Two yearly follow-ups examine the long-term
              effects of these dynamics on marital well-being and stability.

