Title       : Polymer Processing With Supercritical Fluid Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a9817056

Award Number: 9817056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320184             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Manke cmanke@chem1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Esin Gulari  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9223,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9817056
Gulari, Esin/Wayne State U.

Recent measurements from
              our laboratory have shown that dense supercritical or near-critical gases can
              exhibit solubilities of 5-20 wt% or more (Garg, et al., 1994) in polymer melts
              at typical processing temperatures, and that the presence of dissolved gas can
              produce reductions in the viscosity of the melt by as much as two orders of
              magnitude. Because of these properties, we believe that SCG solvents can be
              exploited in broad categories of environmentally beneficial polymer processing
              operations, including recycling of polymers and polymer composites, replacement
              of ozone-depleting blowing agents in polymer foam processing, and reduction of
              volatile organics from polymer assisted metal casting operations.  To
              demonstrate feasibility for these applications according to solubility and
              viscosity criteria listed in Table I (see text), and to encourage industrial
              implementations, we propose to perform solubility measurements and rheological
              measurements on nine polymer-SCG systems listed in Table 2.

A variable
              volume, visible PVT cell will be used to measure the solubility of SCG in
              molten polymer for the nine systems listed in Table 2. Bubble point
              measurements and spectroscopic measurements will also be performed in the
              visible cell for mixed-SCG blowing agents, and for blended polymer systems for
              metal casting.  The PVT measurements will be supplemented by rheological
              measurements performed in a sealed, high-pressure capillary rheometer.  The
              solubility and viscosity data will then be used to develop equation of state
              thermodynamic models and free-volume rheological models for each of the systems
              tested.

The proposed experimental study will produce thermodynamic and
              rheological data for nine polymer-SCG systems needed to evaluate the
              feasibility of SCG assisted polymer processing.  Successful systems will lead
              to replacement of ozone-depleting polymer foaming agents, reductions of VOC in
              metal casting operations, and improved polymer recycling.  The predictive
              thermodynamic and rheological models for polymer-SCG systems will be
              instrumental in the design and engineering of industrial processes based on the
              systems studied.
***

