Title       : Function of Wnt and Ras Signaling Pathways in C. elegans Vulval Induction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9817123

Award Number: 9817123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Eisenmann eisenman@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The activation of signal transduction pathways in response to extracellular
              signals is a basic mechanism used to regulate the growth and differentiation of
              cells.  As more is learned about how extracellular signaling pathways regulate
              cell fate determination it has become clear that in many cases individual cells
              are receiving input from several signaling pathways at once and that cells must
              integrate this information in order to differentiate correctly.  How signaling
              pathways interact at the molecular level and how cells integrate multiple
              signals are poorly understood processes.  Therefore to better understand how
              the diversity of animal cell types is generated during animal development, it
              is essential to understand these processes in more detail.

Dr. Eisemman's
              laboratory studies the function of extracellular signaling in the induction of
              the vulva of C. elegans, a process regulated by a Ras signaling pathway.  A
              mutant screen designed to identify novel factors acting in vulval development
              has been carried out.  Mutations in the bar-1 locus were identified in this
              screen and it was shown that bar-1 encodes a  C. elegans homolog of
              beta-catenin, a protein known to function in Wnt signal transduction pathways. 
              Further characterization of the bar-1 gene suggested that a Wnt signaling
              pathway may be functioning during vulval development, and that conserved Wnt
              and Ras pathways interact during this and other processes in order to regulate
              the activity of an important class of target genes, the Hox genes.  Therefore,
              this is an opportunity to investigate at the molecular level how two
              well-characterized signal transduction cascades interact to control
              differentiation via the regulation of an important class of transcriptional
              regulatory molecules, and to pursue this study in a model system that is well
              suited for genetic and molecular analyses.  

The goal of this proposal is to
              extend the results on the role of Wnt signaling in vulval development, and the
              interactions of the Wnt and Ras pathways in the regulation of lin-39 Hox
              activity in the Vulval Precursor cells.  First, he will identify additional
              factors acting during this process by studying the function of known Wnt
              pathway components in vulval development, by characterizing a second gene
              identified in the mutant screen which could be a downstream Wnt pathway target,
              and by identifying factors which physically interact with the BAR-1 protein. 
              Second, he will determine the mechanisms by which the Wnt and Ras pathways
              control the activity of their common downstream target, the homeodomain protein
              LIN-39, and begin to examine the role of LIN-39 in cell fate specification. 
              The results from this proposal will extend out knowledge of how these two
              conserved pathways function in normal development and how cells integrate
              multiple signaling pathways during development.

