Title       : Collaborative Research: Genomic Evolution in the Endosymbiotic Bacteria
               (Buchnera) of Aphids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9817795

Award Number: 9817795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Baumann pabaumann@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nontechnical Abstract

Collaborative Research: Genomic Evolution in the
              Endosymbiotic Bacteria
(Buchnera) of Aphids

Nancy A. Moran, University of
              Arizona
Paul Baumann, University of California-Davis

Many invertebrates
              contain specialized intracellular bacteria that are transmitted from mother to
              offspring in eggs and that persist in host lineages for millions of years. 
              Typically, animal hosts and bacteria are unable to live apart, a situation that
              has slowed genetic characterization of symbiotic bacteria. The current project
              extends a previous collaboration, between an insect biologist and a
              bacteriologist, which has exploited modern molecular methods to characterize
              individual genes in symbionts of aphids. These bacteria have undergone genetic
              modifications that improve their ability to provide hosts with amino acids that
              are required for growth and reproduction. The new research is designed to
              address the question of how symbionts differ from related nonsymbiotic bacteria
              in overall genome characteristics. The dynamics of genome structure in aphid
              symbionts will be analyzed using newly developed molecular methods for
              determining sizes of large chromosomal fragments and for determining
              chromosomal locations of specific genes in symbionts from several aphid hosts
              of known relationships. In addition, rates of evolution of specific genes will
              be determined for pairs of symbionts with known dates of divergence. These
              results will be compared to corresponding information, from genetic databases,
              for closely related nonsymbiotic bacteria.

The symbionts of aphids possess
              some distinctive genetic traits that appear to represent a general syndrome in
              intracellular bacteria, including both beneficial symbionts of agricultural
              pests and pathogenic bacteria infecting humans, other animals, and plants.
              These characteristics include a reduced number of genes and reduced genome
              size, faster rates of genetic change over time, and biased composition of DNA
              molecules. Thus, the proposed investigations will increase understanding of a
              genetic syndrome that encompasses a variety of agriculturally and medically
              important bacteria. The additional knowledge of the basic biology of these
              organisms could contribute to new methods of controlling both agricultural
              pests and/or agents of disease.


