Title       : Neuronal Basis for Turning Maneuvers: An Adaptive Variation of Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a9817905

Award Number: 9817905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238526             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. McClellan mcclellan@biosci.mbp.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1162,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT
Proposal: IBN 98-17905   
PI: Andrew D. McClellan
Neuronal Basis
              of Turning Maneuvers: An adaptive Variation of Locomotion Behavioral functions
              that are repetitive in nature are usually referred to as rhythmic motor acts,
              such as locomotion (walking, swimming, or flying), respiration, heart rate,
              mating, chewing, and digestion.  Rhythmic motor acts usually are generated by
              sets of nerve cells (neurons) that are called neuronal oscillators.  The
              neuronal oscillators that generate rhythmic motor acts often are continually
              modified to adapt them to the ongoing needs of an animal.  For example,
              locomotion often displays a number of basic but critically important adaptive
              variations, including acceleration, deceleration, turning, equilibrium
              adjustments, and steering.  In the present project, Dr. Andrew McClellan will
              continue his work on how the lamprey brain modulates neuronal oscillators in
              the spinal cord to produced turning maneuvers, a very important adaptive
              variation of locomotor behavior (i.e. swimming).  The lamprey has a number of
              very powerful technical advantages that make it an excellent model system in
              which to study the neural systems in the brain that initiate turning behavior. 
              In particular, anatomical experiments will be used to map the locations of
              neurons in the neural systems in the brain that mediate turning behavior.  In
              addition, in order to determine how these systems operate, several types of
              neurophysiological experiments will be performed: intracellular recordings to
              determine the activity patterns in individual brain neurons during turning
              motor activity; neuronal blocking experiments to test the contributions of
              various populations of brain neurons to turning; and lesion experiments to test
              hypotheses about the neuronal pathways in the brain that mediate turning.  The
              results from this project will contribute to our understanding of how nerve
              cells in the lamprey brain produce turning and also may add fundamental
              information concerning adaptive variations of rhythmic behaviors in other
              animals.



