Title       : ISS Laboratory Upgrade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a9817863

Award Number: 9817863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243800             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Brown brown@ess.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leon J. Slutsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evan H. Abramson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides partial support for upgrading the Impulsive Stimulated
              Scattering (ISS) Laboratory at the University of Washington.  The ISS
              Laboratory has been in nearly continuous operation for over eight years.  In
              part, upgrade work is needed because critical components (lasers, mirrors,
              optical devices and mounts, electronics, and computer systems) are nearing
              reasonable life expectancies.  More importantly however, new technology, now
              availale, will extend the capabilities of the laboratory to higher
              temperatures, and to the study of more difficult and substantially smaller
              samples.  Accurately characterized physical properties of minerals and fluids
              are prerequisite for any effort to understand processes within Earth.  
              Impulsive Stimulated Scattering offers a versatile approach to the measurement
              in a single experiment  of  the elastic moduli, the equation of state, the
              thermal diffusivity,  the viscosity, and the dynamics of molecular
              reorientation in fluids and in very small crystals.  ISS has proven to be well
              adapted both to observations at very high temperatures and to the requirements
              of the diamond-anvil cell and to those of more conventional high-pressure
              systems.  The ISS lab is operated and utilized by an interdisciplinary (Mineral
              Physics) group including, Michael Brown (Geophysics), Leon Slutsky (Chemistry),
              and Evan Abeamson (Chemistry) with collaborations in the Geological Sciences
              (Mark Ghiorso) and Physics (Robert Ingalls) Departments.  Undergraduate and
              graduate students from Geophysics, Geological Sciences, Chemistry, and Physics
              also participated in research in the ISS lab.
***                             
                                                                                             
                                    
