Title       : Computational and Psychophysical Studies of Visual Perceptual Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a9817979

Award Number: 9817979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ning Qian   (Principal Investigator current)
              Zili Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Res Found For Mental Hyg
	      1051 Riverside Drive
	      New York, NY  10032    212/543-5801

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL #9817979
NING QIAN

We see things around us effortlessly.  For this
              reason it is often difficult for us to appreciate the enormous complexity
              involved in visual information processing in the brain.  Researchers have been
              trying to build machines that can mimic various human brain functions. It turns
              out that seeing is a much more difficult task to emulate than, for example,
              playing chess or solving college physics problems. In fact, while there is
              already a chess machine, IBM's Deep Blue, that can challenge the world chess
              champion, we are still far from having a vision machine that approaches the
              visual capabilities of an average three-year old.

To find out how the brain
              achieves the remarkable feat of seeing, researchers have been studying various
              aspects of the visual system using a variety of techniques.  The projects
              proposed in this application center around one of the most important functions
              of our visual system: It constantly recalibrates and improves itself by
              learning from experience.  This so-called visual perceptual learning phenomenon
              has been observed in human subjects of all ages.  Both theoretical and
              experimental methods will be applied in order to synthesize a large body of
              empirical findings into a coherent and logical framework, with the ultimate
              goal of understanding the neural mechanisms of perceptual improvement in the
              visual system.  This synthesis cannot be achieved automatically through data
              accumulation alone, quantitative theories are required for understanding and
              relating different pieces of experimental data.  (Analogously, how a computer
              works cannot be understood only through measuring connectivity and activity of
              the transistors and other components inside the computer; theoretical concepts
              such as operating system and data structure are required.)  The focus of the
              proposed projects is to construct such quantitative theories for visual
              perceptual learning based on existing physiological and anatomical data. 
              Results from these projects will not only advance our understanding of the
              brain mechanisms of visual perception and plasticity but will also provide
              important knowledge that might have practical engineering applications.

