Title       : Analysis of Multiple Cellulases in Plant Cell Wall Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a9817983

Award Number: 9817983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sandy O'Neil                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elena del Campillo cd84@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      The plant cell wall is modified in coordination with almost all
plant
              developmental processes.  Changes in the cell wall are thought to be
mediated
              by a family of enzymes that break down links in the structural
polymers making
              up the cell wall, in particular links between glucose
molecules. The enzymes
              expected to modify cellulose, commonly referred to as
cellulases, are members
              of this family.
        In Arabidopsis  the family of cellulases is extensive
              (more than
twelve members) and is encoded by structurally different classes of
              genes.
Within the family there are members located at the plasma membrane that
              are
presumed to act at the innermost layers of the cell wall, and members
              that
are secreted and are presumed to act at any stratum within the cell
              wall,
including the outermost layer.  Both structural groups have
              similar
catalytic signatures and homology to Family 9 of bacterial
              cellulases.
        This project has the underlying hypothesis that cellulases
              anchored
in the plasma membrane play a role in cell wall biosynthetic
              processes while
those that are extracellular play specific roles in cell wall
              catabolic
processes that range in activity from partial and localized, to
              massive and
catastrophic.  This range in activity is linked to contrasting
              functions
like cell growth and cell death, respectively.  For all
              Arabidopsis
cellulase genes nothing is known about their true in vivo
              substrate, mode of
action and to what extent they can act on cellulose or
              other beta-1-4 glucans.
        To better understand the role of cellulases in
              plant development,
genetic and molecular studies are proposed to investigate
              how gene
expression and enzyme levels are modulated during shifts between
              different
cellulase functions for three structurally distinct Arabidopsis
              cellulase
genes:  a putative membrane-anchored cellulase Cel6.1.1,  a
              putative
secreted,  auxin-stimulated cellulase Cel5.1.1, and a putative
              abscission
cellulase Cel115L.  The comparison is significant since it is
              believed that
the major cell wall changes occurring in processes of growth and
              expansion
take place in the innermost layer of the cell wall.  It is
              anticipated that
cellulases involved in growth will be up-regulated during
              growth and
down-regulated during cell wall disassembly, and vice versa for
              cellulases
involved in cell wall disassembly
        The experimental system
              to be used for these studies is Arabidopsis
hypocotyl growth in which
              contrasting functions of cellulase are manifested
in different developmental
              stages of the same tissue. These functions
include longitudinal and radial
              growth, cell separation and cell death.
Hypocotyl growth will be compared
              among wild-type plants, morphological
mutants that are defective in lateral or
              longitudinal growth but are not
defective in cellulase genes and T-DNA
              insertional mutants (knock-out
mutants) that are predicted to be defective in
              a particular cellulase gene.
Knock-out mutations may change the shape or other
              characteristics of the
plant consistent with the mutated genes hypothesized
              function and will
provide strong evidence for cellulase function.

