Title       : Polar Tetramethylene Biradicals in "Charge Transfer" Cycloaddition and
               Polymerization Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1998   
File        : a9817239

Award Number: 9817239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry K. Hall hkh@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9817239
Hall
In earlier studies it has been shown that "charge transfer"
              reactions can be used to initiate vinyl homo- and copolymerizations.  The
              homopolymerizations were cationic and, of course, the copolymerizations were
              free radical.  This project will extend this chemistry to demonstrate that
              anionic polymerizations can also be brought about by "charge transfer"
              reactions of donor and acceptor olefins and their resulting cyclobutanes.  As a
              second topic knowledge and capabilities regarding "charge transfer"
              interactions will be used to control free radical addition polymerizations. 
              The involvement of "charge transfer" complexes in alternating copolymerizations
              has been long and rather inconclusively discussed.  This project will
              investigate the effect on alternating copolymerizations of added
              non-polymerizable donor or acceptor molecules which will competitively complex
              one of the comonomers.  By such interactions, the steady state concentrations
              of free radical will be raised or lowered leading to control of the sequence
              distribution and composition of the resulting copolymers in ways not accessible
              today.
%%%
Valuable educational experience will be gained by the graduate
              students and postdoctoral associates carrying out this program.  They will
              experience all the aspects of organic synthesis including the latest reaction
              techniques and reagents.  Deliberate polymerizations will be carried out with
              free radical, and ionic initiators to demonstrate that these are satisfactory
              monomers.  The polymeric products will be separated, isolated and thoroughly
              characterized, giving the researchers useful knowledge in synthetic polymer
              chemistry.   

