Title       : DLI Phase 2: Alexandria Digital Earth Prototype
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9817432

Award Number: 9817432
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6488870            (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence R. Smith smithtr@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Frew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anurag Acharya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Divyakant Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Goodchild  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 6857      SPECIAL PROJECTS (IIS)
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1086,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 

IIS-9817432  
Smith, Terence 
University of California, Santa
              Barbara 
$1,080,000 - 12 mos.

DLI Phase 2: Alexandria Digital Earth
              Prototype

This is the first year funding of a five year Cooperative
              Agreement award.  This Project is a component of the InterLib collaboration
              between University of California at Berkeley, the University of California at
              Santa Barbara, and Stanford University.  The combined interLib technologies
              will be demonstrated on the emerging California Digital Library (CDL), and on a
              testbed developed by the San Diego Supercomputer Center. 

The Alexandria
              Digital Earth Prototype (ADEPT) Project will develop digital library
              environments and services that are based on the Digital Earth Metaphor. The
              services will support access to, and use of, heterogeneous digital information
              distributed across the Internet on the basis of georeference as well as other
              criteria. In particular the system will support the construction and use of
              personalized digital information collections called Iscapes (Information
              Landscapes). A variety of services will be provided that allow Iscapes to be
              developed as information service layers in which diverse information resources
              can be organized, accessed, and used. A characteristic feature of Iscapes is
              the creation of special meta-information resources indicating the joint
              usability of the items in the personalized collections. The project will focus
              on developing services that support the construction and use of Iscapes for use
              in learning contexts and for the creation of knowledge across a range of
              disciplines, including the arts, humanities, and social, physical, ] and
              biological sciences. The Project will focus specific attention on evaluating
              the effect of ADEPT services on learning in undergraduate classroom situations.
              

