Title       : Regulation of Morphogenesis and Multicellular Development in Aspergillus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9817272

Award Number: 9817272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce L. Miller bmiller@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Multicellular development in eukaryotes requires precise integration of
              a
number of fundamental biological processes.  Environmental or
              intrinsic
factors can activate diverse signal transduction pathways that
              elicit
tissue- or developmental-specific morphogenesis.  Orderly
              differentiation
and spatial organization of diverse cell types frequently
              requires that
regulation of cell-specific gene expression be coupled to
              alterations in
cell cycle regulation.  Ultimately, cellular morphogenesis is
              driven by
changes in basic processes controlling cell growth, polarity, and
              asymmetry
in cell division.  The long-term goal of this project is to
              address
mechanistic questions concerning multicellular development and
              tissue
formation using the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans.  As in
              higher
eukaryotes, external and internal signals induce two highly
              synchronous
developmental events.  Asexual reproduction (conidiation) is
              characterized
by the spatiotemporal organization of a limited number of
              differentiated
cell types.  Complex transcriptional regulatory interactions
              coordinate the
expression of hundreds of cell-specific genes with critical
              changes in cell
cycle regulation.  A conidiation-independent set of regulatory
              interactions
controls both tissue formation during sexual reproduction and
              cell cycle
modifications required during gametogenesis.  The objectives of
              this
proposal are directed toward elucidating mechanisms that
              control
multicellular development during conidiation, regulate gametogenesis
              and
sexual tissue development, and integrate these two reproductive
              processes.
Specific objectives are focused upon a molecular analysis of the
              Medusa
(medA), Stunted (stuA) and AnSterile12 (anste12) genes.  MedAp is
              required
for commitment to the developmental program, functioning as a
              co-activator
of a subset of conidiation-specific genes and of unknown function
              in
gametogenesis.  StuAp is an APSES-domain protein that is an
              essential
component in integrating developmental gene expression and cell
              cycle
regulation.  The homeodomain protein AnSte12p is related to fungal
              proteins
known to play essential roles in converting distinct signal
              transduction
inputs into specific developmental events.  A balance between
              functions of
StuAp, MedAp and AnSte12p with other developmental regulators
              establishes
cell-specific morphology in Aspergillus nidulans.

During the
              proposed funding period a series of interrelated classical
genetic, molecular
              genetic and biochemical experiments are designed to:  1)
identify DNA response
              elements within an upstream enhancer required for
developmentally regulated,
              but BrlAp-, AbaAp-independent expression of
stuA;  2) begin characterization
              of novel regulatory factors that bind
these response elements;  3) determine
              if stuA overexpression alone, or in
combination with brlA, alters the cell
              cycle through modification of G1/S
and/or G2/M checkpoints;  4) continue
              characterization of extragenic
suppressors of stuA mutations and extragenic
              mutations that mimic the
stunted phenotype;  5) functionally characterize
              MedAp - is it a novel
sequence-specific DNA binding protein?;  6) isolate
              extragenic mutations
that suppress medA -induced growth arrest;  7) physically
              characterize the
A. nidulans ste12 homolog and begin analysis of the
              biological role of
AnSte12p in Aspergillus development.  These experiments
              should provide
important insights into similar mechanisms operating in
              dimorphic fungi as
well as regulatory features that distinguish homothallic
              and heterothallic
fungi.  These experiments should also provide a greater
              understanding of
the diverse strategies used to direct eukaryotic cell
              differentiation and
responses to environmental factors.
