Title       : Natural Disasters and Industrial Activities in the Urban Environment: Potential
               Impacts of Joint Events and Preparedness for Industrial Accidents Caused by
               Natural Disasters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a9817771

Award Number: 9817771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura J. Steinberg lauras@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronaldo Luna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0000908   Urban Problems                          
Program Ref : 1057,1576,9189,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9817771 
Steinberg 
Natural disasters pose a major threat to human life
              and property in urban environments.  Population densities and the concomitant
              concentration of buildings, infrastructure, transportation, and information
              networks in urban areas require particular attention in response and mitigation
              planning for natural disasters.  The mix of land use in urban space, especially
              in the close proximity of industry to residential uses in some areas, presents
              special issues in the planning for natural disasters.  Industrial uses often
              use or produce hazardous materials that could be released unexpectedly during a
              severe natural hazard event.  The potential for explosions as a result of a
              natural disaster also could be a concern for some industrial activities.  An
              interruption to transportation and information networks as a result of a
              natural disaster could prevent, or at least slow, response to an industrial
              site affected by the natural disaster.  Therefore, the consequences of a joint
              event could be catastrophic for the environment and nearby residential
              communities. 

This Urban Research Initiative (URI) research is a
              multi-faceted, interdisciplinary examination of the potential impacts of joint
              events, a natural and technological disaster, on residents and property in
              urban environments.  The research uses a case study approach to investigation
              of two sites, one in California and one in Louisiana, supporting petroleum
              refining activities and also vulnerable to natural disasters.  Furthermore, the
              research will investigate the preparedness of industry, government and
              individuals for response to a joint event, including local land use planning
              near petroleum refining activities as well as mitigation planning for natural
              hazards and industrial accidents.  Current land use policy will be considered,
              including land use designation and density, and the soundness of land use
              practices will be evaluated given the special circumstances of a joint hazard
              event.  This investigation uses a mix of quantitative modeling of environmental
              risk, geographic information tools, survey research, and qualitative interviews
              to build an impact scenario and determine community preparedness for a joint
              disaster. 
***


