Title       : VirB Mediated DNA and Protein Transfer from A. tumefaciens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9817149

Award Number: 9817149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew N. Binns abinns@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Agrobacteria are bacteria that infect damaged plants.  Bacterial DNA is
              transferred to the plant nucleus, and this process is used to move desired
              genes into plants in the process of genetic engineering.  It is important to
              understand how this process occurs, as it represents a natural occurence of
              inter-kingdom DNA transfer, as well as of practical importance.  The movement
              of DNA from Agrobacterium tumefaciens into plant cells depends upon the
              activities of the virulence (vir) genes of  the Ti plasmid.  Several of the Vir
              proteins are required for the production of a single-stranded DNA covalently
              attached to VirD2 at its 5' terminus. The long term objectives are to
              understand how the VirB complex assembles and functions.  Towards this end, a
              variety of genetic and biochemical methods have been developed to study the
              interaction of VirB proteins with themselves and with transported substrates. 
              Recent studies yielded the surprising result that the expression of a subset of
              the VirB proteins in the recipient vastly increased the efficiency of
              virB-mediated conjugal transfer of RSF1010 between agrobacteria.  This result
              leads to several questions about the VirB proteins and recipient activity: a)
              what is the minimal complement of VirB proteins necessary for increased
              recipient activity, b) does the presence of RSF1010 in the recipient affect
              this activity and c) what is the generality of this phenomenon?  The answer to
              these questions may allow the identification of a "core" VirB complex that
              could simplify genetic and biochemical studies, and may have important
              implications to plasmid transfer in general.

In order to define the VirB
              complex and its activity, the interactions between the VirB proteins and
              themselves or the transported substrates must be understood..  In this project
              physical/biochemical analysis, utilizing chemical cross-linking and
              immunoprecipitation will be continued; yeast two hybrid system analysis will be
              carried out, looking specifically at the possibility that other VirB proteins -
              and possibly other unidentified proteins - interact with the VirB7-10 group; 
              and saturation mutagenesis on the virB7-10 genes will be carried out to help
              define regions required for protein interaction and for virulence in general.

