Title       : Carleton and St. Olaf Colleges' Summer Mathematics Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9817967

Award Number: 9817967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deanna B. Haunsperger dhaunspe@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mathematics faculty from Carleton and St. Olaf Colleges plan to continue their
              intensive four-week summer mathematics program for sixteen talented
              undergraduate women. The program will be staffed  by mathematicians who are
              active professionals and outstanding teachers.  The students will immerse
              themselves in mathematics, living and working in a supportive community of
              women scholars (undergraduates, graduates, and post-graduates) who are
              passionate about learning and doing mathematics.  The program's intent is
              threefold:  to excite these young women about mathematics and mathematical
              careers, to provide them with the tools they will need to succeed in a
              mathematical career, and to connect them to a network of fellow female
              mathematicians.  The past Carleton/St. Olaf Summer Mathematics Programs, as
              measured by the participants' post-program evaluations, were successful in
              achieving all of these goals.

Students will attend two courses which meet on
              weekday mornings and are led by female instructors and teaching assistants.  In
              each of the classes, the students will be introduced to fields of mathematics
              beyond calculus that students usually do not have the opportunity to study in a
              standard undergraduate mathematics  
program.  Topics for these courses in the
              past have included algebraic coding theory, graph theory, low-dimensional
              dynamical systems, and functional analysis.  Through these courses, and the
              homework assigned in them, the students will have the opportunity to improve
              their skills in conjecture and proof and written and oral presentation. 
              Students will not receive course credit for, or grades in, these courses, but
              rather written evaluations of their performance and accomplishments from the
              instructors.  Recreational  
problem solving, discussions on topics pertaining
              to the students' continued scholarship (succeeding as a math major, career
              options, choosing and surviving a graduate program, and being a woman
              scientist), and colloquia on exciting areas of mathematics will complete their
              experience.
