Title       : Regulation of GSK 3B in Xenopus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2001      
File        : a9817393

Award Number: 9817393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy B. Green Jeremy_Green@dfci.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dana-Farber Cancer Inst
	      Office of Grants and Contracts
	      Boston, MA  02115    617/632-3940

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3b) is an intracellular
              serine
threonine kinase found at the heart of a number of important
              signaling
pathways. These include embryonic pattern formation, tumor
              suppression and
regulation of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease.
              A dramatic
example of GSK3 function is in axis formation in the frog Xenopus.
              Expression
of molecules that act via GSK3b, such as Wnt proteins, or of mutant
              forms of
GSK3b itself, result in formation of complete ectopic dorsal axes.
              This
suggests that reduction in GSK3b activity is sufficient to cause
              "dorsalness".
Preliminary studies indicate that endogenous GSK3b is less
              abundant on the
dorsal side of the embryo than on the ventral side. This
              contrasts with the
effects of ectopic Wnt expression in which specific
              activity of GSK3b is
reduced but abundance is not. This proposal aims to
              analyze GSK3b regulation
in Xenopus, comparing endogenous mechanisms with
              classical Wnt regulation, to
better understand the modes of regulation of this
              important protein.

     Endogenous dorsal depletion of GSK3b ccan only be by
              reduction of
synthesis or stability or by translocation of protein away from
              the dorsal
side. The recently demonstrated role for a GSK3-binding protein
              suggests a
post-translational mechanism. Therefore, differential stability
              will be tested
by measuring the half-life of epitope-tagged GSK3b in dorsal
              versus ventral
lysates. Translocation of pre-existing GSK3b protein will be
              monitored by
visualizing localization or dispersion of exogenous, tagged GSK3b
              versus
control proteins.

      Sites on the GSK3b protein required for
              endogenous and Wnt-dependent
regulation are unknown. They will be mapped,
              exploiting the advantages of the
Xenopus system for this purpose.
              Dorsal-specific and Wnt-dependent protein
modifications will be coarsely
              mapped by mass spectrometry of tryptic
peptides. Fine mapping and functional
              correlation will be done by
site-directed mutagenesis and expression in vivo.
              Mutants will be made at
candidate modification sites and tested in vivo for
              specific activity with and
without expression of Wnts.

     Preliminary
              biochemical studies reveal proteins associated with GSK3b in
vivo that do not
              correspond to known GSK3b-binding proteins. GSK3b-associated
proteins are
              clearly important and so to identify these novel proteins (and to
determine
              the association or absence of the known proteins in vivo), direct
biochemical
              analysis of proteins co-immunoprecipitated with GSK3b will be
carried out. Gel
              electrophoresis, Western blotting and microsequencing will be
used.



