Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Development and Testing of Quantitative
               Ultrasound for Thyroid Nodule Classification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9817722

Award Number: 9817722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron B. Brill   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Insana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9817722
Brill

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Aaron Brill of Vanderbilt University and Professor
              Shigenobu Nagataki of the Radiation Effects Research Foundation (RERF) in
              Hiroshima, Japan.  The researchers will undertake a study of the development
              and testing of quantitative ultrasound for thyroid nodule classification. 
              Thyroid cancer is uncommon in childhood but has increased in high dose
              radioiodine-exposed children from the Chernobyl accident.  Thousands of these
              children are being screened using clinical, laboratory, and ultrasound studies.
               Ongoing studies involve Japanese, American and Belarussian researchers.  The
              goal of the project is to develop better methods for diagnosing
              radiation-induced thyroid cancer, a problem faced in the A-bomb survivor
              studies, in fallout affected areas in the U.S., and especially in
              Chernobyl-exposed children.  This proposal will test how accurately
              computer-aided ultrasound can identify malignant thyroid lesions using RF
              signals for tissue characterization, harmonic imaging for improved image
              contrast and lesion detection, improved spatial resolution for lesion boundary
              characterization and 3D image segmentation and registration to characterize
              interval changes.  These features will be integrated with other clinical and
              pathology finding to quantitate the relative utility of these quantitative
              predictors.


This project brings together the efforts of two laboratories
              that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The U.S.
              collaborators have expertise in position tracking and registration in magnetic
              resonance imaging (MRI) and they also have expertise in ultrasound tissue
              classification.  The Japanese collaborators have expertise in the area of
              clinical thyroidology.  Results of this research have potential value as a
              screening test for recognition of malignant versus benign nodules.  This
              research advances international human resources through the participation of a
              younger scientist.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project
              will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.
***

