Title       : Gate Dielectric for Scaled CMOS Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9817869

Award Number: 9817869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tso-Ping Ma t.ma@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9817869
Ma
This proposed research will focus on the synthesis,
              characterization, and application of the Jet-Vapor-Deposited (JVD) silicon
              nitride (abbreviated SiN) and titanium oxide (designated TiO2) as advanced gate
              dielectrics for future generations of CMOS technology.

It is widely believed
              that the thermal Si02 will no longer be acceptable as the gate dielectric for
              many applications when its thickness shrinks to around 2 nm or below, due to
              the excessive leakage current arising from direct tunneling. According to "The
              National Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors" (NTRS), published by the
              Semiconductor Industry Association in 1997, such an oxide thickness is required
              for main stream products to be introduced in the year 2006, less than a decade
              away.

Of the numerous possible alternative gate dielectrics that we have
              investigated, either through literature search or through in-house research,
              none has been found to be as promising as the JVD SiN. Our study so far
              indicates that many of the key electronic properties of the JVD SiN, deposited
              directly on Si at room temperature, are comparable to or better than thermal
              SiO2, especially in the ultra-thin regime. These include the high breakdown
              strength, the low trap density, the low dielectric charge density, the low gate
              leakage current, the low stress-induced leakage current, and the high
              resistance to boron penetration, of which the latter three are far better than
              thermal SiO2. The higher dielectric constant of the JVD SiN (nearly twice that
              of the thermal SiO2) allows a thicker gate dielectric to be used to achieve the
              same gate capacity, which should translate into better controllability and
              manufacturability. It is estimated that the JVD SiN may satisfy the gate
              dielectric requirement upto year 2006, or 1.5-2 nm thickness range, according
              to the NTRS.

Beyond year 2005, a higher her dielectric constant is needed.
              We propose to target JVD TiO2 in this study, as our preliminary results in the
              EOT range of around 2 nm look very promising. While others have tried Ti02 as a
              potential gate dielectric on Si, these films are all thicker than 4 nm of EOT
              (equivalent oxide thickness), partly clue tothe inevitable growth of a
              substantial SiO2 layer between Si and the TiO2 film during TiO2 deposition and
              subsequent processes. In our case, we used ultra-thin JVD SiN (< 1 nm) as a
              buffer between the Si substrate and the deposited TiO2 film, which prevented
              oxidation of the Si substrate. We believe that this approach will allow the
              gate dielectric scaling to continue beyond year 2009, or below 1.5 nm of
              EOT.

JVD is a novel process for synthesizing a wide variety of thin films of
              metals, semiconductors, and insulators. It relies on supersonic jets of a light
              carrier gas such as helium to transport depositing vapor from the source to the
              substrate. Because of the separation of the constituent depositing species, and
              the short transit time, there is very little chance for gas-phase nucleation.
              We believe the high impact energies of the depositing species also contribute
              to the improved film quality.

This research project will address a number of
              important scientific as well as technological issues related to the JVD SiN and
              JVD Ti02 in the sub-2-nm EOT range. The potential impact of this research is
              very significant, as it not only promises to advance our knowledge on two very
              promising electronic materials, but also leads to a better understanding of the
              JVD method as a generic tech-nology for synthesizing a variety of thin and
              thick films. The potential impact of this research on the nation's economy,
              should it be successfully implemented by the semiconductor inductory, could be
              tremendous, as it will enable continued scaling of CMOS technology several
              generations beyond what is possible with the conventional thermal SiO2.
***

