Title       : Minority Graduate Education Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a9817536

Award Number: 9817536
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449297             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yolanda S. George YGeorge@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eleanor L. Babco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) Directorate for
              Education and Human Resources (EHR) Programs and the Commission on
              Professionals in Science and Technology (CPST) propose to conduct a three-year
              research study to identify and disseminate findings on the successful
              strategies that lead to increased minority representation in science,
              mathematics, and engineering (SME) doctoral programs and SME-related careers,
              in particular, professorial positions.  Our study will determine the
              factors-the college and university policies, practices, and support
              services-that lead to the successful transition of minority SME undergraduates
              into and through graduate school to career entry. By identifying and
              disseminating these findings, our aim is to stimulate the creation of a
              structural approach to support minority graduate education.

Building upon
              the ongoing research studies of AAAS and CPST, through a series of planning
              studies, surveys and case studies with colleges and universities and key
              federal and private staff, and surveys of SME minority faculty, we will
              identify indicators related to institutional infrastructure, professional
              socialization, and beliefs and attitudes.  Additionally, we will conduct
              special analyses of employment data on recent SME doctorates.

As data are
              being gathered and analyzed, we will facilitate a national dialogue, engaging
              college and university Presidents/Chancellors, deans and provosts, SME
              department chairs, federal and private funders, and leaders in professional SME
              associations to move minority graduate education forward.  Dissemination
              efforts will include efforts such as regional hearings/meetings; annual meeting
              and planning sessions with thirteen professional societies; and continuous
              reporting of minority graduate education issues, programs, and meetings via
              Internet and resource press packets.

The study will draw from its expert
              research consulting team for ongoing advice on the project, as well as from its
              dissemination team for assistance in distributing the findings across a wide
              spectrum of groups and organizations in a variety of media.

