Title       : Role of CaM Kinase II In Long-Term Synaptic Modification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2001   
File        : a9817317

Award Number: 9817317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323064             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ayse Dosemeci dosemeci@marinebio.mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dosemeci
9817317

The aim of the project is to study the role of the enzyme
              CaM Kinase II in the modification of synapses, which are the sites of
              communication between nerve cells. It is known that previous activity can
              modify a synapse so that the communication is either strengthened (potentiated)
              or weakened (depressed). Studies on a model system with slices from the
              hippocampus, a brain region involved in the formation of memory, indicate that
              the frequency of synaptic activity determines whether potentiation or
              depression will occur. Furthermore, these studies show that both long-term
              potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) require an increase in the
              intracellular levels of calcium ion (Ca2+), an event, which leads to the
              activation of CaM kinase II. A central hypothesis of the present project is
              that CaM kinase II is the sensor that transduces frequency information into a
              specific synaptic modification. CaM kinase II modifies itself by a process
              called autophosphorylation, which can occur, at several different sites on the
              molecule. It is proposed that CaM kinase II can detect the temporal pattern of
              Ca2+ waves through autophosphorylation on two of these sites, one, which occurs
              only in the presence and the other only in the absence of Ca2+. Studies using
              isolated synaptic structures that contain CaM kinase II will be conducted to
              verify the above proposal. Parallel studies will investigate changes in the
              phosphorylation state of CaM Kinase II in slices of hippocampus following high-
              and low-frequency stimulation to produce LTP and LTD respectively. The changes
              that are secondary to the self-modification of CaM kinase II will also be
              identified.

The long-term goal of these studies is to uncover how memories
              are acquired in the brain. It is generally accepted that this process depends
              on lasting modification of the communication between nerve cells, or, more
              precisely, on activity-dependent changes in the efficiency of synapses. During
              this process, the temporal pattern or frequency of activity is likely to
              represent one dimension of the information, which needs to be detected and
              transduced. The present proposal, if validated, would provide a molecular
              mechanism for frequency detection at the synapse and clarify initial stages in
              the cascade of events that leads to lasting changes in synaptic efficiency.

