Title       : Structural Characterization of Muscarinic and Alpha Adrenergic Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9817140

Award Number: 9817140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189967             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Turner gturner@chroma.med.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of these studies is to understand the structure and function of
              two important membrane signaling receptors: the muscarinic acetylcholine
              (subtype M1) receptor and the alpha 2B adrenergic receptor.  Both are members
              of a large family of structurally related G protein-coupled receptors.  The
              experimental approach is to use a novel protein expression system with the
              potential of generating each receptor in the quantities large enough to permit
              many standard structural and functional analyses that have not yet been
              possible.  The approach entails the construction of chimeras of the genes
              encoding the receptors and the bacteriorhodopsin gene to direct high level
              expression in the halophilic archaeon Halobacterium salinarum.  Screening of
              chimeras with different portions of the bacteriorhodopsin gene will define an
              optimal strategy for receptor over-expression.  In addition, constructs will
              also be expressed in previously employed eukaryotic cell systems as a means to
              test receptor function in vivo.  The method will ensure that the successfully
              expressed chimeras retain their ability to couple to endogenous downstream
              signaling components.  The studies have a high potential to yield significant
              new information about the molecular mechanisms of signaling by these membrane
              proteins.
