Title       : Molecular Paleoecology of Permafrost Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a9817937

Award Number: 9817937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Wayne rwayne@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Blaire Van Valkenburgh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Arctic is well known as a unique scientific resource for biology
because it
              contains exceptional records of past climatic fluctuations and
the concomitant
              interactions between biota and an extreme environment.
Preliminary research
              has shown that the bones from animals from the
permafrost contain a further
              important record of global change - a genetic
record, detailing faunal
              evolution through the Late Pleistocene.
Preliminary studies reveal that
              ancient DNA techniques and the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) can be used to
              recover, amplify, and sequence
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) of up to 600 base
              pairs (bp) in length from a
variety of permafrost specimens from extensive
              deposits near Dawson, Yukon
Territories and Fairbanks, Alaska. These
              permafrost deposits date from 20
to 50 thousand years ago and contain
              thousands of bones from previous
inhabitants of the area, making this resource
              a national treasure,
comprising the largest collection of Pleistocene genetic
              information in the
world. In addition to testing long-standing systematic
              issues, DNA from
these bones can be used to examine the consequences of past
              environmental
changes, such as the opening of the Bering land bridge, and
              climate and
anthropogenic effects on population genetics.

Permafrost DNA
              will be used to examine several questions concerning the
effects of Late
              Pleistocene ecology on the genetics of modern populations,
and how the effects
              of current environmental change and biological
introductions compare with that
              of the recent past. Mitochondrial control
region and cytochrome b DNA
              sequences of approximately 200-300 bp will be
sequenced from about 20
              specimens each of wolf (Canis lupus), moose (Alces
gigas) and elk (Cervus
              elaphus) to examine how genetic diversity has
changed since the Late
              Pleistocene. All three taxa have fossil records of
more than several thousand
              years in North America, yet the genetic
diversity of modern North American
              populations is sufficiently limited that
recent bottlenecks appear to have
              occurred. These results will be
contrasted with those from analyses of the
              caribou (Rangifer tarandus) and
the brown bear (Ursus arctos), which also have
              a long record in North
America but have moderate amounts of genetic diversity
              in modern
populations, perhaps due to large population sizes throughout the
              Late
Pleistocene.

As well as examining changes in genetic diversity through
              time, the
permafrost DNA will be used to assess the relationship of Late
              Pleistocene
populations to their modern counterparts. We will distinguish
              among four
possible alternatives: 1) extant populations have DNA sequences
              that are
phylogenetically distinct from those in the Old World and are
              directly
related to those from Late Pleistocene North American predecessors.
              This
result implies genetic continuity and continental isolation throughout
              the
Late Pleistocene and that modern populations survived recent
              glacial
conditions and megafaunal extinction events in relative isolation; 2)
              DNA
sequences of modern populations do not share a common ancestry with
              those
in the permafrost implying that North American lineages went
              extinct
sometime in the past 18,000 years and were replaced by those of an
              Old
World ancestry existing in Beringia; 3) modern populations have a
              mixture
of DNA haplotypes that are related to those from the Late Pleistocene
              of
North America and the Old World implying recent admixture between Old
              and
New World populations; and 4) both modern and permafrost populations have
              a
mixture of DNA haplotypes of Old and New World ancestry implying a
              history
of continental mixing over the Late Pleistocene.

Ancient DNA
              research has promised to allow evolutionary change to
be observed through real
              time but has been constrained by the number of
samples and time frame that it
              has been possible to analyse. This project
will fulfil that potential since it
              permits genetic change to be recorded
in two large, well sampled natural
              populations (Fairbanks and Dawson) over
a time frame of tens of thousands of
              years. It will also lead to a better
understanding of the factors involved in
              molecular preservation under
permafrost conditions, and suitable storage and
              handling regimes for
specimens uncovered by current mining operations. No
              organized collecting
program currently exists for this valuable resource, and
              each year hundreds
of specimens from this genetic museum are simply washed
              away downstream

