Title       : Attentional Control in Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2000     
File        : a9817245

Award Number: 9817245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99455              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley S. Gibson gibson.16@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              When we gaze at a complex visual scene, what determines where we look? Current
              theory suggests that visual attention is controlled by two distinct mechanisms:
              "goal-directed" when visual attention is oriented in terms of the observer's
              goals, and "stimulus-driven" when visual attention is "captured" by objects and
              events in the external world irrespective of goals. The primary question that
              will be addressed in the present research is, "Can visual attention ever be
              captured in purely stimulus-driven fashion?"  Over the past decade, substantial
              empirical evidence has supported the possiblity that at least one stimlus
              feature, abrupt onset, can drive attention. This evidence has been obtained
              using a visual search paradigm in which a single abrupt visual onset (which
              happens to be the target only by chance) appears among several"no-onset"
              elements (which are typically formed by removing camouflaging parts from
              preceding placeholder objects).  In contrast, other visual features such as
              color, luminance, flicker, and motion do not appear capable of capturing
              attention.  Such findings have led to the belief thatabrupt visual onsets are
              special. One popular interpretation is that they capture attention because they
              correspond to the appearance of new perceptual objects.  However, the present
              research seeks evidence for an alternative account in which abrupt visual
              onsets may capture  attention because they correspond to the earliest (and
              largest) form of change in the visual field.  What actually happens is that
              perception of the no-onset elements is delayed.  This hypothesis is
              controversial primarily because such a claim has been thought to be
              inconsistent with traditional accounts of temporal vision (involving a
              phenomenon known as temporal integration). Thus, the first phase of this
              research program is devoted to developing a new, temporal coding account of
              temporal integration that is based on human psychophysical data obtained from a
              novel change detection paradigm as well as mathematical modeling techniques. 
              In addition, a dichoptic presentation paradigm will also be used in an attempt
              to localize the temporal coding process within the visual system (i.e., before
              V1 or after V1).  The second phase of this research will then focus on how this
              temporal coding process is affected by other higher-level states of the visual
              system such as whether attention is focused on a single object or divided over
              several objects (as it typically is in the visual search paradigm).  Together,
              the present series of experiments are important because they will extend our
              knowledge of temporal vision while also providing a more thorough understanding
              of why abrupt visual onsets appear unique in their ability to capture
              attention.     



