Title       : The Influence of Water Temperature on Predator-Induced Defensive Responses and
               Life-History Trade-offs in a Marine Intertidal Snail
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a9817106

Award Number: 9817106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185939             (Estimated)
Investigator: L D. Smith ldsmith@lynx.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey C. Trussell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Evolutionary ecologists seek to understand (1) how organisms adapt to changing
              environments and (2) how broad scale patterns of morphological variation
              reflect such adaptation.  Until recently, morphological variation within
              species has been interpreted as adaptation due to natural selection rather than
              environmentally induced (ecophenotypic) phenomena.  However, it is increasingly
              clear that morphological variation within species can also reflect the
              developmental response of an organism to its environment (phenotypic
              plasticity).
        Among the best documented examples of adaptive phenotypic
              plasticity are predator-induced defensive responses in prey.  Recent
              experiments have shown that snails can reduce their vulnerability to crab
              predators by altering shell form (e.g., thickening shells) in response to
              water-borne chemical cues (effluent) from crabs.  Colder water temperatures,
              however, increase the rate at which shell material dissolves and, thus, could
              profoundly affect the degree, effectiveness, and cost of this defensive
              response. The PIs wish to determine how snail populations respond to the
              interacting environmental cues of crab effluent and water temperature.
       
              The historical and geographic relationship of the smooth periwinkle snail
              Littorina obtusata and the introduced green crab Carcinus maenas in the Gulf of
              Maine provides an outstanding system to test these objectives. The PIs  earlier
              work has shown that smooth periwinkles in the northern Gulf have thicker shells
              than in the southern Gulf and that shell thickness of snails increases in
              response to green crab effluent.  Water temperature and green crab abundances
              are both higher in the southern than in the northern Gulf of Maine and, thus,
              could influence snail shell form separately or in concert.
        To
              determine the relative contribution of crab effluent and water temperature to
              snail shell form, the PIs will conduct a field experiment that manipulates
              levels of each cue.  Half of a group of juvenile northern snails will be moved
              to a southern site, while the remainder are left in their native site. 
              Similarly, half of a group of juvenile southern snails will be moved to the
              northern site, while the remainder are left at the southern site.  The PIs will
              compare shell thickness and body growth among snails transplanted between
              northern and southern populations and those reared in their native
              environments.  For each population in each location, half of the snails will be
              exposed to crab effluent and the other half will not.  These experiments will
              help us understand the effects of environmental and genetic influences on
              resulting shell and body form as well as the relative importance of each cue. 
              In a second experiment, trade-offs between body size, growth rate, reproductive
              success and shell thickness will be examined in the laboratory using a similar
              reciprocal design.  Egg masses will be cultured from 2 northern and 2 southern
              populations, and the hatchlings will be raised in temperature-controlled
              incubators.  Each population will be subjected to 2 water temperatures and 2
              crab treatments (with, without effluent).  Upon reaching maturity, female
              snails will be allowed to mate and lay eggs.  These experiments will identify
              life history trade-offs associated with predator-induced change in shell form
              at each temperature.  In a third set of experiments, the effectiveness of the
              induced response in reducing vulnerability to crab predation will be tested by
              comparing handling times and techniques and foraging success of green crabs on
              the snails derived from the laboratory experiments.  Finally, the PIs will
              survey green crab and smooth periwinkle populations at multiple sites in the
              Gulf of Maine to test for geographic and seasonal associations between snail
              shell thickness and crab abundance.
        Results from this project will
              provide a better understanding of (1) the relative importance of genetic vs.
              environmentally induced phenomena and (2) contributions of two ubiquitous
              environmental cues (predators, temperature) in producing broad scale
              morphological variation. These issues are particularly germane, because (1)
              anticipated changes in global climate will alter water temperatures locally and
              regionally and (2) temperature-related range expansions and human-mediated
              introductions will expose native prey populations to novel predators.



