Title       : The Chemistry of Two-Electron Mixed Valence Excited States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9817851

Award Number: 9817851
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $571000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel G. Nocera nocera@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports research on two-electron transfer reactions by Dr. Daniel G. Nocera of
              the Chemistry Department, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  The goal of
              the research is to elucidate excited state reaction pathways for
              oxidation-reduction reactions occurring in two-electron steps at photoactivated
              metal centers.  Each complex studied will contain two metal atoms in different
              oxidation states, linked by either single or multiple metal-metal bonds.  In
              the case of single metal-metal bonded species, the oxidation states of the
              metals differ by two.  For example, photoelimination of dihydrogen or dihalogen
              from hydrido halides of dirhodium bridged by difluorophospine ligands is
              expected to proceed through a Rh2(II,0) mixed valence intermediate that can be
              characterized.  Additional complexes, including ones containing asymmetric
              ligands to stabilize the two-electron mixed valence centers, will be
              synthesized and studied.  In the case of dimers linked by multiple bonds,
              two-electron mixed valency will be achieved by photogenerating a core with M-M+
              character.  Such species can be obtained from complexes with quadruple bonds or
              with an edge-sharing bioctahedral arrangement.  Photoinitiated bond addition
              and atom transfer reactions for a variety of substrates will be
              explored.

Multielectron reactions are not well understood, but occur in many
              important processes, including photocatalysis, energy conversion, and
              information processing.  The reactions studied here are unusual in that one
              photon promotes the movement of two-electrons.  Understanding the mechanism of
              multielectron transfer should open the way to new reactions involving
              transition metals and small molecule phototransformations.  Students involved
              in the project will experience both synthetic techniques and physical methods.
