Title       : Mechanistic Studies of Photoactive Protein Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a9817388

Award Number: 9817388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal W. Woodbury NWoodbury@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aileen K. Taguchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Woodbury
9817388

This research will use mutagenesis and ultrafast
              spectroscopy to investigate the early time mechanism of bacterial
              photosynthetic reaction centers by exploring the following issues: the control
              of electron transfer along the two symmetrically related electron transfer
              pathways, the role of the accessory bacteriochlorophylls in mediating energy
              transfer from the antenna, and the role of protein dynamics in the electron
              transfer reactions. In addition, single molecule fluorescence spectroscopy will
              be used to explore the energetics and decay times of early charge transfer
              intermediates in single reaction center/antenna complexes as well as the
              molecule-to-molecule variation in the transition energies of high-fluorescence
              reaction center mutants. Finally, photoactive yellow protein, a blue light
              sensory complex will be studied with ultrafast spectroscopy in order to
              understand the role of protein motion in the early time mechanism.

The
              mechanistic study of protein-mediated chemistry remains a central theme of
              modern biochemical research. Light driven biological reactions have been
              particularly amenable to dynamic studies in this area because reactions
              throughout the sample can be initiated and monitored with extraordinary kinetic
              resolution using modern pulsed-laser techniques. In this project mutagenesis
              and femtosecond spectroscopy will be used to study the role of the protein in
              controlling the pathway of electron transfer, the mechanism by which cofactors
              in the reaction center mediate capture of energy from the antenna, and the role
              of protein dynamics in the solar energy conversion reactions. In addition, the
              light emission from single photosynthetic complexes will be monitored in order
              to study how the thermodynamics of photosynthetic reactions changed from
              complex to complex. Finally, a study of the femtosecond dynamics of photoactive
              yellow protein, a blue light sensory complex involved in light-directed
              bacterial movement, will be initiated. In this system, protein motion is
              thought to be central to the mechanism.

