Title       : Characterization of Arabidopsis Thaliana Shoot Meristem L1 Layer-specific
               Homeodomain Protein, ATML1, and its Role in Meristem Function and Pattern
               Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1999   
File        : a9817268

Award Number: 9817268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharman D. O'Neill sdoneill@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An emerging concept in plant developmental biology is that the genetic
control
              of patterned cell division is the key to understanding plant
development. 
              Plants depend on controlled cell divisions in order to make
new organs
              throughout their life cycle.  Organ development in flowering
plants results
              almost entirely from the patterned control of the number,
place and plane of
              cell division, in conjunction with regulated and
coordinated cellular
              expansion.  The establishment of patterned control
occurs during several major
              phases of plant development, namely during
embryogenesis, shoot and root
              development, and during inflorescence and
floral morphogenesis.  A novel
              homeobox gene, ATML1, in Arabidopsis
thaliana is expressed very early in plant
              development, being first detected
in the zygote, then segregated to the apical
              cell and later to the early
protoderm during asymmetric cell division.  An
              atml1 mutant exhibits an
embryo-defective phenotype, with a loss of cellular
              patterning.  Based on
its pattern of expression and its mutant phenotype, the
              ATML1 gene and its
protein product are likely to play a critical role in early
              embryogenesis,
specifically contributing to the control of pattern formation
              during
embryogenesis and possibly later during shoot development. 
This
              project seeks to determine the function of ATML1 in embryogenesis and
SAM
              organization/function by characterizing the genetics and phenotype of
an atml1
              mutant.  The specific objectives are to use a combination of
classical and
              molecular genetic approaches to study the effect of the T-DNA
insertion in the
              atml1 mutant line. This research will provide critical
information for our
              understanding of the basis of cell division and early
pattern formation during
              embryogenesis, and the specification of the
identity of an L1 cell layer in
              the SAM.  Localization of the ATML1 gene
products should also provide insight
              into current hypotheses concerning
protein trafficking and lineage versus
              positional information in the
determination of pattern in plants.
 
