Title       : Molecular-Genetic Study of Aspartate Aminotransferase Genes/Isoenzymes in
               Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9817900

Award Number: 9817900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gloria M. Coruzzi gloria.coruzzi@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Molecular, genetic and biochemical approaches are being used in Arabidopsis to
              study the function of distinct subcellular isoenzymes of aspartate
              aminotransferase (AspAT). Aspartate synthesis by AspAT is crucial to plant
              growth and development, as aspartate serves to transport assimilated nitrogen
              to seeds, and is the precursor to essential amino acids including methionine
              and lysine. Thus, understanding which subcellular AspAT isoenzymes control
              aspartate synthesis may have applications for modifiying the synthesis of
              essential aspartate-derived amino acids in crop plants less amenable to
              molecular-genetic analysis. Arabidopsis contains five ASP genes encoding AspAT
              isoenzymes localized to the cytosol, chloroplasts, mitochondria or peroxisomes.
              Arabidopsis mutants defective in the major AAT isoenzymes: cytosolic AAT2
              (aat2) or chloroplastic AAT3 (aat3) have been isolated and are being used to
              determine the function of each subcellular isoenzyme in vivo. Analysis of aat2
              mutants has shown that cytosolic AAT2 controls the bulk of N-assimilation into
              aspartate in the light and that this pool of aspartate in the cytosol is
              converted into asparagine for N-transport in the dark. A parallel analysis of
              mutants defective in chloroplastic aat3 shows that AAT3 controls the synthesis
              of aspartate in chloroplasts, and that this pool of aspartate in chloroplasts
              is used for methionine biosynthesis, an essential aspartate-derived amino acid.
              Thus, this research on the aat2 and aat3 mutants of Arabidopsis has provided
              insight into metabolic flux from subcellular pools of aspartate in vivo which
              could not have been predicted based on in vitro biochemical studies of the
              isolated isoenzymes. Additional studies include the isolation of mutants
              defective in mitochondrial or peroxisomal isoenzymes of AspAT. These additional
              studies should address roles of these other subcellular AAT isoenzymes in
              aspects of aspartate metabolism including plant-specific processes such as
              photorespiration. Most importantly, an unexpected finding is that certain
              mutations in the ASP genes of the aat2 and aat3 mutations lead to aspartate
              overaccumulation. These mutations in the corresponding ASP genes appear to
              impair aspartate degradation, but not aspartate synthesis by the mutant enzyme.
              These mutant ASP genes will be expressed in transgenic plants in an attempt to
              engineer plants that overproduce aspartate. Such transgenic plants may be
              expected to exhibit increased rates of nitrogen assimilation and/or produce
              seeds with higher levels of aspartate-derived essential amino acids.. Thus,
              these studies on aspartate synthesis and catabolism in a model genetic plant,
              may have significant impact on improving nitrogen assimilation and/or the
              synthesis of essential aspartate-derived amino acids in crop plants.
