Title       : Cell Division Control During Leech Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a9817384

Award Number: 9817384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364024             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley T. Bissen bissen@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The development of a complex multicellular organism from a single fertilized egg
              requires numerous rounds of cell division.  While all mitotic cells are subject
              to internal checkpoint controls, those in a multicellular organism are also
              regulated by external influences.  In a developing embryo, for example, cell
              division must be coordinated with other developmental processes, such as cell
              fate specification, cell migration, and cell differentiation.  The objectives
              of this research are to examine the temporal and spatial controls of cell
              division during embryonic development.  These studies will be conducted in
              Helobdella leech embryos, which undergo invariant patterns of asynchronous and
              unequal cell division to produce individually identifiable cells whose cell
              lineages, cell cycle properties, and developmental fates are known.  The first
              part of this research project will investigate how the timing of cell division
              is regulated within the different classes of leech identified cells.  In
              particular, the patterns of expression, regulation of activity, and function of
              a highly conserved cell cycle control protein (Cdc25) will be examined.  For
              example, preliminary data revealed that overexpression of Cdc25 induces
              premature cell divisions in the segmental founder cells. Evidence suggests that
              neither the absolute level of Cdc25 nor the age of the cell determines the
              onset of premature division, but rather premature division is triggered when
              these cells reach a particular location in the embryo.  

Experiments are
              designed to identify the source of this external signal.  The second part of
              this research will investigate how the orientation of cleavage is regulated in
              a specific subset of early blastomeres.  Previous work has shown that, in the
              absence of zygotic transcription, the mitotic spindles of these cells do not
              assume the proper orientation for unequal cleavage and, as a consequence, they
              always cleave equally.  In order to identify the zygotically expressed genes
              involved in spindle positioning, a pool of differentially expressed cDNAs has
              been generated using subtractive hybridization and differential screening
              techniques.  A series of screening procedures will be used to identify putative
              "spindle positioning" sequences among this collection of cDNAs. Upon isolation
              of full-length cDNAs, those involved in spindle positioning will be identified
              on the basis of the ability of the corresponding RNA to restore unequal
              cleavages in these cells of transcriptionally inhibited embryos.  These studies
              will contribute to the emerging appreciation of the diverse mechanisms used by
              cells in complex organisms to regulate the timing and symmetry of cell
              division.





