Title       : NSF/EPA TSE: Novel Compressed Solvent Extraction Processes for Enhanced Biomass
               Conversion by Thermophilic Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a9817069

Award Number: 9817069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344427             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Knutson bknutson@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sue Nokes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl A. Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert J. Strobel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of the proposed work is to demonstrate the 
feasibility of
              extractive fermentation of volatile products using 
a compressed or
              supercritical solvent.  The project will focus on 
the efficient continuous
              recovery of ethanol from biomass 
fermentation by the fibrolytic thermophilic
              bacteria, Clostridium 
thermocellum.  This organism is capable of producing
              considerable 
amounts of ethanol directly from fibrous biomass, but is
              inhibited 
by the presence of relatively dilute ethanol.  The Principal
              
Invertigators' (PIs) hypthesis is that a compressed solvent is 
capable of
              efficiently extracting product so as to reduce product 
inhibition and thereby
              increase the fermentation rate and yield.  
Supercritical fluid extractive
              fermentation would have the 
advantages of gas-like mass transfer properties,
              solvent strength 
tunability, and ease of solvent regeneration and product
              recovery 
through depressurization.  The specific objectives are to: (i)
              
characterize effects of compressed solvents on the growth and 
metabolism of
              Clostridium thermocellum in the presence of soluble 
and insoluble
              carbohydrates; (ii) demonstrate in situ ethanol 
removal using a compressed
              fluid and evaluate the metabolic 
activity of Clostridium thermocellum as a
              function of extraction 
conditions; and (iii) develop a mathematicl model
              which will 
facilitate the design and analysis of compressed extractive
              
fermentation processes.   This award is made by NSF as part of
the joint
              NSF/EPA Program on Technologies for a Sustainable
Environment.
 
 

