Title       : Theoretical Studies of Chemical Processes in Clusters, in Solution, at Solid-Gas
               and Solid-Liquid Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a9817918

Award Number: 9817918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thanh N. Truong Truong@chemistry.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thanh Truong of the University of Utah is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to understand how the structure, reactivity,
              and mechanism of a given physical or chemical process are affected in clusters,
              in solution, on surfaces, and at solid-liquid interfaces.  Three complementary
              research directions are being pursued: microsolvation, solvation, and
              interfacial chemistry, along with projects in applications and methodological
              development in each.  Applications include dissociation of sodium chloride in
              hydrated clusters, the role of aqueous solvent on organic reactions, and the
              adsorption mode of water at metal oxide surfaces.  New techniques include
              perturbative Monte Carlo simulation within the Effective Fragment Method, the
              Generalized Conductor-like Screening Model, and the Combined Embedded Cluster
              at the Interface with Liquid Approach.

This research plans to improve our
              fundamental understanding at the molecular level of environmental effects on
              important physical and chemical processes.  A systematic series of theoretical
              and computational projects are pursued at increasing levels of complexity to
              address how reactions proceed in solution and at solid-liquid interfaces, and
              how they differ from those in the gas phase.  The multidisciplinary nature of
              this research facilitates the training of new scientists by providing a broad
              background in theoretical chemistry and physics through a problem-solving
              orientation.

