Title       : Comparative Automaticity of Fear
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a9817649

Award Number: 9817649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309332             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl S. Rosengren krosengr@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald L. Clore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lay conceptions of emotion often emphasize the reflexive nature of emotional
              reactions. An insult, for example, might quickly give rise to anger, seemingly
              with little deliberation or thought. This view has recently received support in
              biological, clinical, and social psychology. The current research challenges
              this view, suggesting that it may apply only for a limited set of emotions. The
              available evidence indicates both qualitative and quantitative differences
              between fear and other emotions, with fear being the one emotion that can be
              triggered in the absence of conscious processing or attention. However, this
              hypothesis is based on a comparison of separate studies using a diversity of
              methods. Systematic comparisons among different emotions are virtually
              nonexistent within the context of the same experiment. Six studies will test
              differences between fear, sadness, disgust, happiness, and excitement using
              emotional slides and computerized timing. A variety of behavioral, cognitive,
              subjective, and physiological measures are included in the analysis. From a
              biological perspective, it is sensible that people are capable of responding to
              potential threats as rapidly as possible, irrespective of their prior plans and
              conscious thoughts. However, rapid responding is less important in other types
              of emotional situations, and flexible, thoughtful responding tends to be more
              adaptive when there are no immediate threats to safety. It is therefore
              proposed that biology has prepared humans to respond rapidly to potential
              threats, but not to other types of emotional situations. Only careful,
              controlled studies can provide empirical support for this hypothesis. The
              results are likely to have major theoretical significance, and may inform
              future therapeutic interventions.

