Title       : Traditional Ecological Knowledge of Beluga Whales: Local Documentation and
               Cooperative and Cooperative Application in Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a9817923

Award Number: 9817923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry P. Huntington hph@alaska.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn J. Frost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria E. Fernandez-Gimenez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Huntington Consulting
	      P.O. Box 773564
	      Eagle River, AK  99577    907/696-2564

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) offers potential benefits in many
areas,
              including biological and ecological research, resource
management, and other
              facets of human interactions with the natural
world. Realizing these benefits
              involves linked steps of documentation,
analysis, application, and integration
              with other forms of knowledge.
While previous research by P.I. Huntington on
              TEK of beluga whales has
explored the semi-directive interview as a practical
              method for
documenting TEK, further research is needed to (a) explore the
              potential
for local documentation of TEK, (b) characterize the subsequent
              steps by
which TEK can be used, and (c) develop models for doing both.

The
              proposed project addresses three related questions:
Can the semi-directive
              interview methodology be successfully used or
adapted for use in
              locally-managed efforts to document TEK? 
How is TEK used in the cooperative
              management setting of the Alaska
Beluga Whale Committee? 
Can the results of
              (1) and (2) be generalized to other cases in Alaska,
the Arctic, or the
              world?

To address these questions, the project has four objectives:
Local
              Documentation of TEK: Conduct locally-managed documentation
projects, using
              the semi-directive interview method, on TEK of beluga
whales. 
Application of
              TEK: Examine the structure, management, and conduct of
the ABWC and its
              meetings to assess the role that TEK plays. 
Analysis: Compare the results of
              (1) and (2) with existing information
on other cooperative management bodies
              in Alaska, and other attempts to
use TEK both in Alaska and elsewhere.
              
Workshop: Hold a workshop in the final year of the project, to summarize
and
              synthesize what has been learned, to assess how these results have
contributed
              to understanding of TEK and its use, and to identify future
research
              needs.

This research will develop models for documenting TEK and for using
              TEK
to improve research on and management of natural resources. These
              models
will identify significant factors influencing the documentation and
              use
of TEK, including those that may influence the applicability of
              our
models in other settings.


