Title       : Controlling the Technologies of Privacy Invasion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9817957

Award Number: 9817957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72844              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Rule James.Rule@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computing and related information technologies have generated vast new pressures
              from government and private organizations to acquire and use information on
              "private" citizens. These practices include the monitoring of private citizens'
              movements by police and other state agencies; the sale and trade of consumers'
              personal data for marketing, credit reporting, insurance and other commercial
              purposes; and the appropriation of financial data on private citizens by
              government agencies involved in taxation and other enforcement activities.
              Since the 1960's, every Western democracy has enacted legislation and policy to
              control publicly-defined abuses of information technology leading to erosion of
              personal privacy. Various strategies to control privacy abuses include the
              creation of privacy ombudsmen, industry self-regulation, governmental privacy
              protection boards and the like. In a one-year pilot investigation, this study
              aims to identify cases that will form the basis for a full, comparative,
              cross-national study of privacy protection efforts.  The year will be spent
              interviewing key figures in personal data protection in the US and abroad;
              these will include academic specialists, government and corporate officials,
              and privacy activists.  Other activities during this first year will include
              analyses of primary and secondary documentary sources relating to potential
              cases for study.  The aim will be to generate a list of notable successes and
              failures in legislative and policy efforts to protect personal data - along
              with a series of documentary sources and potential interviewees to serve as
              sources in the ensuing investigation of these efforts. 
