Title       : Determinants of Male Dominance and Reproductive Success in Wild Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1999   
File        : a9817588

Award Number: 9817588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Pusey pusey001@maroon.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Packer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1392,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program
Nontechnical Abstract


Proposal #:  9817588
PI: 
              Pusey, Anne
Title: Determinants of male dominance and reproductive success in
              wild primates



Male chimpanzees and baboons compete for dominance rank
              and for access to receptive females.  The ultimate goal of the project is to
              determine how male reproductive success is influenced by such physical traits
              as body size, canine length and morphological symmetry and by such behavioral
              strategies as social dominance, alliance formation, paternal care and the
              cultivation of long-term relationships with females.  Dr. Pusey's research will
              be carried out on the chimpanzees and baboons of Gombe National Park on
              populations that have been studied for nearly 40 years.   This is an
              extraordinary database upon which to anchor interpretations of the results from
              this project. The immediate goal is to perfect techniques for paternity
              exclusions by extracting DNA from fecal samples and hair.  Samples will be
              collected as part of the long-term studies at Gombe National Park, Tanzania. 
              Various extraction techniques will be tested, and human MapPairTM primers will
              be screened to identify genetic markers in chimpanzees and baboons that exhibit
              necessary levels of heterozygosity yet whose alleles are sufficiently
              distinguishable from humans to minimize problems associated with
              contamination.

Measuring the relationship between physical prowess,
              symmetry, dominance rank, and reproductive success will increase understanding
              of the evolution of sexual dimorphism and the importance of symmetry in
              indicating "quality."  Measuring the effects of behavioral strategies will
              reveal the extent to which male mating competition has driven the evolution of
              complex social behavior.  Because these genetic techniques are non-invasive,
              the project will greatly enhance the ability to monitor levels of inbreeding in
              endangered populations.  

