Title       : Transport of Hydrocarbons by Lipophorin: Oenocytes, Epidermis, Fat Body, and
               Ovary Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9817075

Award Number: 9817075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Coby Schal coby_schal@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


Hydrocarbons ("waxes") play critical roles in preventing water loss and in
              penetration of chemicals, including insecticides, through the insect cuticle. 
              In the German cockroach, a female sex pheromone is derived from a hydrocarbon
              biosynthetic pathway.  The results of Dr. Schal's laboratory from a previous
              NSF grant award have challenged the paradigm that hydrocarbons are transported
              directly from the oenocytes, which synthesize them, to the epicuticle.  Rather,
              the PI has shown that that cuticular lipids are transported from the oenocytes
              by a blood protein to storage and deposition sites.  His long-range goals are
              to understand the dynamics and regulation of hydrocarbon transport through the
              blood and to apply this information towards the development of new tactics of
              insect control.  The PI's specific research objectives are:  (1) Document
              hydrocarbon uptake by lipophorin, a blood protein, from oenocytes, midgut, and
              fat body; (2) Characterize the mechanisms of hydrocarbon deposition by
              lipophorin in the integument, fat body, and ovary; and (3) Test the dynamic
              nature of hydrocarbon transport during development and reproduction.  This
              proposal is of basic biological value, elucidating the dynamics of lipid
              production and transport in a model insect.  Moreover, it will provide an
              in-depth understanding of mechanisms of hydrocarbon transport in the German
              cockroach, an important pest of tremendous impact to society.

