Title       : Cell Interactions and Cell Fate Specification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9817988

Award Number: 9817988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Ettensohn ettensohn@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposed research is to elucidate fundamental mechanisms
              involved in patterning metazoan embryos.  Dr. Ettensohn seeks to define the
              precise roles of specific blastomere interactions in establishing territories
              of gene expression in the embryo and to elucidate molecular pathways that
              underlie such interactions.  This work also addresses the problem of
              conditional fate specification- the allocation of cell fates by non-autonomous,
              context-dependent mechanisms- and the historical problem of embryonic
              regulation.  The model system to be used is the sea urchin, which can be
              studied using a powerful set of cell and molecular biological tools.

Three
              specific objectives are to be pursued: 1)  He will examine the role of Lv-ets,
              a member of the ets family of transcriptional regulators, in skeletogenic
              specification during normal development and when novel cell lineages are caused
              to express a skeletogenic fate by embryo manipulation.  He will explore the
              possibility that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, which has been shown to regulate
              skeletogenic specification, does so by altering Lv-ets protein expression
              and/or localization.  2)  Signals from the vegetal region are known to regulate
              the fates of overlying cells.  He will refine our understanding of the role of
              such signals in patterning through the use of new cell ablation methods, novel
              cell recombination experiments, and new molecular markers.  He will directly
              test the model that a vegetal-to-animal cascade of signals patterns the early
              sea urchin embryo.  3)  The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway plays an
              important role in patterning in many organisms.  Recent studies have provided
              strong evidence that components of this pathway are involved in the allocation
              of cell fates along the animal-vegetal axis of the sea urchin embryo.  He will
              use overexpression of GSK3, C-cadherin, and mutant (activated) beta-catenin
              mRNAs in combination with embryo manipulation and molecular markers to clarify
              the role of this pathway in patterning. Dr. Ettensohn will use embryo
              dissociation studies to test the central question of whether the
              developmentally programmed pattern of nuclear localization of beta-catenin in
              the sea urchin (and possibly other metazoan embryos) is dependent on cell-cell
              signaling, or is regulated by a cell-autonomous mechanism.  Finally, he will
              examine the mechanism by which suppression of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway
              blocks skeletogenic specification.


