Title       : Acquisition of a Gas Source Stable Isotope Mass Spectrometer and Automated
               Preparation Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9817348

Award Number: 9817348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Kaufman kaufman@geol.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marco Colombini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Prestegaard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret A. Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9817348
Kaufman
This  grant provides partial support for the purchase  of  a
              gas  source stable isotope mass spectrometer with  automated preparation
              systems for the Isotope Geochemistry  Laboratory at  the University of
              Maryland.  The Principle Investigators include:  A.Jay Kaufman, a recent
              addition to the Department of  Geology  faculty  after seven years as  a 
              post-doctoral fellow and research scientist in stable isotope geochemistry at 
              Harvard  University; Karen Prestegaard, a  physical  and chemical  hydrologist 
              in  the Department  of  Geology;  and Margaret  Palmer, an ecologist in the
              Department of Zoology. In  addition, Christina Gallup, a geochronologist and 
              coral researcher in the Department of Geology, and Russ Dickerson, an
              atmospheric chemist in the Department of Meteorology will use the new
              instrumentation in their studies.

The  establishment  of  a  gas source 
              stable  isotope  mass spectrometer  at the University of Maryland  represents 
              the first  academic facility of its kind in the Washington  D.C. area.    As  
              such,  this  facility  will  allow  additional collaborative studies by local
              researchers, in particular at George Washington   University   and   the   
              Smithsonian Institution.  The gas source instrument will be housed in  a
              newly-renovated  laboratory adjacent to the existing  stable isotope 
              preparation  laboratory in the Chemistry  building. This  facility,  funded  by
               the university  and  the  Earth Sciences  Instrumentation and Facilities 
              Program  (EAR/IF), will  support research initiatives in chemical stratigraphy,
              carbonate  geochemistry, global climatic  and  environmental change, coral 
              research,   hydrology,   atmospheric and environmental sciences.
***

