Title       : Single-Molecule Trapping and Nanoscale Dielectric Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a9817297

Award Number: 9817297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine L C. Hunt klch@tpauli.cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Katharine Hunt is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program to perform theoretical studies of single molecule trapping
              and nanoscale dielectric response.  The goal of this research is to develop a
              quantitative model for optical trapping of DNA fragments labeled with
              intercalating dyes, and the trapping of dye-labeled polystyrene spheres.  In
              analyzing the interaction between a laser field and a large molecule such as
              DNA, Hunt will consider the intramolecular distribution of induced polarization
              rather than using a single global polarizability.   Nanoscale dielectric
              response will be investigated by ab initio calculation and analysis of two
              non-local dielectric functions, one that characterizes the intramolecular
              potential screening, and a second one that relates the dielectric displacement
              to the local Maxwell field.  The result will permit the calculation of
              many-body properties, including solution-phase dielectric functions.

The
              capability to observe, trap, and manipulate individual molecules of biological
              importance opens up a range of new possibilities for investigation, and for
              molecular-level control.  Some possibilities include: ultrasensitive DNA
              analysis, chromosome manipulation, direct observation of intracellular
              transport of biomolecules, observation of conformational fluctuations in DNA,
              the study of the dynamics of supercoiling / uncoiling transitions, and schemes
              for rapid DNA sequencing.  Hunt's research will contribute to a physical
              understanding of this newly discovered phenomenon at the molecular level.

