Title       : Molecular Physiology of Olfactory Coding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a9817251

Award Number: 9817251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159868             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Marchand   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 The sense of smell, olfaction, depends on receptor nerve cells in the sensory
              tissue of the nose, which carry information to the brain.  This information is
              encoded in the pattern of physiological activity of the receptor cells. 
              Receptor cells have molecules on their surfaces that bind to odorant stimuli
              when present.  It remains unknown, however, which odors are recognized by each
              of the olfactory receptors.  This question of the molecular code for olfaction
              is a central question in olfactory research.  This study approaches the issue
              with a powerful combination of voltage-sensitive dyes and molecular tagging,
              using the salamander nose as a model system having a relatively flat sheet of
              sensory tissue with limited numbers of receptor types.  Physiological responses
              are localized by voltage-sensitive dyes at a cellular level of resolution, to
              identify which cells respond to particular odors.  For the same tissue,
              molecular probes specific for olfactory receptor molecules are then used to
              histochemically label cells with particular receptors.  Results showing which
              cells have types of response specificity matching up with particular receptor
              molecules will provide direct evidence to determine how a code for olfaction
              can be created.
    The potential impact of this work is very high for
              chemosensory sciences because how organisms recognize molecules in the
              environment is crucial for a variety of behaviors; the basic findings on
              molecular recognition also will be pertinent for understanding molecular
              recognition mechanisms in other sensory systems and in other parts of the
              brain.

