Title       : Ecophysiological Correlates of Vertebrate Cold Hardiness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9817087

Award Number: 9817087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon P. Costanzo costanjp@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack R. Layne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PIs will investigate physiological, ecological, and evolutionary aspects of
              cold hardiness in certain amphibians and reptiles.  This research will use the
              wood frog and hatchlings of the painted turtle as models to investigate two
              cold-hardiness strategies employed by lower vertebrates: supercooling and
              freeze tolerance.  Supercooled animals are in a metastable state in which the
              body fluid remains liquid (uncrystallized) at temperatures well below its
              freezing point.  Freeze-tolerant animals survive exposure to subzero
              temperatures by tolerating the freezing of their body tissues.  
	Studies will
              identify environmental and physiological factors influencing the ability of
              hatchling painted turtles to remain supercooled during hibernation in their
              nests, which lie within the frost zone.  Field and laboratory studies will
              explore the effects of moisture on cold hardiness.  A comparative study will
              examine the relationship between desiccation resistance and supercooling
              capacity in hatchlings of several species of northern turtles from diverse
              habitats.  This work will provide insight into the physiological and
              morphological adaptations permitting some species of northern turtles to
              hibernate on land.  
	Research in ecological physiology often considers the
              benefits of a particular adaptation without regard to its deleterious
              consequences.  This project will identify "trade-offs" incurred by
              freeze-tolerant animals by investigating the impact of freezing and thawing on
              selected aspects of organismal performance.  Studies of the wood frog will
              expand recent findings of freezing-induced impairment of locomotor performance
              and reproductive potential, and provide a rigorous evaluation of freeze
              tolerance as an adaptive, winter-survival strategy.  Physiological studies,
              including NMR imaging of intact frogs during freezing and thawing, are aimed at
              identifying the underlying cause of the impairment. 
	By integrating field and
              laboratory studies, this research will provide novel insights concerning
              adaptations that not only promote survival at subzero temperatures, but also
              influence the geographic distributions of some amphibians and reptiles.  In
              addition, this work has implications for applied disciplines, such as the
              development of methods for cryopreserving mammalian organs and the use of
              cryopreserved gametes from amphibians for ex situ propagation and
              reintroduction programs.




