Title       : Statistical Evaluation of Global Observing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9817552

Award Number: 9817552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ta-Hsin Li thl@pstat.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9817552
Ta-Hsin Li

Satellites, particularly low-Earth-orbiting (LEO)
              asynchronous platforms, have become the primary vehicle for monitoring global
              environmental behavior from space because of their capability of global
              coverage. Satellite data, combined with in situ observations, are increasingly
              important for global climate and environmental assessment and prediction.  The
              sampling properties of satellites have a great impact on satellite-based data
              products. Sampling errors due to poor sampling design or improper use of
              satellite data can cause rapid deterioration in accuracy.  Evaluation of
              sampling errors thus constitutes an integrated part of the uncertainty
              assessment of environmental assimilation, estimation, and prediction.

The
              overall goal of this research is to improve our understanding of sampling
              errors for global observing systems and to enhance our ability to assess the
              impact of sampling errors on the estimation of global environmental parameters.
              Ultimately the proposed research will lead to effective design of sampling
              schemes and quality assurance of satellite-based data products.

To achieve
              the overall goal, this research proposes to develop general statistical
              methodology and procedures for exploration and evaluation of sampling errors in
              various derived parameters from various observing systems.  The observing
              systems considered include single polar and nonpolar platforms, intercalibrated
              multiple polar and nonpolar satellites, and combinations of in situ point-gauge
              networks with polar/nonpolar satellites.  The derived parameters of interest
              include the coefficients in the advanced global representations using the
              spherical harmonics and the empirical orthogonal functions (EOFs). Special
              attention is paid to small-scale/short-wavelength parameters that are important
              to the estimation of regional and interseasonal to interannual changes and
              trends.  For efficient representation of regional activities, the research also
              proposes to develop statistical theory and algorithms of spherical wavelets and
              investigate sampling errors in the spherical wavelet representations.

The
              proposed research is exploratory in nature, conducted both analytically, via
              theoretical analysis, and numerically, via computer simulations and numerical
              experiments using physical-statistical models and assimilated data.  Successful
              completion of the research is expected to improve our understanding of sampling
              errors for various important global observing systems and our ability to assess
              the impact of sampling errors on the estimation of important global
              environmental parameters.  The methodology and procedures developed in the
              research are expected to be helpful in guiding the data-collection planners to
              evaluate different sampling designs prior to a data-collecting mission and make
              optimal choices according to their understanding of the environmental fields to
              be observed.  The research results are also expected to be useful in the
              uncertainty assessment and quality assurance of satellite-based data products
              that are now widely used for environmental studies.

This research project in
              environmental statistics is jointly supported by the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the DMS Statistics Program. 

