Title       : Regulation of Sulfate Assimilation in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a9817594

Award Number: 9817594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Leustek leustek@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sulfate assimilation is the pathway by which inorganic sulfate (SO42-) is
              reduced for cysteine synthesis. Cysteine is an important amino acid with many
              different functions. This proposal focuses on its role as the precursor of
              glutathione an important antioxidant in plants.

The enzyme APS reductase,
              which produces sulfite (SO32-) from 5-adenylylsulfate (APS), catalyzes an
              essential step in sulfate assimilation. Experimental evidence has been obtained
              that APS reductase is activated by oxidation. The proposal hypothesis is that
              APS reductase plays a key role in regulation of glutathione synthesis under
              conditions of oxidative stress. Therefore, it may be an important component in
              the plant response to oxidative stress.

In the work proposed the project
              hypothesis will be tested by exploring the mechanism and physiological effect
              of APS reductase regulation. APS reductase genes have been cloned from several
              different plant species. Each will be studied for the ability to be regulated
              by oxidative conditions. It is believed that the mechanism of APS reductase
              regulation relies on two cysteine residues in the protein that can form a
              disulfide bond. The state of the cysteine residues of the enzyme will be
              analyzed. Finally, the physiological effect of bypassing the APS reductase step
              by expressing bacterial homologs in transgenic plants will also be
              studied.

This work will provide new insight into an important facet of plant
              response to oxidative stress, the mechanism for regulation of glutathione
              synthesis. APS reductase is one of a small group of enzymes that are activated
              by oxidative stress conditions. The novelty of this system and the connection
              with oxidative stress are compelling reasons for further study of APS
              reductase. 

