Title       : Stoichiometry of the Inhibitory ATP Site and Inhibition Gate of the ATP
               Sensitive Potassium Channel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9817116

Award Number: 9817116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Drain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ATP-sensitive potassium channels (ATP-K channels) of cells are so-named because
              of their inhibition by intracellular ATP.  This inhibition plays a crucial role
              in the coupling of electrical activity of the plasma membrane to energy
              metabolism in a variety of animal cell types.  However, little is known about
              the molecular mechanism of this coupling.  The ATP-K channel is formed from
              four subunits each of a regulatory subunit, and a pore-forming subunit.  To
              understand how ATP inhibits the gated opening of the pore, it is fundamental to
              understand the number and location of ATP binding sites relative to the
              structure of the gate itself.  Preliminary studies have defined amino acid
              sequences involved in ATP binding and gating which map to the C-terminal domain
              of the pore-forming subunit.  These results will be extended by constructing
              multimeric fusion proteins of mutant and wild-type subunits to analyze the
              number of binding sites and gates and how they interact in the presence of ATP.
               The approach will combine site-directed mutagenesis and expression of mutant
              channels in frog oocytes where channel activity can be assayed by
              electrophysiological methods.  The results will reveal the subunit arrangement
              of both binding sites and gates and whether they interact independently or
              cooperatively.  It is anticipated that the resulting molecular model for the
              ATP-K channel will have broad implications for how other membrane proteins may
              be regulated directly by ATP and hence indirectly by the energy state of the
              cell.

