Title       : Somatic Chromosome Origins and Organization in the Genome of Tetrahymena
               thermophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a9817121

Award Number: 9817121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Bruns pjb4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D M. Cassidy-Hanley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Developmental genome rearrangements have been found at the gene level in a
              number of diverse organisms, including genes for vertebrate immunoglobin and
              yeast mating type. The ciliated protozoa provide an extreme case, in which an
              entire genome is subject to massive developmental alteration. All sexually
              competent ciliates contain two separate nuclei, a silent germinal micronucleus
              and an actively transcribed somatic macronucleus. Tetrahymena thermophila has a
              diploid micronucleus with five metacentric chromosomes that undergo meiosis and
              mitosis and are transcriptionally silent. It's macronucleus, derived from the
              micronucleus during conjugation following extensive genome alteration, contains
              about 45 copies of 200 amitotic chromosomes that have lost 10-15% of the
              genome, are maintained by a copy number correction system, are actively
              transcribed, and segregate haplotypes of the fragmented genome. In this
              two-part project, the sites for the rearrangement will be isolated and used to
              locate the macronuclear genome on the micronuclear genetic map, creating two
              relational genetic maps. In the first part, germinal deletions of various sizes
              will be created and mapped to specific micronuclear chromosomes. Because the
              micronucleus is not expressed, deletions will be maintained in heterokaryons,
              with homozygous mutant micronuclei and wild type macronuclei, and crossed to
              each other to identify overlaps. DNA from deletion strains will be used as
              template for PCR, with primers made from already mapped micronuclear specific
              RAPD sequences, to place the deletions on the existing micronuclear meiotic
              map. In the second part, the sequences that flank chromosome breakage sites
              (cbs) will be cloned and sequenced. These sites occur where macronuclear
              chromosomes are cut out of micronuclear chromosomes during development, and
              therefore mark the boundaries of adjacent macronuclear chromosomes in the
              micronuclear genome. The extent of micronuclear specific DNA will be determined
              in each clone and the clones will be used to identify adjoining macronuclear
              chromosomes, by probing pulse field electrophoresis gels. Length of
              macronuclear chromosomes and micronuclear specific sequences at the junctions
              will be combined to create a physical map of the macronuclear chromosomes
              projected on the micronuclear genome. The meiotic map location of the breakage
              sites will be identified by the mapped deletions, created in the first part, to
              relate the physical and genetic maps.

The end result of this project will be
              a collection of extremely useful genetic reagents (the deletion set) and the
              addition of physical distances and specific macronuclear locations to the
              genetic map of Tetrahymena. This information will greatly facilitate positional
              cloning and cloning by complementation. In addition, the collection of
              sequences at all the break points will add to our knowledge this
              developmentally directed chromosome rearrangement.


