Title       : The GnRH System in Birds: Ontogeny of Function and Neuroregulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2001       
File        : a9817024

Award Number: 9817024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Ottinger mo20@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Birds develop male or female characteristics during embryonic and early
              postnatal stages in their life history.  Precocial birds, such as the Japanese
              quail are relatively independent at hatch; they are very mobile and are able to
              feed themselves.  Because their systems are well developed at hatch, this
              species undergoes sexual differentiation during embryonic development.  As
              such, the  male or female system is organized during embryonic development and
              require embryonic exposure to the gonadal steroids, estradiol and testosterone
              for sexual differentiation. Through previous work in our lab and other labs,
              changes in plasma levels of estradiol and testosterone have been described. 
              Further, the effects of these steroids on the sexual differentiation of
              reproductive behavior has also been investigated.  However, although the role
              of steroids has been determined for sexual differentiation of behavior has been
              described, little is known about sexual differentiation of endocrine patterns
              in birds.  
In avian species, chicken gonadotropin releasing hormone-I
              (GnRH-I) is the primary hormone produced by the hypothalamus.  GnRH-I directs
              the function of the rest of the reproductive endocrine system by stimulating
              the pituitary gland to produce gonadatropins, which in turn stimulate the
              function of the gonads.  The goal of this research is to investigate the GnRH-I
              system in Japanese quail during embryonic development and determine if
              embryonic steroids are critical for later sex differences in the function of
              the GnRH-I system.  Experimentally, the objective is to determine if the
              function of the GnRH-I system is altered by treatments known to impact sexual
              behavior.  Our hypothesis is that the GnRH-I system is sexually differentiated
              by embryonic steroids, resulting in later expression of male or female
              endocrine responses.  It is likely that regulatory systems in the brain are
              critical components of this developmental process and involve noradrenergic and
              opioid peptide systems. By investigating these processes, this research will
              elucidate some of the hypothalamic mechanisms that synchronize endocrine and
              behavioral components of reproduction in birds and provide the basis for
              understanding the effects of environmental chemicals that may impact these
              systems.

 	EFFECT OF BUDGET REVISIONS ON RESEARCH GOALS

The first year of
              our NSF proposal is to be funded at a reduced rate from our request.  In order
              to accomplish some of our goals within the time and the funding limitations, we
              will revise our research goals.  In Study I, we will concentrate on Experiment
              1.1, in which we will investigate the effects of embryonic treatments on GnRH-I
              system.  We will not attempt to conduct Experiment 1.2 with our collaborator in
              Torino because this study will take more than one year and we do not have
              sufficient funding.  Instead, immunohistochemistry for GnRH-I, enkephalin, and
              tyrosine hydroxylase will be conducted at UMCP without the 3-D analysis.  If
              time allows, we will begin some of the work proposed in Study II to determine
              the effects of embryonic treatments on GnRH-I release  in vitro.  In this way,
              we will collect additional data regarding the response of the GnRH-I system to
              embryonic steroid manipulation. 

 	Personal Participating on the NSF Funded
              Research

Dr. Mahmoud Abdelnabi will spend 30% time on this project.   His CV
              is attached.

Ms. Nichola Thompson will spend 50% time on this work in
              technical support.

