Title       : Dissertation Research: Architects of the Self: Social Scientists and the
               Construction of the Individual in Postwar America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9817935

Award Number: 9817935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7764               (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. Pandora kpandora@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This dissertation research project will examine the careers of three prominent
              American social scientists in the mid-twentieth century and their attempts to
              redesign human personality and human nature in an atmosphere of accelerated
              social change after the Second World War. Professional social science
              experienced unprecedented institutional growth during this period as a result
              of the increased need for human resource management in governmental, military,
              corporate, and educational institutions. As scientists were enlisted to help
              produce social technologies for a society struggling to adjust to new patterns
              of work, domestic life, and community, scientific representations of the
              individual underwent reassessment and modification. The tremendous expansion of
              science and technology during this period also catapulted individual scientists
              beyond the academy into new positions of social authority. This project focuses
              on the social theories of three such scientists and their contrasting visions
              of the individual as either an efficient automaton or a multidimensional whole.
              The cultural anthropologist Margaret Mead, the behaviorist psychologist Burrhus
              F. Skinner, and the personality psychologist Gardner Murphy all made central
              contributions to American social science and the scientific construction of
              human personality in the twentieth century. Mead, Skinner, and Murphy each
              crafted a unique vision of humanity and applied it to their respective
              critiques of American culture and American science. Their social theories were
              shaped not only by scientific research and experimental methodology but also by
              the expectations of public constituencies that placed different demands on
              individuals and groups in American society. By examining the reciprocal
              exchange and appropriation of social scientific and popular images of the
              individual, this project will contribute to an emergent but growing canon in
              the history of science that addresses the cultural history of American social
              science.

