Title       : Probing the Electronic Structure of Metal Clusters and Multiply Charged Anions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9817811

Award Number: 9817811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joyce A. Guest                          
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lai-Sheng Wang LS.WANG@PNL.GOV  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Lai-Sheng Wang of Washington State University is supported by the
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to continue his studies of the
              electronic structure of atomic clusters and multiply charged anions in the gas
              phase. A magnetic-bottle time-of-flight photodetachment photoelectron
              spectroscopy apparatus with laser vaporization cluster source or electrospray
              ion source will be employed to carry out the experiments. Project activities
              will focus on clusters of transition metals, aluminum and gallium, transition
              metal oxides, and alloys.  The goal of the effort on atomic clusters is to
              elucidate their electronic structure and evolution with cluster size toward
              bulk band structure.   In addition, Coulomb barriers in multiply charged
              anions, solvent stabilization effects, oxide complexes as catalytic
              intermediates, and iron-sulfur cluster complexes will be probed. The outcomes
              are expected to improve the understanding of multiply charged anions in the gas
              phase, including their stability, energetics, and solvation.  

The
              electronic structure of atomic clusters, and its evolution with cluster size,
              are not well understood.  Outcomes from the atomic cluster research will impact
              the understanding of chemistry relevant to corrosion, catalysis, and oxidation.
              Improved atomic level knowledge of bonding between metallic elements will be
              valuable in developing new materials.  Iron-sulfur proteins are important
              electron transfer agents in biological systems, and the iron-sulfur cluster
              anion studies will help in understanding the protein geometry and properties.
              

