Title       : Urban Research Initiative: Urban Landscape Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a9817755

Award Number: 9817755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick N. Halpin path@pinus.env.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean L. Urban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Mansfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subhrendu Pattanayak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1349      URBAN RSCH INITIATIVE PROPOSAL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research supported, under the Urban Research Initiative, develops an
              analysis of landscape change that integrates insights from economics and
              ecology in the urbanizing environment of the Research Triangle, North Carolina.
               In contrast to its primarily agricultural history, the Triangle has undergone
              explosive growth in the past two decades, driven in part by the industry of
              Research Triangle Park and three major industries.

This project focuses on
              feedbacks between the economics of land value and ecological land conditions,
              particularly, on trade-offs between conservation and development.  The research
              team hypothesizes that feedbacks are manifest in urbanizing landscapes such
              that decisions to devote lands to natural or open spaces, such as greenways or
              parks, will feed back to confer higher economic values on nearby land parcels. 
              Thus, land use decisions will propagate a spatiotemporal pattern in land use,
              driving a particular trajectory of landscape change that is sensitive to
              small-scale planning decisions.  

The researchers explore this hypothesis
              and its implications by implementing a spatially explicitly landscape simulator
              developed from a nearly 20-year time series of regional land use data.  This
              project takes advantage of an extraordinarily rich geodata infrastructure
              comprising ecological, economic, and remotely sensed data in a common
              geographic information system (GIS) and involves participants ranging from city
              (Raleigh, Durham, and Chapel Hill) and county (Wake, Durham, and Orange)
              governments to local conservation organizations (e.g.,  The Nature Conservancy,
              the Triangle Land Conservancy).  The researchers use the data-based model  to
              explore actual and hypothetical land use scenarios.  They also analyze the
              model to synthesize general implications of the feedbacks and interactions
              between economic and ecological land values, toward a more integrative
              conceptual framework and theory of landscape change in urbanizing environments.
               The insights gained will have broad applicability beyond this specific
              research site.

