Title       : GOALI: "Dynamically Responsive Polymeric Additives for Process Improvements an
               Environmental Compability"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9817048

Award Number: 9817048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria M. Santore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9817048  Santore, Maria/Lehigh U.    This program targets the
              generation of rules for the custom design of polymeric additives that will
              bring several industrial sectors closer to environmental compatibility:
              coatings formulation (replacement of organic formulations with aqueous ones),
              waste water treatment (flocculants effective for aggressively aerated low
              solids sludges), paper making (increased white water recycle and lower waste
              stream volume), aqueous lubrication, and oil recovery (biodegradable additives
              compatible with sandstone formations).  In these instances environmental
              compatibilization depends on a fundamental understanding of the transient
              dynamic aspects of polymer adsorption and colloidal phenomena.  In particular,
              the program targets the questions of how specific polymer chemistry and
              architecture determine (1) adsorption rates and (2) interfacial relaxations. 
              The program then addresses (3) how adsorbed layers in different stages of
              relaxation mediate colloidal interactions and cause stabilization or
              flocculation.  The outcome from this program, in addition to design rules that
              allow one to tailor molecules that are dynamically responsive to the timescales
              of particular processes, includes information about transient colloidal
              potentials that will facilitate process-specific flocculation and stabilization
              models.  The core scientific program at Lehigh is supplemented with liaison
              projects involving 4 companies, coop programs, and 5th year masters programs,
              for the most effective technology transfer to bring the fundamentals to the
              specific industrial situations.    An experimental program employing model
              narrow molecular standard water soluble polymers (polyethylene oxide and
              pullulan - based) and substrates of controlled chemistry (through the
              deposition of self assembled monolayers) will allow systematic variations in
              the relevant chemical and architectural parameters in studies of adsorption,
              interfacial relaxation, and the evolution interfacial colloidal for ces.  Use
              of these model systems is critical to the development of theory for dynamic
              behavior.  The issues of adsorption, relaxation, and colloidal forces will be
              probed through a unique combination of techniques.  Polymer adsorption and
              relaxation kinetics will be measured with a synergistic combination of total
              internal reflectance fluorescence (TIRF) and near-Brewster reflectivity,
              developed in the PI's lab under prior NSF support.   Together the two methods
              measure the evolving surface mass, the evolving layer thickness and density,
              and the kinetic behavior of fluorescently-tagged interfacial populations. 
              Interfacial relaxations will be further probed through self exchange studies
              using TIRF.  These studies will establish the evolutionary timescales of the
              layers and provide some idea of which layer features evolve.  Models developed
              under a Research Initiation Award will be modified to give quantitative
              explanation of the observed dynamics.  The next phase of work relates this
              evolving layer structure to colloidal behavior.  Dynamic measurements of
              colloidal forces will be measured using 'MASIF," similar to the surface forces
              apparatus, but designed for dynamic data acquisition. Finally impinging jet
              colloidal deposition studies will be employed to measure how interfacial
              relaxations  and pairwise colloidal force measurements translate to
              flocculation or stabilization in   situations of strong shear and hydrodynamic
              collision forces.  The sticking ability, as a function of the transient
              interfacial state and hydrodynamic conditions can be used in existing
              flocculation models to make them more process-specific for wastewater, paper,
              coatings, and oil recovery applications.
