Title       : Control of Organ Initiation and Size by the AINTEGUMENTA Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a9817992

Award Number: 9817992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488033             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Fischer rfischer@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              To understand mechanisms that regulate cell proliferation associated with organ
              initiation and the determination of organ size, the function of the
              AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) transcription factor is being studied.  ANT is an important
              regulator of cell proliferation that is responsible for organ primordia
              initiation and the determination of mature organ size and shape. 1) ANT is
              transcribed in meristematic cells that initiate all aerial lateral organ
              primordia, in marginal meristem cells that contribute to organ width and in
              meristematic procambium cells that generate the vascular system.  2) The
              loss-of-function ant mutant phenotype (i.e., no ovule integuments, reduction in
              floral organ size and number, narrow leaves) is associated with a decrease in
              cell proliferation.  3) In transgenic plants where ANT is transcribed from the
              strong 35S promoter, the gain-of-function phenotype (i.e., enlarged leaves,
              floral organs and ovules) is associated with increased cell proliferation. 
              Thus, ANT provides a unique entry point into the signal transduction pathway(s)
              that link the control of cell proliferation with organ initiation and the
              determination of organ size and shape.

To understand how cell proliferation
              is regulated during organogenesis, the PI will accomplish the following goals: 
              1) Determine the relationship between patterns of ANT transcription and cell
              proliferation during organogenesis.  2) Identify genes and sequences that
              control ANT transcription in meristematic cells.  3) Identify targets of the
              ANT transcription factor and determine their relationship to the control of
              cell proliferation and organogenesis.  4) Elucidate the role of an ANT
              interacting protein on the control of cell proliferation and organogenesis.  5)
              Obtain additional regulators of organogenesis by identifying mutations
that
              suppress or enhance the phenotype of a weak mutant allele, ant-3. Results from
              these experiments will provide insight into fundamental mechanisms that control
              organ initiation and the determination of organ size and shape.  They will help
              to elucidate the signal transduction pathways that control cell proliferation
              during organogenesis.  This information will generate novel methods to modify
              organ size in crop plants, and thereby increase their productivity and
              value.


