Title       : RUI: Molecular Genetic Analysis of Drosophila Neuroglian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9817079

Award Number: 9817079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Chandler rchandle@unc3.unionky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      College Street
	      Barbourville, KY  409061740    606/546-4151

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Drosophila neuroglian is a member of the L1 subfamily of immunoglobulin-like
              cell adhesion molecules (Ig-CAMs) whose members include the neuroglian homolog
              human L1.  These molecules are thought to be involved in critical processes of
              embryonic nervous system development such as cell adhesion, neurite growth,
              axon fasciculation and intercellular signaling.  There is evidence of
              considerable conservation of function between neuroglian and human L1 since
              mutations in both Drosophila neuroglian and human L1 lead to motor neuron
              axonal pathfinding defects.  Much of what we know about the function of these
              molecules has been inferred from cell culture studies.  Expression of
              neuroglian on the surfaces of transfected cells in culture causes the cells to
              aggregate, demonstrating homophilic cell adhesion.  Current evidence suggests
              that certain regions (domains) in the portion of the molecule located on the
              exterior of the cell are necessary for cell aggregation in culture
              conditions.
    The experiments described in this proposal will extend these
              findings from cultured cells to the living organism.  A technique termed
              P-element mediated germ-line transformation will be used to examine the
              function of protein variants of neuroglian in living Drosophila.  These studies
              will determine which of the extracellular domains of neuroglian that are
              involved in cell adhesion in culture also are involved in producing the sensory
              cell patterning defects and motor neuron pathfinding defects that occur in
              mutant embryos.  These studies also will investigate the effects on nervous
              system development of the overexpression of neuroglian in neurons.  Effects of
              the mutant forms of neuroglian on axon fasciculation will be evaluated to
              determine whether physical adhesion is a major function of neuroglian, and if
              it is, to determine whether or not the domains involved in cell adhesion in
              cultured cells are the determinants of adhesion in the living animal.

