Title       : Membrane-delimited Modulation of Ionotropic Glutamate Receptor Channels by
               Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9817151

Award Number: 9817151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shan Ping Yu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:
Yu, Shan Ping
 
Membrane-delimited Modulation of Ionotropic
              Glutamate Receptors by Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors
	In the brain, the
              major excitatory neurotransmitter released by nerve terminals is glutamate.
              Glutamate can act on two types of proteins or receptors on the cell membrane:
              ionotropic glutamate receptors (or NMDA, AMPA/kainate receptors categorized
              according to specific agonists) and metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs). 
              NMDA and AMPA/kainate receptors are associated with ion permeable channels
              while mGluRs affect several intracellular signal systems; these two receptor
              families play critical roles in neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity, as
              well as in neuronal cell death (excitotoxicity).  The proposed investigation
              will test the hypothesis that selective activation of mGluR subtypes 1/5 can
              suppress NMDA receptor activities by a mechanism involving a G protein that
              acts independently of diffusible second messengers.  This type of ion channel
              modulation has been called membrane-delimited modulation, because it can be
              observed in small membrane pieces excised from intact cells.  It is proposed
              that this membrane-delimited modulation of ionotropic glutamate receptors may
              provide a unique way of local regulation of synaptic transmission and
              excitotoxicity.  The investigators will characterize the membrane-delimited
              modulation of NMDA and AMPA/kainate receptors by specific mGluRs and study the
              crucial mediating role of G proteins and their subunits.  Ion channel
              activities will be examined using whole-cell and single-channel recordings in
              cultured cortical, hippocampal neurons, and glutamate-receptor-transfected
              HEK293 cells.
Three specific aims will be investigated: 1) Membrane-delimited
              modulation of ionotropic glutamate receptors by specific mGluRs 2) Effect of
              mGluR activation on ionotropic glutamate receptor single channel currents 3)
              Role of G proteins in the mGluR-induced membrane-delimited modulation of
              ionotropic glutamate receptors.  By accomplishing these aims, scientist will be
              able to understand better how those two types of glutamate receptors can
              communicate after concurrent stimulation by the neurotransmitter glutamate.

