Title       : Endocrine Regulation of the Ecdysteroid Cascade During Insect Metamorphosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a9817339

Award Number: 9817339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn M. Riddiford lmr@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9817339
Riddiford
Metamorphosis involves a spectacular change of form such as
              the transformation of a caterpillar into a lovely butterfly.  Dr. Riddiford
              seeks to understand the cellular and molecular basis of the hormonal regulation
              of the complex series of events necessary for this transformation to occur in a
              coordinated manner at the right time.  In insects the growth of the larva
              requires periodic molts of its cuticular exoskeleton which are initiated and
              coordinated by the steroid hormone ecdysone acting on the epidermis which makes
              the culticle in the presence of a second hormone juvenile hormone. 
              Metamorphosis occurs when ecdysone acts in the absence of juvenile hormone,
              causing changes in the epidermis that lead to a new type of cuticle and the
              differentiation of imaginal (adult) discs and processor cells to form new adult
              structures.   Dr. Riddiford will utilize antibodies to the isoforms of the
              ecdysone receptor and its partner ultraspiracle and of the early
              ecdysteroid-induced transcription factors and when necessary, in situ
              hybridization analysis of the RNAs, to study differences in epidermal cell
              response to the circulating ecdysteroids in the presence of juvenile hormone
              during a larval molt and in its absence during metamorphosis of the tobacco
              hornworm, Manduca sexta.  These responses will be compared to those in the
              imaginal cells which mainly proliferate during larval life, then become
              committed for metamorphosis early in the final larval stage to elucidate the
              mechanism whereby these two different types of cells respond to the same
              hormonal milieu.  Dr. Riddiford will also develop a method of selectively
              deleting one of the ecdysone receptors or the induced transcription factors in
              the epidermis when it is responding to ecdysteroid in vitro and then in the
              animal so as to assay the functional roles of these various factors in causing
              both new cuticle formation during the molts and the cellular switches necessary
              for metamorphosis.  These studies will provide deeper insight into how the two
              major ecdysteroids, ecdysone and 20-hydroxyecdysone, initiate and coordinate
              the cellular responses during a molt and during the switching of the epidermal
              cell fate that is the hallmark of metamorphosis and how juvenile hormone
              directs ecdysteroid action to prevent metamorphosis.  The basic knowledge
              gained also may lead to new selective approaches to insect control.

