Title       : Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitors Mediate T Cell Anergy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2002   
File        : a9817191

Award Number: 9817191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339119             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. Gilbert gilbertkathleenm@uams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Crew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Tolerance induction in T lymphocytes is a well-documented property of the
              mammalian immune system that insures immune responses are not mounted to
              self-antigens.  Although there are several mechanisms that can lead to
              tolerance, it is clear that in some cases the potentially reactive immune cells
              are not destroyed but instead are blocked from undergoing normal cell division
              and remain in a state of anergy.  These studies will explore the molecular
              basis of this form of tolerance through use of a model system in which mouse
              helper T lymphocytes (Th1 cells) are tolerized to an antigen (keyhole limpet
              hemocyanin) in the presence of n-butyrate, a pharmacological inhibitor of the
              cell cycle. Preliminary findings have shown that n-butyrate-induced anergy
              alters expression of certain G1 cell cycle regulatory proteins, namely specific
              cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKIs).  The hypothesis to be tested is
              that there is sustained expression of one CDKI, designated p27, and
              transcriptional up-regulation of a second CDKI, designated p21, that leads to
              anergy.  As one objective, experiments will be conducted to confirm that both
              the protein levels and inhibitory activities of these CDKIs are increased in
              anergic Th1 cells compared to control cells.  Levels and activities of the
              target G1 cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases will also be assessed.  As a
              second objective, preliminary experiments will examine tolerance induction in
              cells genetically altered to express either increased or lowered levels of the
              CDKIs.  The studies will provide novel information on a mechanism of tolerance
              induction by examining a previously undocumented connection between regulatory
              proteins of the cell cycle and T helper cell anergy.  The studies will provide
              information that may be relevant to other and more generalized mechanisms of
              tolerance induction in the intact animal.
