Title       : Contingent Attentional Capture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9817673

Award Number: 9817673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Folk cfolk@email.vill.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9817673
Charles L. Folk

			ABSTRACT

Although the visual world
              consists of multiple sources of information, 
there are fundamental limits on
              the ability of humans to process multiple 
stimuli simultaneously.  Thus, a
              selection mechanism is needed that
determines which sources of information are
              processed or "attended" at any given point
in time.  This selection mechanism
              is subject to two competing constraints. On
the one hand, efficiency dictates
              that only those events relevant to current 
behavioral goals should be
              attended.  On the other hand, adaptability
suggests that salient stimuli or
              events that may be relevant to the establishment of 
new goals should also be
              attended.  The goal of this research is to explorea 
model of how the
              selection mechanism manages to satisfy both efficiency and 
adaptability to
              produce successful interaction with the environment.  The 
basic premise of
              the model is that salient, potentially important stimulihave 
the ability to
              automatically "capture" or drawn attention to themselves, but 
that such
              attentional capture is ultimately contingent on whether theobserver 
is set to
              respond to that property.  One series of studies will critically 
test this
              "contingent capture" model against other existing theoretical 
accounts.  The
              remaining studies will explore issues such as the functional 
stimulus classes
              for which selection mechanism can be set, and the
functional mechanisms by
              which these attentional control settings are instantiated.  In 
addition to
              elucidating the nature of the selective attention mechanism,
this research may
              also have important applied implications for the development of 
display
              systems that maximize the efficiency of information transfer between 
display
              and operator, as well as for the diagnosis and treatment of  the
              
"distractability" associated with many mental disorders.  Finally, it may
              
serve as a guiding framework for exploring the underlying brain mechanisms
              
associated with attentional control. 
 


