Title       : Mesoscale Air Flow over Topography: Modeling and Observation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2001  
File        : a9817728

Award Number: 9817728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale R. Durran durrand@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mountains exert a profound influence on the earth's weather and climate.  This
              research will investigate two of the most important terrain-induced atmospheric
              phenomena: strong surface winds and gravity-wave drag.

Strong surface winds
              may be can be generated by the interaction of the synoptic-scale flow with
              topography through two different mechanisms, gap winds and downslope winds. Gap
              winds are produced when air is forced through a narrow break in a mountain
              barrier.  Downslope winds may be generated when air flows across mountain
              ridges with steep lee slopes.  Significant weather hazards and extensive
              property damage can occur during extreme gap-wind and downslope-wind events. 
              This study of strong oro-graphically-forced surface winds will focus on gap
              winds, and on the relation and interaction between gap winds and downslope
              winds  Part of the proposed research on gap winds will involve participation
              the Mesoscale Alpine Programme (MAP).

Gravity wave drag is often produced
              when stably stratified air flows over a mountain barrier. Under these
              conditions surface-pressure perturbations develop that exert a force on the
              topography that tends to accelerate the mountain in the direction of the flow. 
              An equal and opposite force is exerted by the mountain on the airstream that
              tends to decelerate the overlying flow.  In contrast to the drag produced by
              surface friction, however, the decelerative forcing associated with
              gravity-wave generation can be exerted at elevations far above the ground. 
              Since the gravity waves that transport the majority of the drag aloft are too
              small in scale to be resolved in global weather and climate models,
              gravity-wave-drag processes must be parameterized in these models.  The quality
              of the weather and climate forecasts generated by global atmospheric models is
              sensitive to the details of this parameterization and efforts are underway to
              develop improved gravity-wave-drag parameterizations.  The proposed research on
              gravity wave drag falls within one of the crucial research areas identified for
              study under the U.S. Weather Research Program.


