Title       : MGE: Increasing the Production of Underrepresented Doctoral Recipients in SMET
               Disciplines through a Partnership between Howard University and Leading
               Minority Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a9817672

Award Number: 9817672
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Don M. Coleman DMC@SCS.Howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antoine M. Garibaldi  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9817672
A. Garibaldi

Howard University, the nation's largest on-campus
              producer of African American Ph.D. recipients, and the  nation's second largest
              producer of African American baccalaureate degree recipients, proposes to build
              upon its record of Ph.D. production by increasing its output of Ph.D.
              recipients in the science, mathematics, and engineering (SME) fields by fifty
              percent over the next five years.

Specifically, Howard proposes to establish
              and lead a consortium of the nation's most prestigious minority institutions
              which are among the largest producers of Bachelor's degree recipients who go on
              to obtain Ph.D. degrees in SME disciplines.  Partner institutions are:  Howard
              University, Bennett College, Bowie State University, Dillard University, Fisk
              University, Grambling State University, Hampton University, Morehouse
              University, Morgan State University, St. Augustine's College, Spelman College,
              Talladega College, Tougaloo College, University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez, and
              Xavier University of Louisiana.

At the undergraduate level, selected
              students will be provided an intensive summer research and graduate
              preparation-training program.  Upon completion of the master's degree and the
              fulfillment of requirements towards the Ph.D., all participants will be
              enrolled in Howard University's nationally renowned Preparing Future Faculty
              Program.  Lastly, a comprehensive evaluation plan will focus on issues of
              time-to-degree, completion rates, and post-graduation employment trends.



              

