Title       : Collaborative Research on Social Exchange and Network Cohesion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9817706

Award Number: 9817706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reeve D. Vanneman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79896              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shane R. Thye srthye@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a project to develop and test a theory of network cohesion that stems
              from research on power and commitment in exchange networks. This formulation
              breaks new ground by integrating ideas from two previously distinct research
              programs, Network Exchange Theory and the Theory of Relational Cohesion.
              Network Exchange Theory is a formal theory of power in exchange relations that
              uses information about the network structure to predict power and the
              distribution of resources in networks. The Theory of Relational Cohesion deals
              with negotiated exchange in the context of a network, and predicts that
              structural power produces commitment to exchange partners through an
              intervening emotional-affective process. The new Theory of Network Cohesion
              combines the two via a formal mathematical model that predicts when networks of
              "self-interested" persons evolve into "collectively-oriented" groups. The
              theory is consistent with previous work on dyadic commitment, and generates new
              predictions for larger social exchange networks.

The theoretical argument is
              that certain types of exchange networks generate feelings of global solidarity
              or cohesion, above and beyond any person-to-person dyadic commitment.
              Specifically, it hypothesizes that densely connected networks containing a high
              proportion of equal power relations should produce interactions that elicit
              feelings of groupness among all network members. Dense networks embody a type
              of structural "closeness" that virtually ensures all members have the potential
              to exchange resources with one another. Relatively dense social structures have
              fewer cliques, allow persons to easily interact with most or all others (high
              reachability), and exhibit less stratification of network positions. The
              distribution of power also has important consequences for the solidarity
              individuals experience in social interaction. The Theory of Relational Cohesion
              and attendant research indicate that equal power relations generate feelings of
              excitement or pleasure, and these emotions cause the relationship to become a
              valued object in its own right. Based on these principles, it is predicted that
              the combined effect of network density and distribution of power should produce
              "group-wide" feelings of solidarity that transcend local exchange ties.

The
              theory will be tested in a fully computerized experimental setting wherein
              persons negotiate with partners over a pool of profit points that can be
              redeemed for cash. This is a form of negotiated social exchange where persons
              in relations must agree on the division of profit or earn nothing at all. The
              theory predicts that certain network configurations will lead to interactions
              and perceptions that bind members together and to the group as a whole. The
              project calls for four experiments, manipulating network density and the
              distribution of power, to determine how network structures foster (1) emotional
              attachments to the larger group as a distinct object and (2) behavioral acts of
              commitment directed at other group members. Two distinct forms of commitment
              behavior will be studied: a symbolic gesture with little extrinsic value (i.e.,
              the giving of small token gifts) and a non-symbolic form of pecuniary
              self-restraint (i.e., the division of profit in a dictator game). Four
              experiments will measure both forms of behavior under a variety of network
              configurations.

This project has broader implications for group solidarity
              and cohesion. Whether the setting involves corporate agents in commercial
              enterprise, salary negotiations between professional ball players and team
              owners, or the buyers and sellers of black-market goods, the structure of
              network relations largely determines who interacts with whom and the extent to
              which power is used to promote self-interest. The Theory of Network Cohesion
              predicts that under favorable network configurations, interactions and
              exchanges will be distributed across all group members and the distributions of
              profit will tend toward equality. The result will be that people experience
              mild everyday positive emotions, develop a sense of common experience and group
              identity, and refrain from opportunism or malfeasance.

