Title       : The Effects of a Recurrent Coastal Plume on the Dynamics and Structure of the
               Lower Food Web in Lake Michigan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9817805

Award Number: 9817805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120172             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Lavrentyev peter3@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9817805    Lavrentyev        Research will be undertaken in response to an
              Announcement   of Opportunity (NSF 97-38) for Coastal Studies in the Great  
              Lakes.  This is a collaborative research project between   investigators from
              twelve academic and government research   institutions.  The  research is being
              conducted under the   auspices of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP)
              program   and the NOAA Coastal Ocean Program.        This collaborative,
              research program focuses on the   importance of episodic  events on
              nearshore-offshore   transport and subsequent ecological consequences. The
              study   seeks to 1) determine what processes control the cross-  margin
              (inshore to offshore) transport of biological,   chemical, and geological
              materials in the coastal margins of   the Great Lakes, and to 2) develop and
              test scientific   strategies for assessing, quantifying, and predicting the  
              impacts of multiple stresses both natural and anthropogenic,   in the Great  
              Lakes or selected coastal sub-regions. A   tight coupling between contaminated
              sediments and overlying   water exists in lakes and coastal ecosystems through
              the   process of sediment resuspension. Satellite observations in     Lake
              Michigan illustrate an annually recurrent episode of   nearshore-offshore
              transport, a 10-km wide plume of   resuspended material extending over 200 km
              along the   southern shores of the lake. Preliminary evidence indicates   that
              this episodic event may be the major mechanism for   cross-margin sediment
              transport in Lake Michigan.  This type   of event impacts recycling of
              biogeochemically important   materials (BIMS), ecosystem responses,
              cross-isobath   transport in the Great Lakes. The program results will be  
              applicable to similar events in many coastal areas. This   comprehensive,
              interdisciplinary study will implement an   integrated observational program
              and numerical modeling   effort to identify, quantify, and develop prediction
              tools     for the winter-spring resuspension event and to assess the    impact
              of this event on the  transport and transformation of   BIMS and on lake
              ecology.        This component of the study focuses on structure and  
              abundance of microbial food web organisms before, during,   and after plume
              formation; measure Nitrogen cycling rates in     relation to community and
              species-specific grazing rates of   microzooplankton within, at the edge, and
              outside of the   plume. Observations, experiments, and results will be    
              coordinated with those from primary production and   zooplankton grazing
              experiments and other studies of   nutrient and physical processes to complete
              a conceptual   model and   provide data for the proposed coupled  
              biological/physical model.
