Title       : Agrin Interactions with Extracellular Matrix
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9817201

Award Number: 9817201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247246             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Cole   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              P.I.: COLE, Gregory
   Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) are a specialized
              class of protein that are crucial to the development of the nervous system. 
              HSPGs are proposed to regulate processes as diverse as neural cell
              differentiation, cell adhesion and axon outgrowth.  Recent studies from Dr.
              Cole's laboratory have shown that the adhesion of neural cells to each other,
              that is mediated by the neural cell adhesion molecule NCAM, is modulated by
              HSPG.  Biochemical and molecular studies of this HSPG have resulted in the
              demonstration that agrin is a HSPG that binds to NCAM.  Agrin is an
              extracellular matrix protein identified and named based on its involvement in
              the aggregation of acetylcholine receptors during formation of the connections
              between motor nerves and skeletal muscle (neuromuscular junction).  Emerging
              evidence indicates that agrin's function is not limited to its role in
              acetylcholine receptor aggregation, as the majority of agrin expression occurs
              in developing central nervous system, kidney and lung.   In support of this
              postulate, disruption of the agrin gene in mice is lethal prior to birth,
              suggesting that a crucial function of agrin is related to embryonic
              development, and not solely receptor aggregation of developing neuromuscular
              junctions.   Agrin's expression in the brain and spinal cord is of particular
              interest, as it is primarily associated with developing nerve pathways. The
              studies outlined in this proposal are aimed at understanding how agrin
              functions in brain development by interacting with specific extracellular
              matrix molecules in the nervous system.  The studies described herein will
              examine both heparan sulfate-dependent and -independent interactions between
              agrin and the extracellular matrix. 
These studies will also examine how agrin
              may be a important modulator of extracellular matrix formation in developing
              embryos, and how agrin may regulate the formation of nerve tracts in the
              developing nervous system.  

