Title       : (URI) Collaborative Research: A Real-Time Urban Management System (for Dynamic
               City Visualization and Decision Support)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1999     
File        : a9817773

Award Number: 9817773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Muntz muntz@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Jepson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9817773
Muntz

The Real-time Urban Management System is a system, which is
              being designed to respond directly to the extremely diverse needs of modern
              cities and municipalities in their need to understand and manage real-time
              information and resources.  The primary problem that this system will address
              is the need to facilitate collaboration and sharing of information amongst
              dissimilar (multi-disciplinary) user groups.  The prototype system is being
              designed to allow information, both static and real-time (or temporal), to be
              made available, to be visualized and to be shared in an immediate fashion
              across a very diverse set of user populations, groups and functions.  These
              will include civic departments as well as with society and the community as a
              whole.

In order to accomplish this objective we intend to focus on
              three
Different application areas.  They are:

1) Police emergency response
              training and situation
Assessment for the Los Angeles metro subway system. 
              This application is representative of an intricate urban complex which is
              normally inaccessible for familiarizing emergency and law enforcement personnel
              with the environment which they will inevitably find themselves during an
              emergency situation.  It is both difficult and expensive to replicate up for
              training.  The transit police have expressed great interest in collaborating
              with us in the use of VR techniques in training police personnel for emergency
              response in the metro stations and tunnels.
This task will be carried out in
              the first half of the
Project period along with the technology focus described
              next.

2) Technology research.  The application above will provide the
              direction and impetus for the research.  We will also focus is on the
              structuring of the system to permit efficient, simple extension and tailoring
              of the system to new applications as they are identified.  The objective is to
              reduce the need for highly trained experts to build
Such applications. 
              Without this capability the proliferation of such systems will
be slow indeed.
               The goal here is to provide the basic concepts (data models, data manipulation
              primitives, interfaces to external databases, etc.) that permit relatively
              quick and efficient contruction of new applications.

3) Application of the
              system to emergency response and training for the Los Angeles International
              Airport will, in the second half of the project, be the testbed for the
              authoring system developed under item 2.
We feel that the airport will be an
              ideal site for developing the technology for automatic update of the model from
              aerial photographs.  This is a central part of the proposed research.  While
              actual emergencies (crashes, terrorist attacks, earthquakes, etc.) can not be
              produced on demand, we will be able to take aerial photographs, register the
              images with the model and develop the techniques to update the model with, for
              example, the current positions of planes, location of emergency vehicles, etc. 
              The fact that the airport is also due for some expansion and rennovation during
              this period will allow the use of a "before" model with some aerial photographs
              and video to again explore the techniques required to do change analysis an
              automatic model update.  The airport also provides numerous opportunities for
              real-time feeds on the position of vehicles and personel for example which will
              be incorporated into the system.

