Title       : Study of Glyoxalase II In Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a9817083

Award Number: 9817083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Crowder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1108,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Crowder and Makaroff
As part of a study to better understand the role(s) of
              glyoxalase II in cellular growth and development in plants and obtain
              structure/function data on glyoxalase II, five cDNA's corresponding to three
              Arabidopsis glyoxalase II gene families have been isolated and are being
              characterized.  The goal of this project is to address two fundamental and long
              standing questions concerning glyoxalase II:  (1) What function(s) does
              glyoxalase II have in plants?  and (2) What are the active site residues in
              glyoxalase II?  In order to determine the function(s) of glyoxalase II in
              plants, each of the glyoxalase II isozymes from A. thaliana will be cloned,
              overexpressed, and characterized.  Having the purified enzymes will allow for
              substrate specificity studies to be performed in vitro using steady-state
              kinetic studies. The second aspect of this part of the project involves
              cytochemical and molecular studies to determine the role(s) of glyoxalase II
              isozymes in plant growth and development.  To address the role of glyoxalase II
              isozymes in detoxification and cell proliferation, experiments to isolate and
              characterize plants containing gene disruptions in each of the glyoxalase II
              isozymes will be conducted.  In order to determine the active site residues in
              glyoxalase II, mutations of highly conserved residues (including the putative
              Zn binding ligands) will be generated, and the resulting mutant enzymes will be
              characterized for catalytic activity and metal binding. Characterization of the
              Zn binding sites in glyoxalase II proteins and their role/properties, using the
              metallo-b-lactamases as a potential model, will provide insight into
              structure/function relationships in glyoxalase II proteins and identify the
              structural motif used for catalysis.
	The glyoxalase system consists of two
              enzymes, glyoxalase I and glyoxalase II.  While glyoxalase activity is found in
              all organisms studied to date, its exact role in the cell has still not been
              clearly defined. In plants it appears that the glyoxalase system plays a
              critical role in cellular detoxification processes and may also be involved in
              the regulation of cell proliferation.  This project will address the
              physiological function of glyoxalase II and provide structural information
              about the active sites.

