Title       : REU Site: Developing Undergraduate Research in Computer Network-Based Intrusion
               Detection and Information System Protection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0097858

Award Number: 0097858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harriet G. Taylor                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Frincke frincke@cs.uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Alves-Foss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1713      WORKFORCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,9250,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0097858
Frincke, Deborah
University of Idaho

REU SITES:  Developing
              Undergraduate Research in Computer Network-Based Intruision Detection and
              Information System Protection

The need for technologically literate workers
              has reached a critical level.  The US Department of commerce predicts that by
              2006, the United States will need more than 1.3 million new technology workers.
               Further, there is a growing consensus that the lack of trained information
              security an information assurance personnel has reached or soon will reach
              crisis proportions.  This REU is intended to address the shortage of
              information assurance researchers by providing opportunities for undergraduates
              to participate in ongoing research projects under the auspices of the CSDS. 
              The Center for Secure and Dependable Software (CSDS) at the University of Idaho
              (UI) was formed in 1998 as an Idaho Center to better organize and promote
              information security education and research.  The CSDS/University of Idaho was
              named as one of the first seven Centers of Excellence in Information Assurance
              Education, and is therefore uniquely suited to lead this initiative.

	Our
              specific objectives are to include 14 undergraduate REU participants yearly (42
              total) in a program, which is intended:

1. To address the national need for
              researchers and "thinkers" with competencies in critical infrastructure
              protection by involving undergraduates in this area of research.
2. To provide
              an "learn by doing" environment in which motivated undergraduates learn how to
              take charge of their research in a disciplined and creative manner, and to lead
              others in such endeavors.
3. To offer a unique research experiences to people
              who would not otherwise have such opportunities.
4. To stimulate
              undergraduates to pursue graduate education or research careers in information
              assurance.
5. To attract a diverse student population to this field of
              study.
6. To provoke discussion and consideration of the vast array of ethical
              issues involved in computer security and privacy research and practice, both
              for the REU participants and later at her REU participants' home site.

Key
              components of our program include: a faculty with considerable experience in
              working with undergraduates in a research environment; immediate integration of
              students in existing research programs in information assurance, drawn from the
              PI and senior investigator's currently funded research: an emphasis on critical
              thinking, leadership, presentation, and publication skills; the Expanding
              Horizons seminars, which bring students into direct contact with highly
              regarded members of the information assurance field, with practitioners, and 
              with those involved in setting national policy in this area; also an optional
              ethics component in the form of an integrated sequence of lectures and
              discussion sections to be led by senior investigators with considerable
              expertise in this area.  A service aspect is also included, where students lead
              a project of their choice to solve specific real problems in information
              assurance.

The program is geared towards students who would not normally
              have an opportunity to work in research or in this area.  Recruitment will
              emphasize diversity, both to enrich the student experience and to bring
              underrepresented groups in the national security/privacy/information assurance
              policy and technology debates.  Ongoing assessment is emphasized in terms both
              of examining how student capabilities change through their participation in
              this program as well as in tracking student career choices after the program
              ends.

