Title       : Collaborative Research: The Direct and Indirect Photolytic Fate of Persistent
               Organic Pollutants in Arctic Surface Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0097142

Award Number: 0097142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu-Ping Chin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are capable of being
              transported to the Arctic by long-range processes (i.e., global distillation),
              and from locally contaminated areas by sea ice and runoff. The effect of these
              persistent pollutants on arctic ecosystems is poorly understood, but evidence
              shows that bioaccumulation occurs for some contaminants, and in particular may
              pose a threat to organisms at the highest trophic levels and indigenous people.
              Dissolved organic matter (DOM) is ubiquitous to all surface waters in the
              Arctic, and may play an important role in the fate of POPs. DOM is capable of
              acting as a "quasi-sorbent" thereby altering the speciation of POPs in the
              water column. DOM is also highly photoreactive and is able of forming chemical
              transients that can transform POPs to other substances. Given the high degree
              of photon flux that occurs during the boreal summer, photolytic processes may
              play an important role in POP fate in arctic surface waters. This research is
              exploring processes that control the fate of POPs in the presence of DOM from
              surface waters at a freshwater (Toolik Lake) and a marine site (Barter Island)
              in the Arctic. Specific objectives include:

1. identify and quantify the
              level of POP contamination in the surface waters at the two sites;
2. collect,
              isolate, and elucidate the structural and photolytic properties of DOM at these
              two sites;
3. measure the degree to which direct and indirect photolysis
              occurs for POPs using solar simulators in the lab and at the Toolik Lake field
              site;
4. identify and quantify the types and amounts of transient species
              formed by the photolysis of DOM; and
5. study the reaction kinetics and
              mechanisms for the direct and indirect photolysis of POPs and their daughter
              products.

The project is a collaborative effort between investigators at
              Ohio State University/BPRC (Chin) and the University of Colorado/INSTAAR
              (McKnight). Heptachlor, hexachlorobenzene, cis-chlordane, lindane, and two PCB
              congeners have been selected for study because they represent contaminants
              commonly detected in arctic surface waters, fauna, and the aboriginal people,
              and because they possess a wide range of physicochemical and photochemical
              properties. State-of-the-art methods for isolating and quantifying
              photosensitizers will be used. These include tangential-flow ultrafiltration
              unit and reverse-phase columns for concentrating DOM from the two sites. DOM
              isolates present at environmentally realistic levels will be used in both lab
              and outdoor photolysis experiments to determine the efficacy of these
              photosensitizers at transforming POPs. The reactions will be followed closely
              to quantify changes in both the parent compound and their photoderivatives.
              Other aspects of the project will attempt to "trap" phototransients using
              "probes" in an effort to elucidate important photolytic pathways. The proposed
              project will provide the basis for future research into the processes that
              control POP fate in the Arctic. Finally, information accrued will aid those
              parties responsible for the stewardship of these ecosystems.

