Title       : REU Site: Summer Research Projects in Contemporary Physics for Women and
               Minorities - Phase IV
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0097759

Award Number: 0097759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268182             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank S. Merritt merritt@uchep.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. O'Gallagher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Chicago Department of Physics proposes to continue to
              administer a Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) site project targeted
              especially for women and minorities. This program has been in effect for nine
              years now with the overriding objective being to encourage women and members of
              under-represented minority groups to pursue careers in physics.  Applications
              are solicited nationally from undergraduate programs in physics and engineering
              with particular emphasis on traditional women's colleges and historically black
              colleges. The core of the program for each student participant is a research
              project under supervision of an individual faculty member.  Typical student
              projects are distributed among the areas of high energy physics, cosmic ray and
              space physics, astronomy and astrophysics, general relativity, condensed matter
              physics, optics and solar energy, and electron and ion microscopy. These
              research experiences are complemented by field trips and a series of lectures.
              Each of the students makes a formal oral presentation during the last two weeks
              of the program and submits a written report describing his or her research. The
              program includes a number of regular social events as well. The  program
              currently is structured to support fourteen or fifteen students each summer and
              has been combined operationally with smaller REU programs on campus supported
              independently by the interdisciplinary Materials Research Science and
              Engineering Center (MRSEC) and the Center for Astrophysical Research in
              Antarctica (CARA).  These components include 6 to 9 additional students so that
              for the past few years a total of about 20-23 students have been participating
              "under one roof" in the combined programs. 
