Title       : Harmonic measures, potentials, approximation and polynomials inequalities on
               general sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0097484

Award Number: 0097484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67517              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vilmos Totik totik@math.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research will be done in connection with metric properties of harmonic measures
              on infinitely connected domains, in connection with polynomial inequalities and
              orthogonal polynomials. The estimates for harmonic measures/Green
              functions
will be given via a local integral involving a density function
              associated with
the boundary of the domain.  Such results directly lead to
              estimates for polynomials in the complex plane and to extensions of some
              classical 
polynomial inequalities for general compact sets. The results, in
              particular, will allow  to find the order of the Markoff factors for
              Cantor-type sets, which in turn
will produce compact sets of zero measure for
              which the Markoff factors are of the minimal growth order O(n^2). Weighted
              polynomial inequalities
with respect to general (say doubling) weights will
              also be studied together with applications in connection with approximation
              theory and orthogonal polynomials.
Another part of the research is polynomial
              approximation and orthogonal
polynomials with varying weights (the weight
              varies with the degree), which
will be studied with the help of logarithmic
              potentials in the
presence of an external field. The approximation problem is
              fundamental
in proving appropriate asymptotics for Christoffel functions
and
              orthogonal polynomials with varying weights, that in
turn can be used to test
              the universality hypothesis in statistical-
mechanical models of quantum
              physics. The proposed research uses different tools from classical analysis,
              but the main method is potential thoretic.

Research will be done in
              mathematical analysis. The main effort will be to find new ways to estimate
              some classical quantities and to  extend some well known results to more
              general situations. These will allow wider applicability
of several classical
              tools and will provide some new insights into the theoretical aspects of some
              fundamental questions in approximation theory
and orthogonal polynomials.


