Title       : REU Site in Algebra, Number Theory and Graph Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0097592

Award Number: 0097592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Morey sm26@swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project is a one year REU site in mathematics, to be held at Southwest Texas
              State University.  Five students will work closely with two faculty members for
              eight weeks in the summer to solve open problems in mathematics.  The
              objectives of the program are to directly involve students in research and to
              allow the students to interact with each other and to form a close mentoring
              relationship with a faculty member.  The students will work in teams of two or
              three under the supervision of a faculty mentor.  All of the open problems for
              this program have a strong computational aspect.  The students will begin their
              research by computing examples and searching for patterns.  They will then
              progress to making conjectures and proving theorems.  

The  topics for this
              program will come from the fields of Algebra, Representation Theory, and Graph
              Theory.  The background needed for the program will be a one semester course in
              Modern Algebra, or the equivalent.  Some of the problems will also require
              knowledge of Linear Algebra.  All students who have the necessary background
              are eligible to apply.

Throughout the summer, the student groups will stay
              informed of each other's progress by holding twice weekly seminars at which
              they present their preliminary results.  At the end of the summer, the student
              will write their results in the form of a research paper and will prepare a
              final presentation to be given to the Mathematics Department.  The students and
              faculty will continue to work on the problems after the summer program ends by
              using electronic correspondence.  Most of the projects will result in a final
              paper that will be submitted to a refereed journal for publication.  In
              addition, each student will be provided  with funding to travel to a
              mathematical conference to present his or her work.

The point of contact for
              student recruitment is Dr. Susan Morey.  She can be reached at (512) 245-3739
              or by e-mail at morey@swt.edu.   Her web site address is
              http://www.swt.edu/~sm26/index.html.  A link to the address for site
              information will be provided there when it becomes available.
