Title       : GOALI: Phase Stabilities of Rare Earth Metal Silicides and the Growth of
               Silicide Nanowires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0097621

Award Number: 0097621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $642675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. Austin Chang CHANG@ENGR.WISC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Stanley Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,1682,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI project is a study of the phase stabilities of rare earth metal
              silicides and the growth of nanowires on preferred directions along a silicon
              substrate.  Many rare earth metals react with silicon to form disilicides
              exhibiting the same crystal structure as that of erbium disilicide. The < 0211
              > direction of the silicides often has a negative lattice mismatch with one of
              the <110> directions of the Si. Disilicides of Er, Ho and Dy have such a
              lattice mismatch. Other rare metal disilicides, such as disilicides of Sm, Gd,
              and Tb, exhibit a positive lattice mismatch. The mismatch along the c-axis of
              these disilicides with the perpendicular <110> direction of Si is always
              positive.  This project examines the compositional stabilities of ternary rare
              earth metal silicides in the solid state at 650C by determining ternary phase
              relationships. Taking advantage of the chemical similarity of the rare earth
              metals, an efficient approach is outlined for determining the ternary phase
              equilibria, including the compositional stability of the disilicides. Since
              nanowire growth takes place at high temperatures and the coefficients of
              thermal expansion of these silicides are expected to be different from that of
              Si, the coefficients of thermal expansion of these disilicides are measured as
              a function of temperature and alloy composition by high-temperature x-ray
              diffraction. These investigations are carried out at UW-Madison. Each year of
              the grant, two or more of the researchers working at UW-Madison will spend time
              at Hewlett-Packard Laboratory to carry out nanowire growth and characterization
              with access to HP's expertise and facilities. On the basis of this combined
              study, appropriate conditions for growing ternary silicide nanowires with
              optimal lattice mismatch will be determined. 
%%%
The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having high potential
              technological relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level to important fabrication aspects of
              electronic/photonic devices. An important feature of the program is the
              integration of research and education through graduate student and post
              doctoral training in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. A
              post doctoral research associate and a graduate student will spend time each
              year of the project working on site at Hewlett-Packard Laboratory benefitting
              from the Industrial collaboration staff expertise and facilities and
              instrumentation available at HP. The availability of unique instrumentation and
              facilities, and direct intellectual interaction with HP staff provides
              invaluable educational opportunities and perspectives, and fosters the
              integration of research and education. The project is co-supported by the
              DMR/Metals and Electronic Materials programs and the MPS OMA(Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities). 
***

