Title       : Dissertation Research: Natural Selection at the Alpha-2 Globin Locus in Bornean
               Orangutans.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0097057

Award Number: 0097057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maryellen Ruvolo ruvolo@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Natural selection is the directional force of evolution and is known to have
              affected the genetic structure of our species.  The classic example of
              selection involves adaptations in the hemoglobin genes of humans created to
              combat malaria parasites.  The most widely known adaptation is the sickle cell
              hemoglobin.  Many primates other than humans harbor similar malaria parasites. 
              One such primate is the orangutan, an Asian ape.  The main hypothesis of this
              study is that the alpha globin genes of orangutans are under natural selection
              and adaptations to malaria.  This is significant because if orangutan alpha
              globin genes have evolved by natural selection, malaria may be an important
              selective pressure in primates other than humans.  By extension, malaria may
              have been a major selective force in the lives of early hominids such as
              Australopithecus.  Large-bodied predators are often considered to be selective
              agents among apes, but microscopic "predators" may in fact have had larger
              effects.

To test this hypothesis, DNA sequence data will be generated for 
              two genes, alpha-2 globin and Dmd, from a large number of orangutans. 
              Different measures of genetic diversity will be calculated from these two
              genes, which will be compared and contrasted to one another.  The Dmd gene has
              been shown not to be influenced by natural selection in humans and will
              therefore be an index of non-selective evolution.  If the diversity at the two
              genes is significantly different, natural selection will be inferred to be
              acting at the alpha-2 globin gene. 

The data collected will also be used to
              make inferences about orangutan population history and inform conservation
              efforts.  Some estimations will be population age, population size, migration
              rates, and mutation rates.  These parameters will then be compared to published
              comparable estimates for modern humans and chimpanzees, enabling direct
              comparisons among the population histories of these primates

