Title       : Evolutionary Algorithms for Symbolic FSM Equivalence Checking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0097246

Award Number: 0097246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell A. Thornton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Integrated Circuits (ICs) are becoming more complex and market demand continues
              to pressure designers to produce new ICs in a shorter amount of time.  For
              these reasons, there is interest in the use of verification
methods that allow
              designers the ability to ensure correctness of their product without resorting
              to time-consuming simulation techniques.  Two approaches for verification are
              equivalence checking and model checking.  Internally, in these two approaches,
              a method for checking the equivalence of Finite State Machines (FSM) is
              commonly used.

FSM equivalence checking is typically implemented through the
              use of a symbolic state-space reachability algorithm that uses BDD data
              structures and satisfiability (SAT) algorithms. While there have been advances
              in symbolic FSM machine state-space traversal methods in recent years, many
              designs of interest still cannot be verified using this method due to the
              transition relation (TR) BDD becoming too large, the BDD representing the state
              space already traversed becoming too large, the intermediate BDDs during image
              computation becoming too large, and, the overall process requiring too much
              computation time.

Evolutionary algorithms have recently been applied to
              several problems in design automation.  This research project involves the
              investigation of the use of evolutionary algorithms for exact and approximate
              FSM
equivalence checking.  Evolutionary algorithms are being developed that
              prune the TR and the reachable state BDDs such that exact, over-approximation
              or under-approximation state space traversals can be
performed.  Since
              evolutionary algorithms can be quite computationally intensive, a major portion
              of this effort focuses on the development of efficient mutation and crossover
              operations.


