Title       : REU Site: Wyoming's Infrared Observatory's Summer Undergraduate Research
               Assistantship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a0097356

Award Number: 0097356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Canterna canterna@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1207,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Prop : AST-0097356
University of Wyoming 
PI : Ron Canterna



The Wyoming
              Infrared Observatory (WIRO) will provide a Summer Undergraduate Research
              Assistantship Program (SURAP) as a National Science Foundation Research
              Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Program.  SURAP will offer undergraduate
              students throughout the nation its tutorial program in research.  The main
              goals are: 1) to introduce undergraduate participants to a realistic and
              fulfilling experience in astrophysics research, working directly with active
              professionals, 2) to offer each student experience observing directly with the
              0.6 and 2.3 m telescopes and its CCD instrumentation, 3) to encourage each
              undergraduate to publish their results and communicate their research findings
              at professional meetings.  Seven to eight participants will be chosen from
              universities and colleges throughout the nation.  Successful candidates are
              selected based on their academic performance, interest in a research career,
              and faculty recommendations.  SURAP's secondary goal is to have a diverse
              student environment with students from liberal arts colleges and small
              universities with limited research facilities.  Special efforts are made to
              actively recruit freshmen and sophomore undergraduates, women, and
              under-represented minorities.  The program has traditionally selected students
              with no prior REU experience, outside of the student's home institution.  A
              concurrent academic/laboratory course and research seminar will accompany the
              tutorial research program and this seminar includes an introduction to modern
              infrared and CCD detectors, image processing, experience in observing with a
              modern, computer-controlled telescope, academic instruction in fundamental,
              modern astrophysics, and science ethics.  The focal point of the course will be
              a student-oriented, temporal monitoring program of interesting astronomical
              objects using WIRO's computer-controlled 0.6 meter reflector at Red Buttes and
              the 2.3 meter telescope.
***



