Title       : Collaborative Research: Investigation of Englacial Conduit Formation and
               Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0097095

Award Number: 0097095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Jacobel jacobel@stolaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
OPP-00-97137
Fountain
OPP-OO-97095
Jacobel

This is a
              collaborative proposal from Principal Investigators at Portland State
              University and St. Olaf College. The movement of water through glaciers
              profoundly affects ice motion by influencing the stress distribution at the bed
              of the glacier.  Therefore, a great deal of research has focused on the
              hydraulic nature of subglacial water transport.  For temperate glaciers, the
              main source of water is surface-generated melt water.  How this water reaches
              the glacier bed is of critical importance.  Surface and englacial conditions
              may preferentially direct water flow to certain parts of the glacier bed and
              starve other parts of the bed.  Therefore, an understanding of the controls on
              the spatial pattern of subglacial hydraulic conditions will depend on an
              understanding of the surficial and englacial conditions routing the water to
              the bed.  Existing knowledge of englacial conduits has largely been a
              by-product of investigations into subglacial conditions.  The goal of this
              project is to investigate the location, size, and hydraulic character of
              englacial conduits in an alpine glacier. 

This project will take place on
              the Storglaciaren in Tarfala, Sweden, where an extensive background of
              scientific wok exists and an active research program continues.  The Principal
              Investigators will undertake a two-year field program that directly detects
              englacial conduits and uses ice radar to identify and trace the conduit paths. 
              Low frequency radar measurements (5 MHz) will locate regions with strong
              englacial scattering suggestive of englacial water pockets and potentially
              productive areas for drilling.  The radar will also be used to map the local
              bed depth and topography.  Conventional hot-water drilling will penetrate the
              glacier to intersect englacial conduits. After a conduit is encountered, they
              will measure conduit diameter, water pressure, and water flow speed using
              down-hole instruments. They will attempt to determine the interconnectivity
              between conduits to measure their integrated hydraulic properties over the flow
              path.  The path of the conduits will be traced using a high-resolution ground
              penetrating radar operated at 100 MHz, a frequency chosen both resolve
              individual conduits, and to monitor changes in echo characteristics
              corresponding to hydrologic changes over time.

The results from this study
              will further our understanding of conduit origin and the controls on water
              routing to the bed.  Identification of high-resolution radar signals with
              conduits of known sizes and locations will make significant progress towards
              future use of ice radar for detecting and mapping the location of englacial
              conduit.
 NSF Proposal Number:  0097137
PI:  Fountain

Statement of
              Work

We will directly measure the geometry and hydraulics of englacial
              conduits   The principle method of detecting englacial conduits will be
              drilling into the glacier to directly intersect the conduits.  We will employ a
              hot-water drill capable of penetrating at rates of 1 m min-1.  We will attempt
              to drill 20 boreholes in 3 different arrays for a total of 60 holes.  During
              drilling we will monitor both drill depth and water levels.  If openings appear
              on both sides of the borehole and flow is detected, either by natural
              particulates moving in the water or by a deflection of thread hanging from the
              camera, no further drilling in the hole will occur.  If flow is detected
              careful hydraulic measurements will be made.  The shape of the opening will be
              recorded and flow velocities will be measured.  Within each borehole array and
              between arrays, we will test for interconnectivity by displacing the water in
              one borehole and measuring the response in other boreholes.  

The data from
              this project will test a model for the origin and evolution of conduits.
              Another test will compare the measured depth of a water-filled conduit and its
              hydraulic characteristics to that predicted by theory.  The flow data and
              geometry of the conduits will be used to test Rothlisberger's (1972) theory. 
              If we are able to monitor conduits over time we will also test Spring's (1980)
              non-steady state theory. From the borehole arrays and the radar imaging
              (Jacobel) we will infer the 3-dimensional topology of the conduit network at 6
              different locations (over 2 years) in the glacier.  These results will help to
              resolve the differences between the models of Shreve (1972) and Fountain and
              Walder (1998).  More generally, spatial differences in the conduit networks
              imply differences in the flux of water to different areas of the bed and
              therefore impose an external condition on the development of subglacial
              hydraulic systems. These results will be reported in several journal articles. 
              










