Title       : Atom Transfer Reactions: Implications for Polymerization Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0097839

Award Number: 0097839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Waymouth waymouth@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Robert M. Waymouth, Chemistry Department, Stanford University, is supported
              by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division to develop the chemistry of well-defined titanium complexes
              in the Ti(III) oxidation state, to investigate atom transfer reactions that
              mediate the reversible interconversion of Ti(III) and Ti(IV)in non-polar media,
              and to develop new catalytic systems based on titanium complexes that change
              oxidation state during catalysis. These studies are directed at catalysts for
              the syndiospecific polymerization of styrene as well as the development of new
              catalyst systems for the production of block copolymers of styrene and
              non-conjugated olefins. Mechanistic studies of syndiospecific styrene
              polymerization will focus on the reactivity of well defined Ti(III) precursors
              for styrene polymerization. Styrene and ethylene homopolymerization experiments
              and styrene/ethylene copolymerization experiments will be carried out to test
              the competence of both Ti(III) and Ti(IV) complexes for styrene and ethylene
              polymerization activity. The coordination chemistry of titanium complexes with
              stable nitroxides such as 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl (TEMPO) will be
              carried out as a strategy for reversibly interconverting Ti(III) and Ti(IV) in
              non-polar solvents. The synthesis of Ti-TEMPO complexes and the bond energies
              of the Ti-nitroxide bonds will be investigated by thermolysis and nitroxide
              exchange equilibria. The kinetics and thermodynamics of atom-transfer
              equilibria between titanium complexes and other metal halides will be
              investigated to provide fundamental information on metal-halogen bond
              energetics. These studies will guide the choice of appropriate atom-transfer
              redox partners to mediate the interconversion of Ti(III) and Ti(IV) complexes.
              

Polyolefins and polystyrenes are two important classes of polymers. This
              research seeks to develop a catalyst system that can produce a polymer that
              contains both polyolefin and polystyrene fragments. The properties of such
              "block co-polymers" can be precisely engineered if the composition and the size
              of the "blocks" of each individual component can be controlled. In this
              project, new titanium catalysts that will polymerize styrene when the titanium
              has a 3+ charge and olefins when it bears a 4+ charge will be developed. By
              altering the metal charge the composition of the block copolymer can be
              controlled.


