Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0097366

Award Number: 0097366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213591             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott T. Chapman schapman@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Holder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Holly J. Rosson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vadim Ponomarenko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julio R. Hasfura-Buenaga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In attempting to remain one of the Southwest's premier centers for undergraduate
              mathematics, the Mathematics Department at Trinity University recognizes the
              importance of the emerging role of undergraduate research and will reopen our
              Summer Undergraduate Research Experience in Mathematics Program, which was
              originally funded by the National Science Foundation during the summers of
              1997, 1998 and 1999.  Our objectives in having a three year project are
              fourfold:

1.  To provide student participants with an understanding of, an
              appreciation for, and an experience in the nature of mathematical research and
              the life of a mathematical researcher, to a degree which will encourage them to
              pursue the study of the mathematical sciences on the graduate level.

2.  To
              offer these experiences with a special eye toward students who do not typically
              have these opportunities.  Of particular interest to us are students who are
              either female or a member of an under-represented minority group.

3.  To
              produce quality mathematical work appropriate for publication in undergraduate
              research journals and, when possible, in higher level research journals.

4. 
              To gain experience in the use of computers and their interaction in
              mathematical research.

While we envision the recruiting effort for students
              to be nationwide, we see, due to our location, a unique opportunity to recruit
              students at many colleges and universities in South Texas that have
              traditionally high Hispanic enrollment.  We will have an expanded recruiting
              effort to such schools and a revamping of our past program evaluation efforts. 
              This will also be an expansion of our old program from 4 faculty to 6 faculty
              and the number of students involved from 6 to 12.  The available research areas
              will include: Abstract Algebra, Difference Equations, Discrete Dynamical
              Systems, Mathematical Programming, Combinatorics, and Number Theory.  Our
              expansion is in line with Trinity University's strong commitment to
              undergraduate research, as demonstrated by Trinity's nationally recognized
              undergraduate research programs in Chemistry, Biology and Computer Science.
