Title       : Studies in Commutative Algebra and Computational Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0097093

Award Number: 0097093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolmer V. Vasconcelos vasconce@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns problems in commutative  algebra, algebraic geometry and
              computational algebra.  These problems  range from the explicit construction of
              algorithms in algebra and the development of settings to analyze their
              complexity to the construction and analysis of several classes of singular
              varieties.  The investigator  is:  (a) developing  methods to construct
              integral closures of algebras, ideals and modules, and understanding  their
              complexity, including the introduction of non-Turing models of complexity;  (b)
              developing families of numerical signatures (multiplicities, volumes) of rings
              and algebras that play in local rings and arbitrary algebras a role similar to
              Castelnuovo--Mumford's regularity in graded structures; (c) carrying out an
              algebraization of blowup algebras and of  algebras associated to  commuting
              sets of elements of  Lie algebras with the major aim of finding its properties
              of Cohen-Macaulay type (including rational singularity),  arguably the most
              efficient packaging of an algebraic structure.

The mathematical problems
              with which this proposal is concerned come from the overlapping areas of
              commutative algebra, algebraic geometry and computational algebra.  The
              research program is focused on the search for generic and numerical solutions
              of  sets of  polynomial and analytic equations, such as those that apply to
              such diverse areas as algebraic geometry, combinatorics, cryptography,
              control/coding theory and robotic motion.  The investigator studies the fine
              structure of these algebraic systems, and he develops methods and algorithms
              for solving them.  At the same time he is seeking to break the computational
              logjam of several problems of computer algebra through a more fundamental
              understanding  of their structure.

