Title       : Synthesis, Photophysics, and Chemistry of Novel Fullerene Derivatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0097089

Award Number: 0097089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David I. Schuster david.schuster@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              supports the work of Dr. David I. Schuster and Stephen R. Wilson in the
              Department of Chemistry of New York University in New York City.   Part of the
              work is aimed at the synthesis and photophysical investigation of
              supramolecular complexes with a variety of rotaxanes and catenanes in which
              non-covalently linked metal porphyrin complexes and C60 fullerenes are held in
              unusual spatial relationships.   It is based on earlier work with
              porphyrin-fullerene dyads connected by flexible polyether or rigid steroid
              linkers.   Other studies will involve [2+2] photocycloaddition of cyclic enones
              to C70, and the synthesis, photochemistry and self-assembly of fullerene
              derivatives with highly fluorinated molecular tails.

Most of the work
              involves the synthesis and study of molecules which contain both an electron
              donor (a metal (usually zinc) porphyrin complex), which can be readily put into
              an electronically excited state using light, and an electron acceptor (a ball
              of 60 or 70 carbon atoms), to which an electron can be transferred after the
              donor has been excited.   The process mimics the first step of photosynthesis
              in green plants, which use a magnesium porphyrin complex to absorb light,
              followed by electron transfer.   The novel molecules to be studied will shed
              light on the details of the electron excitation and transfer process, and could
              eventually lead to novel optical and electronic materials.   Because the work
              involves synthesis, characterization, photochemistry, photophysics, and
              computational design, it is expected to provide excellent training for the
              students involved.
