Title       : Molecular Monolayers on CMOS for Nanoscale Chemical Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0097434

Award Number: 0097434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271441             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor Thornton t.thornton@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Devens Gust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael N. Kozicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1648,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0097434
Thornton

The project outlined in this proposal aims to develop a new
              type of hybrid molecular-semiconductor chemical sensor that is highly
              integrated, cheap and versatile. The sensor consists of polarizable molecular
              monolayers that adhere (i.e. self-assemble) to an underlying CMOS-compatible
              integrated circuit. The molecular monolayers are designed in such a way that
              their physical structure changes after exposure to the chemical of interest.
              The change in physical structure leads to a change in their electrical
              polarization which is detected by a sensitive transistor immediately below the
              monolayer. It is possible to design the molecular monolayers to respond to a
              wide range of individual chemical agents. The device combines the enormous
              flexibility associated with organic synthesis with the mass production
              capability of silicon chips. If successful, the research the PIs are proposing
              will lead to chip-based sensors that are cheap enough to be considered
              disposable, yet contain multiple sensing elements. The sensing elements will be
              integrated at the nanoscale and each chip will be capable of detecting a wide
              range of chemical agents. It will be possible to integrate the sensing elements
              with peripheral electronic circuitry that will perform both analog and digital
              signal processing. The information provided by the chip can be fed to a central
              computer (e.g. a home or office p.c.) to form a complete system for monitoring
              chemicals that influence our quality of life.

The research will concentrate
              on the science and engineering that underpins a generic chemical sensing
              technology. Rather than focusing on a sensor that detects a single class of
              chemicals, they are looking to develop general principles that will allow them
              to build integrated sensors that can be tailored to a wide range of chemical
              classes. In this way a standardized processing technology can be used to build
              sensors for gas-phase or liquid-phase species that could be organic, biological
              or inorganic in nature. This vision is analogous to the way in which present
              day CMOS can be used to build analog or digital circuits for different
              applications including information processing, communications and power
              electronics. As a demonstrator of this technology the PIs propose to fabricate
              a chip-based sensor that combines circuitry for basic analog signal processing
              with molecular monolayers that are individually and selectively sensitive to
              different chemical agents. For demonstration purposes, they shall focus on
              three prototype devices for sensing pH, metal ions and biologically important
              enzymes. However, their principal objective is to complete the basic research
              that would underpin a generic sensing technology based on hybrid molecular-CMOS
              integrated circuits.

The PIs propose a highly comprehensive and
              multidisciplinary program to investigate the preparation and properties of
              chemically active organic molecules, the fundamental factors controlling the
              interfacing of these species with electronic materials, and the incorporation
              of the molecules into prototype devices for multi-use sensing applications. The
              work will combine molecular synthesis with novel device fabrication and
              advanced scanning probe imaging. The molecular synthesis will initially
              concentrate on specifically tailored porphyrin-based molecular monolayers that
              incorporate functional groups that will bind strongly to the surface of the
              underlying transistor. If this approach shows promise, other sensing molecules
              for other specific applications will be designed and synthesized.

The
              physical structure and orientation of the molecules on the semiconductor
              surface will be studied using a combination of scanning tunneling microscopy
              and atomic force microscopy. The visual, and quantitative data provided by the
              scanning probe images will be correlated with that provided by electrical
              measurements, to better understand the physical configuration of the molecular
              monolayers before and after exposure to the chemical agents of interest.

If
              successful this work will create a revolution in environmental sensing that
              will have widespread beneficial impact.

