Title       : MEMS-Based Acoustic Array Technology for Real-Time Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0097636

Award Number: 0097636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399511             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toshikazu Nishida nishida@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jian Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl S. Gugel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Sheplak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1648,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
0097636
Nishida

The objective of this research effort is to develop a
              MEMS-based acoustic array using expertise in acoustics, MEMS design and
              fabrication, adaptive signal processing, and DSP hardware development for
              distributed sensing and control. The technology offers the potential to
              economically scale directional microphone array technology to hundreds of
              microphones while improving data handling and portability. The potential impact
              includes directional microphones for communication devices to industrial
              screening for noise abatement.	

This research will explore the microphone
              design, beamforming algorithms, and DSP hardware required to realize a
              MEMS-based acoustic array. The microphone design involves the modeling,
              fabrication, and characterization of a dual back plate force-feedback
              capacitive MEMS microphone as the array element to avoid the electrostatic
              pull-in instability of open-loop capactive microphones while yielding a wider
              bandwidth, dynamic range, and larger signal-to-noise ratio. Due to the presence
              of strong acoustic interference signals, requirements for the beamforming
              algorithm include adaptive approaches that can be used for simultaneous
              interference suppression. One of the most effective adaptive beamforming
              approaches is the Capon beamformer which has been widely used in many
              applications in radar and communications. This research includes the
              implementation of the real time adaptive acoustic imaging algorithms with
              MEMS-based acoustic arrays. These algorithms include: 1. adaptive beamforming
              algorithms for acoustic sources with arbitrary radiation patterns, 2. steering
              vector estimation algorithms in the presence of interference, 3. adaptive
              beamforming with gapped or missing data information, and 4. recursive
              implementations of the adaptive algorithms for moving sources. This creates a
              substantial computation problem that has traditionally been handled in a
              non-real time manner.
	
		I


