Title       : MEMS Biosensor Array for Biochemical and Clinical Diagnostics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0097468

Award Number: 0097468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Tadigadapa srinivas@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1648,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Calorimetry is a very versatile and effective investigative tool for analyzing
              biochemical reactions and is capable of providing continuous quantitative
              assays of biochemical reactions with exceptional operational stability. The
              ability to follow the progress of a biochemical reaction continuously as a
              function of time or reactant concentration has many research and clinical
              applications with far reaching consequences. However, calorimetric bioanalysis
              has been mostly hampered by the high cost, slow response times and cumbersome
              nature of the equipment. To address these limitations, a novel calorimetric
              biosensor is proposed by integrating a polymer based micro-reaction chamber on
              a MEMS thin film freestanding microthermopile sensor. The thermopile will be
              fabricated on a freestanding micromechanical structure such as a cantilever
              with the cold junctions placed on the bulk of the silicon chip (the rim) and
              the hot junctions on the freestanding structure. A polymer-based reaction
              chamber will be integrated right above the hot junctions of the thermopile. The
              large thermal mass and good thermal conductivity of the rim keeps the cold
              junctions at room temperature whereas the unconstrained cantilever tip will
              rise in temperature due to the heat of reaction. Coating the hot junctions with
              specific immobilized enzymes will provide selectivity by catalyzing only the
              reaction of the corresponding analyte. The sensor will also be used for the
              accurate measurement of the specific heat and thermal diffusivity of the
              reactants. Real-time monitoring of these thermal properties will provide with
              an independent tool for analyzing the progress of the biochemical reaction.
