Title       : Development of a Coupled Global Circulation/Adaptive Food Web Model to Explain
               Carbon Cycling in the Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a0097335

Award Number: 0097335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Laws laws@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research will be on the development of a food web model that can be used to
              predict export production and to characterize the nature of the carbon exported
              to the interior of the ocean. The model will be similar to the food web model
              developed conceptually at the 1999 Synthesis and Modeling (SMP) food web
              work-shop in Keystone, Colorado. In the model phytoplankton are envisioned as
              consisting of five functional groups, small phytoplankton such as Synechococcus
              and Prochlorococcus, diatoms, coccolithophores, Phaeocystis, and nitrogen
              fixers. Division of the phytoplankton in this manner is hypothesized to be
              necessary to explain the dependence of export ratios on temperature and primary
              production, to account for the allocation of exported carbon between calcium
              carbonate, particulate organic carbon, and dissolved organic carbon, and to
              take into account various methods of ballasting (fecal pellets, calcium
              carbonate, and silica) that influence the sinking and remineralisation rates of
              particulate carbon. A distinguishing characteristic of the model is the
              assumption that open ocean biological communities adapt to environmental
              conditions in a way that tends to maximize the stability of the steady state
              condition toward which the communities evolve. This same hypothesis has
              previously been tested with a simpler food web model in which the phytoplankton
              are envisioned as consisting of only two functional groups, small and large
              phytoplankton. The success of that previous model, which was developed with
              funding from the first phase of the SMP, has provided the motivation for
              extending this same approach to the more complex model with five functional
              phytoplankton groups. It is hypothesized that a stable coupled
              physical-biological model of the ocean will require that the biological
              component be adaptive. With respect to export production, specific questions to
              be addressed with the model will include the following:

1. How much of the
              organic carbon is exported as dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and how much as
              particulate carbon (PC)
2. Of the PC export, how much is exported as
              particulate organic carbon (POC) and how much as carbonate carbon (CC)
3. To
              what extent is the exported POC ballasted by silica and/or carbonate or
              sequestered by incorporation into encapsulated fecal pellets

A
              time-dependent version of the model may be incorporated into a GCM at a later
              date.  

