Title       : REU Site for Research in the Biological Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0097499

Award Number: 0097499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170859             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis M. Smith dsmith@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara S. Beltz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      106 Central Street
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    781/283-1000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate students will take part in a three year summer research
              site
program in the Department of Biological Sciences at Wellesley College,
              an
undergraduate college for women, which has a strong interest in
              the
research training of undergraduates.  Applications will be
              actively
encouraged from Wellesley College Biology, Psychobiology,
              Biological
Chemistry and Environmental Sciences majors, students from
              regional
liberal arts colleges and universities, as well as similar
              institutions
nation-wide.  These students will have a serious interest in
              gaining
research experience to add to their demonstrated academic talent. 
              They
will already have shown an ability to think independently
              and
imaginatively, and will have strong recommendations from
              knowledgeable
faculty at their own institutions.  Ten participants for each of
              the three
years will be selected by the PI and the participating faculty. 
              The
selected students will take part in a lively, instructive, ten
              week
program.  Under the guidance of their faculty mentor, each student
              will
participate fully in an active research program.  This will
              include
everything from pursuing a literature review, to carrying out
              independent
experimental procedures and observations, and continuing to the
              analysis
of data and the determination of conclusions.  Each will also prepare
              and
deliver a presentation of results to the entire program in a
              weekly
seminar series.  This, along with a series of demonstrations of
              the
techniques utilized by other laboratories, and a final poster
              session,
will familiarize each student with the wide variety of active
              research
programs in the Department.  Throughout the summer seminars and
              workshops
will be presented by scientists, and field trips will be taken to
              field
research sites and biotechnology companies. It is expected, based
              on
previous experience, that participation in this program will have
              a
significant impact on the future of these undergraduates, as most
              will
pursue advanced degrees.
