Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates at Mountain Lake Biological Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0097249

Award Number: 0097249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229274             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Nagy enagy@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry M. Wilbur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Mountain
              Lake
Biological Station (MLBS, University of Virginia) offers ten students
              a
summer opportunity to conduct independent,
              self-motivated,
interdisciplinary, and original biological research in
              experimental,
field-based ecology, evolution, and behavior.  Under the close
              supervision
and guidance of a research mentor, and the program coordinator,
              students
design, execute, analyze, interpret, and present a self-contained
              research
project within the ten weeks of the program.  Many student projects
              are
published in leading peer-reviewed journals.  Students participate in
              weekly
seminars on the design and conduct of research, scientific ethics,
              writing
and presentation techniques, and other matters of scientific and
              academic
life.  Students prepare written and oral proposals and final
              reports.
Participants also take advantage of the rich, varied, and
              stimulating
intellectual and social life at Mountain Lake.  MLBS hosts two
              formal
research seminars per week, which include both in-house and
              invited
speakers.  All Station residents eat meals together in the common
              dining
hall, and most daily activity revolves around the central lab building
              where
all research programs are housed.  And since field sites are often
              within
walking distance, interactions among all Station users occur
              constantly,
resulting in a remarkably supportive and collaborative
              environment.
Researchers from large universities and small colleges return to
              the Station
year after year - some for 10, 20, even 30 years. Sixty to eighty
              principal
investigators, course faculty, post-docs, graduate and
              undergraduate
students, and high school students are in residence at the
              Station
throughout the summer.  MLBS has hosted an NSF REU-Sites
              program
continuously since 1993 and has graduated well over 100 students -
              over half
have gone on to pursue graduate training in biology.  The program is
              very
successful at attracting women and students from small colleges
              where
research may not be a focus.  Minority students and those
              in
underrepresented groups are especially encouraged to apply.  

