Title       : REU Site: LA Observed: Summer Program in Ethnographic Research on LA at Play
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0097750

Award Number: 0097750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94443              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Katz jackkatz@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jill Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for an REU Site in Sociology at the University of
              California, Los Angeles.  Members of the Sociology Department, in collaboration
              with faculty from a variety of other disciplines on the campus, are currently
              involved in launching a large-scale research project concerning contemporary
              urban life in Los Angeles called LA Observed.  The REU Site will focus on the
              training of undergraduate students to conduct ethnographic field research in
              one substantive area of that project: cultural activities around the city. 
              Fifteen undergraduate students will participate in the eight-week program.  The
              majority of students will be recruited from the regional campuses of the
              California State University system, with a smaller number coming from the host
              institution.  The goal of the Site is to attract a diversified pool of talented
              undergraduates, especially those from under-represented groups, who might not
              otherwise have the opportunity to participate in an intensive research
              environment.  Students will work closely with faculty research supervisors in
              classroom activities for 8-10 hours per week, and will engage in independent
              fieldwork at their chosen site for an additional 10-15 hours per week.  They
              will receive rigorous academic training that will quickly allow them to gain
              first-hand knowledge about the nature of sociological inquiry and analysis. 
              Each student will produce a professional-quality final research paper. 
              Students will thus have the opportunity to contribute to the success of the
              larger LA Observed project.

This award contributes to the Foundation's
              continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through
              active undergraduate research experiences.
