Title       : Nanodroplet Aerosols: Formation and Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0097896

Award Number: 0097896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara E. Wyslouzil barbaraw@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
              Division, Barbara Wyslouzil of the Worcester Polytechnic Institute will pursue
              a program of research on nanodroplet aerosols.  The formation of liquid
              droplets in aerosols will be studied with a view to measuring and understanding
              nucleation from a phase transition perspective.  Small angle neutron scattering
              (SANS) will be used to experimentally monitor particle size and composition and
              structure, and infrared (IR) measurements will be used to aid in the
              compositional analysis during nucleation and droplet formation.  The research
              program is two pronged.  First, a deeper understanding of phase transitions
              under conditions that are far from equilibrium will be obtained.  Very high
              cooling rates insure that nuleation and condensation (phase transition) occur
              under highly supersaturated conditions.  Intrinsic size distribution data from
              SANS measurements are expected to provide the first direct experimental
              measurements of nucleation rates in nozzles.  Second, the internal structure of
              multi-component droplets will be discerned.  The compositional and structural
              data will be used to test various models for the droplet structure.  Key among
              the compositional factors to be examined is the degree to which immiscible
              phases mix and the clarity with which phase boundaries develop between
              immiscible liquids. 

This project will lead to a deeper understanding of how
              multicomponent droplets form.   The results of the work will benefit society in
              helping to understand the physical chemistry of droplet nucleation, and this
              knowledge will benefit weather and climate studies and industrial processes
              based upon aerosol droplet formation.  The work also will have a high impact on
              teaching undergradute and graduate students advanced materials science
              experimental and analysis techniques. 








