Title       : Solving Quantified Algebraic Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0097976

Award Number: 0097976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hoon Hong hong@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0097976
Hong, Hoon
North Carolina State U

The long term objective
              of this research is to develop mathematical theories, algorithms, and software
              libraries/packages for efficiently solving quantified algebraic constraints
              (quantified boolean expressions of polynomial equations/inequalities over real
              numbers), which can handle large real life problems. This particular project
              will focus on moderate size inputs (up to about 10 variables). There are still
              many interesting real life problems of moderate sizes.

The potential impact
              is as follows.  Many important and difficult problems in mathematics,
              scientific, engineering and industry can be reduced to that of solving
              quantified algebraic constraints. Thus the availability of efficient
              algorithms/softwares for solving quantified algebraic constraint will have a
              broad impact on science and industry.

The specific approaches are as
              follows.

- Allow approximate solutions.

The subject of quantifier
              constraint solving arose originally as a problem in logic. Naturally, obtaining
              "exact" solution has been the goal of the previous research efforts. In order
              to obtain exact solutions, most calculations have been carried out
              symbolically, suffering from enormous intermediate computation swelling.
              Further, they had to deal with all the singular/degenerate cases, which are
              often very expensive computationally to analyze. However, in most real-life
              problems, approximate solutions are acceptable. In fact, often, there are many
              uncertain coefficients in constraints, and thus it is even meaningless to try
              to find exact solutions. Hence, we will allow approximate solutions. During
              this project period, we will pursue two particular ideas in this direction:
              "approximate quantification" and "box approximation" of solution sets. Our
              preliminary investigations suggest that these are very promising
              ideas/directions.

- Utilize the structure of constraints.

So far, the
              constraints have been treated as "flat" objects. For example, the polynomials
              arising in the constraints have been viewed as "atomic" objects. However,
              constraints in real life problems usually have intrinsic structures that arise
              naturally from the structures in the underlying laws/components or from the way
              how the those laws/components are combined. Thus, we will utilize the
              structures of given constraints. During this project period, we will study ways
              to utilize two particular structures: "convexity" of bounded quantifiers and
              "composition" structure of polynomials. Again, our preliminary investigations
              suggest that these are very promising ideas/directions.

The results will be
              implemented in a software library and freely distributed on the web, in order
              to facilitate their application to moderate size real life problems by the
              scientific and engineering communities.

