Title       : Collaborative Research: Quasiparticle Transport in Organic Materials:
               Vibrational Dressing, Static Disorder, Nanoscale Confinement, and Quantum
               Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0097204

Award Number: 0097204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366000             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. M. Kenkre kenkre@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Dunlap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0097204
Kenkre
This is a Collaborative Research Project between the University
              of New Mexico and the University of Missouri at Rolla.  The research performed
              is theoretical, employ analytic and computer methods, and deals with
              fundamental issues of quasiparticle transport in organic materials on the one
              hand, and applications to technologically important systems and devices on the
              other hand.  Among the fundamental issues it addresses are dynamic disorder,
              static disorder, intense applied fields, carrier-carrier interactions, and
              quantum effects arising from variation in the characteristic size of the
              systems under study.

Breaking the translational invariance by strong
              interactions of quasiparticles, such as electrons, with vibrations and other
              oscillatory motions of molecules, constitutes dynamic disorder.  Some of the
              issues to be addressed are very new, while others are longstanding but
              unresolved:  What is the nature of the fundamental carriers of charge and enegy
              in organic solids?  To what extent are they localized or extended in space,
              free or associated with distortions around them (polaronic), coherent or
              incoherent in their motion?  What new effects on dynamics may be expected as a
              result of system size variation from the mesoscale to the nanoscale? 
              Theoretical investigations to be performed will seek to determine conditions
              under which transport is normal or (and to what quantitative extent) anomalous
              in the sense of dispersive, so that application of ordinary equilibrium
              statistical mechanics may not mislead quantitative assessment of experiment. 
              Investigations will also address the possibility of formation, as well as the
              effects on experiments, of composite particles: electron-photon (e.g.,
              polaron), exciton-phonon (e.g., excimer), phonon-phonon (e.g., vibron), and
              exciton-photon (e.g., polariton) in limits in which the characteristic motion
              times of the constituent elements are disparate.

Static disorder, both
              spatial and energetic, arises in organic materials from random molecular
              packings, chemical impurities, charge-dipole interactions, and orientational
              and spatial inhomogeneities.  Such mechanisms can, and often do, lead to static
              disorder chacterized by substantial spatial correlations.  Research will focus
              on the sources and possible control of such correlations and their effects on
              quasiparticle transport.  Studies will be performed of the interplay and
              competition that occurs between correlated and uncorrelated sources of
              disorder, and a variety of effects, such as rate inversion in polaronic
              systems, that can arise from a combination of high fields, the polaronic nature
              of charge, and disorder.

On the basis of insights gained through this work
              on fundamental aspects of quantum transport of quasiparticles, the research
              will focus on a number of practical device issues and phenomena including the
              screening of charge-dipole interactions, the mutual interaction of charges
              during injection, interfacial effects in organic light-emitting diodes and
              field effect transistors, recombination, and photogeneration.  It will also
              address special device features such as geometrical constraints, reduced
              dimensionality, reduced phase space, and particularly the nanoscale (more
              appropriately the meso-micro-nano-scale) transition.
%%%
 This is a
              Collaborative Research Project between the University of New Mexico and the
              University of Missouri at Rolla.  The research performed is theoretical, employ
              analytic and computer methods, and deals with fundamental issues of
              quasiparticle transport in organic materials on the one hand, and applications
              to technologically important systems and devices on the other hand. 
***

