Title       : Graph-Based Data Mining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0097517

Award Number: 0097517
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442487             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane J. Cook cook@cse.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence B. Holder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharma Chakravarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the increasing amount and complexity of today's data, there is an urgent
              need to accelerate the development of knowledge discovery and concept learning
              methods for mining large databases. Furthermore, much of this data is
              structural in nature, or is composed of entities and relationships between
              those entities. Hence, there exists a need to develop scalable methods for
              discovering new knowledge in structural databases. The main objective of this
              project is to investigate and implement new methods for performing knowledge
              discovery and concept learning on structural databases represented as graphs.
              This work builds upon existing methods for graph-based knowledge discovery
              implemented in the Subdue structural discovery system. The graph-based
              discovery algorithm is extended to perform structural concept learning and
              structural, hierarchical conceptual clustering. To achieve greater scalability,
              database management techniques are integrated into the graph-based discovery
              and learning processes. One targeted application is the use of Subdue as the
              core of a structural Web seach engine. Domain experts provide guidance and
              feedback on applications to molecular biology, geology, telecommunications, and
              software engineering. Achievement of the above objectives impacts the ability
              to automatically extract useful knowledge from the ever-increasing amount of
              data. By disseminating the Subdue discovery algorithm, databases, and
              discovered results over the Internet, scientists in all areas benefit from
              similar analyses of their own databases. Through integration of our research
              ideas into classes taught at UTA and into student research, this project
              impacts education at UTA and at other universities.
