Title       : CONFERENCE: 2001 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Trosine Phosphorylation and Cell
               Signalling Conference to be held May 16-20, 2001 in Cold Springs Harbor, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a0097090

Award Number: 0097090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas K. Tonks tonks@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1114      CELLULAR SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Tyrosine Phosphorylation and Cell Signaling Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
              Conference May 16 - 20, 2001

The phosphorylation of proteins on tyrosyl
              residues is now recognized to be an essential element in the control of such
              fundamental cellular processes as growth and proliferation, differentiation,
              cytoskeletal function and the cell cycle.  We are currently witnessing an
              outstanding period of progress in characterizing the structure, regulation and
              function of both protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and protein tyrosine
              phosphatases (PTPs), the coordinated action of which governs the levels of
              cellular phosphotyrosine.  The objective of the Seventh Meeting on "Tyrosine
              Phosphorylation and Cellular Signalling" is to provide a format in which the
              study of PTKs and PTPs will be integrated to help participants see how their
              results contribute to the overall "big picture."  The sessions will be
              organized around physiological processes and cellular functions, rather than
              around particular categories of enzymes, so as to try and provide a biological
              context.  With the exception of the Keynote Addresses by Joseph Schlessinger
              and Jack Dixon, all speakers will be selected from submitted abstracts.  This
              will allow emphasis to be placed on encouraging graduate students,
              post-doctoral fellows and young independent investigators to present talks. It
              also should facilitate the presentation of the most recent and "hottest"
              results.  An attendance of 300- 350 is anticipated.  Approximately 60 will give
              oral presentations and up to 160 will present posters.  NSF funds will enable
              more young investigators to participate, especially those who do not yet have
              independent funding.  The integration of research on PTKs and PTPs at this
              meeting, placing emphasis on the biological roles of these enzymes, will
              engender a sense of cohesiveness and communication across the field. 

