Title       : Modulated Coding For Frequency-Selective Multipath Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0097240

Award Number: 0097240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299105             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiang-Gen Xia xxia@ee.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research involves the mitigation of  multipath interferences
in a
              frequency-selective fading channel. As broadband digital
              wireless
communications is more demanded than ever, such as wireless
              image/video
web browsing and wireless data transmission, the technical
              challenges
are exponentially increasing. One of such challenges is that, when
              the
bandwidth of a channel becomes wider, there are more severe multipaths
in
              a wireless system. This implies that the multipath interference
mitigation
              becomes more important than ever.

Modulated coding (MC), a convolutional
              coding defined on the complex
field, has been recently proposed by the PI to
              optimally mitigate
intersymbol interferences (ISI) when the ISI channel is
              known at both
the transmitter and the receiver. The advantage of MC is that,
              since
the arithmetic operations of both MC and ISI are over the complex
              field,
they can be naturally combined together, which provides the
              convenience
of the optimal MC study for a given ISI channel. Since the
              encoding
simplicity of the MC, it is also convenient for further adding
              a
conventional error correction coding (ECC) before the MC. It has been
shown
              that the combined MC and turbo coding of an ISI channel may
outperform the
              AWGN channel capacity at low SNR. As an example, for the
two tap ISI channel
              [0.7071,0.7071], the bit error rate is 0.00001 at the
code rate 1/4 and the
              SNR E_b/N_0=-1.15 dB, which is above the AWGN
channel capacity. The
              disadvantage of the previous MC study is that the
transmitter needs to know
              the ISI channel, which although may be possible
for some applications, such as
              storage channels and  wireline channels,
may not be practical for some other
              applications, such as wireless
channels. The aim of this proposal is to
              optimally design and update MC
without the full knowledge of the ISI/multipath
              channel at the
transmitter with applications, in particular, in wireless
              communication
systems. Due to the simple structure of MC, the MC update at
              the
transmitter is possible, which is unlike the existing coding schemes.


