Title       : Applied Mathematical Logic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0097881

Award Number: 0097881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Kunen Kunen@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator's research integrates a number of diverse areas
              in
mathematics: logic, set theory, algebra, topology, and analysis,
as well
              as some automated reasoning techniques from computer science.
In topology, the
              investigator focuses on properties of
Stone spaces, compact homogeneous
              spaces, and Bohr topologies.
Topology and analysis are integrated in this
              research; measure theory is
used to construct topological spaces with
              interesting properties,
while the topological properties of a space are used
              to prove theorems
about the possible measures which can exist on the
              space.
The investigator studies Bohr topologies, which involve giving a
              topology
to arbitrary abstract groups or other structures; this subject has
              its
roots in the harmonic analysis of the 1930s; modern questions in
              this
area relate to general topology, Fourier series, and functional
              analysis.
Logic and set theory are relevant because results in topology and
              measure
theory are frequently independent of the usual axioms of set theory;
              when a
result is proved independent, the methods used are those of formal
              logic. 
In algebra, the investigator works on algebraic systems such
              as
quasigroups and loops.  Automated reasoning tools are very useful
here,
              primarily in the study of non-associative systems.  These
systems are
              described by fairly simple axioms, and a computer search
can often reveal
              interesting new consequences of these axioms. 
However, the investigator
              combines the computer use with
classical arguments involving combinatorics and
              group theory.


    There are two distinct, but related, threads to this
              research.
The first thread involves the expansion of our knowledge of
              traditional
pure mathematics.  There is no specific practical application in
              mind
here, although topology arises naturally in an attempt to
              generalize
properties of the geometry of physical space, and measure
theory
              is a natural extension of the notion of probability.
The second thread
              involves automated reasoning (AR) tools.  AR allows the
computer to derive
              logical conclusions from given knowledge.  This subject
has been in existence
              since the 1960s, but it is only in recent years that
the hardware and software
              have become powerful enough to discover conclusions
which could not have been
              discovered without computer assistance.
This second thread is a continuation
              of the investigator's work in
improving the AR tools and using these tools to
              create new results
in mathematics.  This is of interest not only for
              the
mathematics itself, but because it demonstrates the power of the
              tools,
which can then be applied to reasoning tasks in other areas of
              science
and engineering, as well as to autonomous decision making by robotic
              agents.

