Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the Smithsonian Environmental
               Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0097216

Award Number: 0097216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter P. Marra marra@serc.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D W. Coats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Educating future generations of scientists is one of the Smithsonian
              Environmental Research Center's ( SERC ) primary objectives, and this has been
              accomplished since 1971 by a highly successful undergraduate internship
              program. SERC's history and its future potential in training undergraduates
              make it a model location for establishment of an REU Site in Environmental
              Sciences. Interns accepted into the REU program will select a mentor and spend
              four days in that laboratory, and one day a week during their first three weeks
              rotating through other terrestrial or aquatic laboratories. After settling into
              an independent research project, interns will be immersed continually in
              scientific culture and a cohesion curriculum. They will take a series of short
              courses and will participate in graduate-level discussion groups. They also
              will attend SERC's weekly and evening seminar series and take field trips to
              affiliated research institutions. At the end of their internship, interested
              and motivated students will be encouraged to continue their research through
              the academic year and accompany their SERC mentors to a national scientific
              meeting to present their findings. Effective recruitment is critical to the
              success of this program. Advertising on the World Wide Web, on e-mail bulletin
              boards, and through mailings will continue. Partnerships with faculty and
              higher administration at several mid-Atlantic academic institutions to identify
              and encourage talented students to 
enter the SERC internship program will
              continue. 

