Title       : Spectroscopy Predissociation Dynamics and Scattering of Van der Waals Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0097189

Award Number: 0097189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304605             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henning H. Meyer hmeyer@hal.physast.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In this proposal funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Henning Meyer of the University of Georgia will pursue a
              program of research on the spectroscopy, predissociation, and scattering of van
              der Waals systems.  IR and molecular beam scattering are used to study the
              electronic ground state and predissociation dynamics.  Van der Waals systems
              involving different sources of internal angular momentum, electronic (NO) and
              internal rotational (acetaldehyde), will be complexed with molecules such as
              water, CO, nitrogen, methane, and HF.  The influence of the internal angular
              momentum on the bound level structure of the complexes will be studied, as will
              the energy transfer efficiency of the complexes in bimolecular collisions. 
              Resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI) and ion time of flight
              analysis will be used to analyze fragmentation.  The data will be analyzed with
              a view to establishing the effects of the internal angular momentum on the
              intermolecular dynamics, for example, with respect to non-adiabatic effects in
              rotational-electronic coupling and to large amplitude vibrations.  The
              experimental studies will be complemented by a rigorous theoretical treatment,
              either based on first principles or within the framework of reasonable
              approximations.

The data gathered in this study will provide new insights
              relevant to intermolecular energy transfer and elementary reaction dynamics. 
              In particular, the studies on acetaldehyde, an important air pollutant
              resulting from the oxidation of tropospheric hydrocarbons, adds to the
              understanding of the formation of tropospheric ozone.  This fundamental project
              thus is important for understanding more practical environmental issues such as
              global change.

