Title       : REU Site: Climate Modeling and Societal Impacts: Scientific, Political and
               Philosophic Themes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0097731

Award Number: 0097731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Frodeman frodeman@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for an interdisciplinary REU Site in climate modeling
              and societal impacts (CMSI) at the University of Colorado in Boulder.   CMSI is
              a cooperative program between academia (The University of Colorado) and a
              government laboratory (NCAR, the National Center for Atmospheric Research).  
              Its goal is to introduce a group of undergraduates in physical sciences, social
              sciences, and the humanities to the constellation of perspectives surrounding
              the use of numerical climate models .  The project's premise is that it is
              crucial for all scholars and citizens to have a deep appreciation of the power
              and limits of scientific knowledge for the resolution of societal
              problems.

Twelve undergraduates per year will participate in the program for
              eight weeks.  Students will gather and evaluate scientific data and investigate
              the social, political, psychological, economic, and philosophical issues
              surrounding the interpretation and use of data for addressing contemporary
              controversies over global climate change.  Research projects will begin with
              the acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of data from radiosondes and the
              characterization of cloud cover used as input to general circulation models. 
              As this scientific inquiry continues, students will engage in political and
              philosophical reflection upon their work and the relationships between science
              and public policy.  At the end of the eight weeks, students will draw their own
              conclusions concerning the relevance of global climate change research to
              societal needs.  Program outcomes will include papers published in scientific,
              public policy, and philosophic journals and presentations at national
              conferences.

This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts
              to attract talented students into careers in science through active
              undergraduate research experiences.


