Title       : REU Site: Neuroscience Research Experience for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0097404

Award Number: 0097404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda M. Rinaman Rinaman@bns.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Land  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Center for Neuroscience at the University of Pittsburgh (CNUP) will train
              eight to twelve undergraduate students each summer in its ten-week Neuroscience
              Research Experience for Undergraduates (Neuroscience REU). The main focus of
              the Neuroscience REU will be full-time student involvement in laboratory
              research under the guidance and supervision of CNUP faculty mentors.  Students
              will experience the challenges and rewards of intensive, hypothesis-driven
              laboratory research in molecular, cellular, and systems-level neuroscience. 
              The Program aims to encourage a broad and diversified pool of talented students
              to consider careers in neuroscience research, and will provide the laboratory
              experience that is necessary for students to compete successfully for admission
              to neuroscience graduate training programs.  Consequently, the Program
              particularly seeks applicants from students at liberal arts colleges and other
              academic institutions with limited neuroscience research opportunities.  The
              Neuroscience REU will officially begin in early June.  A weekly "Research
              Breakfast" seminar series will expose students to a variety of neuroscience
              topics and technical approaches.  During the summer, students will receive
              workshop training in research ethics, and will learn how to make effective oral
              presentations, write a research abstract, and get into graduate school. 
              Research projects will foster a close collaboration between mentor and student,
              and will provide a hands-on preview of career opportunities in neuroscience
              research and education.  Students will learn many of the skills necessary to
              perform research, such as proper formulation of experimental strategy and
              appropriate documentation and analysis of data.  At the end of the 10-week
              Program, students will formally present the results of their training
              experience at a colloquium of participating students and mentors.  The
              Neuroscience REU will accept applications from full-time undergraduate students
              who are enrolled at a four-year accredited college in the United States, and
              who have successfully completed at least one year of study in neuroscience
              and/or related college coursework (e.g., biology, chemistry, psychology,
              mathematics).  Interested students should complete an application form and
              write a personal statement describing their interest in the Neuroscience REU. 
              Applicants also must have two letters of recommendation sent from faculty at
              their home institution who are familiar with their qualifications
