Title       : Collaborative Research: Ecosystem Structure, Biogeochemical Fluxes and
               Vulnerability to Climate Change Perturbations.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0097237

Award Number: 0097237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101188             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh W. Ducklow duck@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1389,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is part of the U.S. JGOFS Synthesis and Modeling Project (SMP)
              aimed at the SMP objective of understanding Mechanistic Controls of Local
              Carbon Balances, specifically the role of food web structure in controlling
              particle flux, particle export, nutrient regeneration and DOC production in
              oceanic systems. The collaborators will use data generated from the JGOFS
              process studies to consolidate field measurements into formal, quantitative
              descriptions of size and function-based food web groups and the material flows
              between them. They will use inverse techniques to infer unknown (unmeasured)
              material flows in the food webs. Finally they will use the trophic networks
              derived to test the stability of the plankton-biogeochemical ecosystem
              following potential perturbations to simulate changes due to ocean warming or
              increased stratification. 
Scientific reviews strongly support the assertion
              that understanding how the biological pump operates requires detailed knowledge
              of the relationships between food web structure, productivity, new production
              and biological fluxes. The amount of material leaving the surface layer is
              usually dependent on how it is partitioned among the plankton community. In an
              idealized plankton community, most of the primary production that passes
              through bacterioplankton and microzooplankton is likely to be recycled in the
              surface layer. In contrast, a significant portion of the primary production
              that passes through the mesozooplankton may become part of the sinking flux of
              organic matter via fecal pellet production and active transport below the
              euphotic zone due to vertical migration. Although many of the relevant
              processes were measured in JGOFS, the resulting data have never been rigorously
              condensed in a series of depictions of foodwebs consistent with all the data. 
              
This food web synthesis, a collaborative effort between Hugh Ducklow, George
              Jackson and Mike Roman, aims to further an ecosystem-based synthesis of JGOFS
              results. The goal is the construction or 'recovery' of a series of solutions to
              foodweb networks consistent with observations from the four major US JGOFS
              Process Studies in the North Atlantic (NABE); the Equatorial Pacific (EQPAC);
              the Arabian Sea and the Southern Ocean Process Study (AESOPS -- Ross). The
              project is based on the assumption that improved understanding of ecosystem
              structure and function depends critically on knowledge of the component rate
              processes, or inter-compartmental exchanges. There now exists a body of formal
              techniques and theory for analyzing the holistic properties of such flux
              networks. The research plan consists of four elements: 1. Consolidate field
              measurements into descriptions of size and function-based food web groups and
              the measured flows between them. 2. Use inverse techniques to infer unknown
              (unmeasured) material flows in the food web. 3. Use biomass and rate
              information to examine stability properties and how they differ, and how
              characteristic flow structures generate basin scale contrasts in particle
              export, nutrient regeneration, and DOC production in oceanic systems. 4. From
              the derived stability properties, infer the vulnerability of different foodweb
              structures (different ocean provinces) to ocean warming and changing
              stratification.

