Title       : Chaperone Assisted Protein Folding in E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0097430

Award Number: 0097430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois C. Baneyx baneyx@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The PI's long term objective is to: (1) Understand how molecular chaperones and
              foldases interact with protein substrates and each other to mediate proper
              folding in the cellular environment, and (2) Manipulate these pathways to
              achieve cost-effective production of biologically active heterologous proteins.
               Their specific aims are to: (1) Gain mechanistic information on the in vivo
              function of the alternate translation products synthesized from the clpB
              transcript since they have shown that ClpB plays an important role in de novo
              protein folding, possibly as a result of its unique ability to break apart and
              remodel protein aggregates. As part of this aim, they will investigate whether
              E. coli requires a precise stoichiometric ratio of ClpB (or ClpB variants) to
              DnaK-DnaJ-GrpE to promote the correct folding of aggregation-prone proteins.
              (2) Use error-prone PCR mutagenesis to generate ClpB variants and screen the
              resulting libraries for mutants exhibiting enhanced chaperone function.
              Selected gain of function mutants will be purified and characterized to gain
              insights on the structure-function relationship of ClpB. Useful amino acid
              substitutions will be combined on a single gene, and the ability of various
              mutants to improve the folding of recalcitrant aggregation-prone proteins will
              be assessed. (3) Determine whether the folding of small aggregation-prone
              proteins can be improved by redirecting the flux of newly synthesized
              polypeptides to the DnaK-DnaJ-GrpE team and its ancillary chaperones. This will
              be accomplished by eliminating the trigger factor (tig) gene from the
              chromosome. In parallel, they will use genetics approaches to isolate E. coli
              strains that constitutively synthesize high levels of the major chaperone teams
              and will introduce the tig deletion in these backgrounds with the goal of
              generating host cells that may be particularly well suited for producing
              heterologous proteins in a soluble form. The performance of these strains will
              be assessed in batch and fed-batch fermentations.  It is anticipated that the
              proposed work will generate useful tools to deal with the problem of
              heterologous protein aggregation while providing fundamental insights on the
              function and mechanism of action of ClpB and the pathways of chaperone-assisted
              protein folding in the cytoplasm of E. coli.

