Title       : Organic Materials of Intermediate Dimensions for Optoelectronic Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0097611

Award Number: 0097611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo C. Bazan bazan@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research program has the goals of understanding how bringing conjugated
              organic chromophores into close proximity influences the optical and electronic
              properties of the ensemble and how molecular topology can be used to control
              the organization of molecules in the solid state.  To achieve these goals the
              PI will synthesize model compounds and study their optical, electronic and
              morphological properties.  Specific objectives during the grant period are: (1)
              The synthesis of structurally defined bichromophoric and multichromophoric
              molecules that are held together by the paracyclophane framework.  The target
              molecules will have a rigid structure that precisely determines the distance,
              orientation and number of interacting units.  (2) To combine spectroscopic
              studies with quantum mechanical analysis to build a cohesive view of
              photoexcitation in multichromophore paracyclophane structures.  (3) The
              synthesis of a homologous series of aggregated chromophores with the intent of
              identifying the limit at which the electronic communication between individual
              units ceases to be important.  These are truly organic nanomaterials in that
              their electronic description intermediate between those of individual
              chromophores and of bulk materials (i.e. crystals, polymer films).  (4) The
              synthesis of organic molecules with geometries that discourage crystallization.
               Of interest is to examine how topology translates into bulk morphology. 
              Materials of this type can be purified to a greater extent than polymer
              counterparts and therefore may offer advantages in situations where a small
              concentration of contaminants disproportionately affects charge migration in
              the solid.
%%%
The fundamental knowledge obtained through these studies will
              enable the engineering of organic materials for use in emerging optoelectronic
              technologies.  This area of technology is likely to find widespread use in
              society.  Specific examples include organic-based light emitting diodes for
              display applications, thin film transistors, solid state lasers, more efficient
              organic solar cells for energy generation and photodetectors.  The issue of
              interchromophore delocalization is significant beyond the confines of materials
              design because it makes a profound impact in other areas of science, such the
              mechanism of photosynthesis and oxidative charge migration in double-stranded
              DNA.

