Title       : REU: Structure and Function of Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0097389

Award Number: 0097389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julio F. Turrens jturrens@usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    251/460-6101

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proteins are one of the major constituents of biological systems, and are
              involved in all aspects of cell life, from structure to function and
              reproduction.  The goal of this REU site is to expose ten undergraduate
              students to basic research by having them involved in projects exploring
              different areas of protein structure and function.  At least six of these
              students will be selected from four-year institutions, mostly within the state
              of Alabama.  A special effort will be made to recruit students from groups
              under-represented in science, including female and minorities.  The Principal
              Investigator will be visiting different campuses during the fall semester to
              promote the program and interview potential candidates.  Some of these campuses
              are four-year traditionally minority institutions, including Alabama State
              University in Montgomery, Stillman College in Tuscaloosa, Talladega College and
              Tuskegee University. The studies will be carried out in different academic
              units on campus, including Biology, Biomedical Sciences, Chemistry and
              Pharmacology.  Although each student will be working on an individual project,
              they will be meeting regularly to follow up on the progress of all other
              projects.  The students working in this REU will also participate and discuss
              their progress during three regularly scheduled discussions with other
              undergraduates participating in the Summer Undergraduate Research Programs
              organized every year by the host institution.  In addition, all students in the
              REU site will attend weekly presentations by each of the investigators with
              projects in this site, to expose the participants to every project and to the
              different ways in which investigators from different disciplines approach the
              area of protein biochemistry.  The participants will write reports and also
              will present their results in poster format either on campus (during the
              Undergraduate Research Week held in the Fall) or at their own campuses.  The
              overall quality of this experience will be assessed by having students complete
              questionnaires prior and after the summer research and to make improvements for
              future cycles.  Faculty advisors also will be asked to complete a questionnaire
              at the end of the summer to improve the program in subsequent years. 
              Information and dissemination of the program will be done through the Committee
              for Undergraduate Research's web page, at
              http://www.southalabama.edu/biomedical/ucur/.  


