Title       : International Mathematical Olympiad 2001 USA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0097092

Award Number: 0097092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter E. Mientka imo2001@amc.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The United States of America will host the 42nd International Mathematical
              Olympiad (IMO) in the year 2001 in Washington DC.  The IMO is the premier
              international mathematics competition for high school students and it will
              bring to the USA more than 500 of the most talented high school age
              mathematicians from more than 80 countries.  The American mathematics community
              will use this opportunity to promote the importance of mathematics for all
              students and to celebrate the accomplishments of our best and brightest
              students.

During the competition, students work individually over a two-day
              period on six challenging problems, presenting their solutions as essay-style
              proofs akin to those produced by research mathematicians.  During the several
              day grading period the IMO students will be treated to American hospitality,
              visiting attractions in and around the Capital and experiencing American life
              and culture. At the closing awards ceremony, outstanding performances are
              honored by the awarding of gold, silver, and bronze medals to students scoring
              in the top half of the results.

As the host country, it is the
              responsibility of the USA, in addition to organizing the contest, to provide
              lodging, food, entertainment, and cultural activities for all the participants
              and team leaders during the
approximately two weeks that they are in our
              country.  For the participants, many of whom become world leaders in math and
              science, the IMO provides a unique opportunity to build friendships with
              students from other countries, to exchange mathematical ideas, and to learn
              about other cultures, especially about the USA. For the American mathematics
              community, the IMO provides an opportunity to promote the importance of a
              strong mathematics education for all students---much like the Olympics are used
              to promote physical fitness for all---and to celebrate the outstanding
              achievements of our nation's young men and women in mathematics.
Financial
              support from the Division of Mathematical Sciences of the National Science
              Foundation for competition and related administrative costs will help to
              underwrite the underlying theme of the importance of mathematics education for
              all students, thus furthering the educational goals of the NSF and IMO 2001 USA
              activity.
