Title       : REU in Neural Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0097614

Award Number: 0097614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chiye J. Aoki chiye@cns.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Support from the NSF REU Site Grant will enable the Center for Neural Science at
              New York University to support an established, successful summer undergraduate
              research program (SURP). SURP was founded as a model program in 1990 and has
              continued ever since at a reduced level through funds derived from individual
              grants and institutional funds.  Support from the NSF REU Site Grant will make
              it possible to regularize and expand the program, reach out to students beyond
              NYU, thereby impact a broader student population. Under-represented minorities,
              women and undergraduates from small colleges that are limited in resources for
              equipment and research opportunities will be pursued actively, through
              collaboration with NYU's Faculty Resource Network., a consortium of 13
              historically black colleges and universities in the South and 15 regional
              liberal arts colleges, together representing over 100,000 undergraduates and
              over 8,300 faculty members.  Eight to ten undergraduates, mostly between their
              sophomore and junior years, who have demonstrated keen interest in basic neural
              science research and with a GPA minimum of 3.0 will be chosen every summer from
              a pool of approximately 100 applicants. 
	First-hand research experience will
              be made available to these students by placing them in one of the CNS labs,
              ranging in subfields from theoretical neurobiology, sensory physiology,
              behavioral and molecular investigation of emotional memory, to cellular and
              molecular basis of  brain development and recovery from injuries. Their
              education, training, and progress will be fostered and monitored using a
              three-tiered system, consisting of the following: (1) one-to-one, daily
              interactions with a mentor and affiliated members of the host lab; (2) weekly
              and bi-weekly group luncheons, overseen by the director, during which
              self-assessments are made and a lecture series is scheduled; and (3) close,
              week-by-week coaching of each student's skills in oral and written
              presentations, leading up to a Symposium and preparation of a written report
              during the last week of the program that describe the rationale, hypothesis,
              outcome and interpretation of data generated from the summer research activity.
              
	As in the past, the CNS SURP's seminar series and social functions will run
              conjointly with those of the NYU Washington Square Campus's Leadership Alliance
              program in Social Studies and NYU Medical School's Sacklar Institute Minority
              Undergraduate Summer Research Program in Biomedical Sciences.  These joint
              functions, together with a  variety of social and cultural activities that will
              be planned over lunches, dinners, after-hours and week-ends for the CNS SURP
              group, will provide students with opportunities to be part of a large group of
              undergraduate and graduate students, post-docs, and faculty.  This program will
              ensure that the CNS SURP students obtain a realistic view about  diversity in
              scientific inquiries, style, and gain opportunities to chat casually about
              practical issues of becoming a scientist, such as family planning, balance
              between personal life and work environment, opportunities and options for PhDs
              and MD-PhDs, etc. while also enjoying York City's rich collection of culture
              and research institutions. 

