Title       : REU Site: Collections-Based Research Experiences for Undergraduates at The
               Academy of Natural Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0097541

Award Number: 0097541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominique A. Didier didier@say.acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon K. Gelhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. McCourt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Fellowhsip at
              The Academy of Natural Sciences is to provide undergraduates with experience in
              collections-based research in a natural history museum environment in an effort
              to recruit new young researchers to pursue advanced degrees in the field of
              organismal and systematic biology.  The REU program at the Academy fills a gap
              in traditional undergraduate training by providing a diverse and exciting
              research experience in a museum environment for students who may not be exposed
              to a research in the areas of systematics, evolution, and organismal biology. 
              An additional goal of the program is to attract underserved minorities to our
              program and promote diversity in all areas of biological research.
Students
              are recruited from colleges and universites from around the country through
              
advertisements on the Internet and through direct mailing.  Students at
              historically black colleges and universites (HBCU's) are a recruiting priority
              and direct contact with faculty at HBCU's is used to attract minority
              applicants.  Each year, eight students are chosen on the basis of academic
              performance, overall interest in organismal biology, and the evaluations of two
              referees, for a 10-week summer fellowship.  After a one-week introductory
              session in which students receive tours of all collections and academy
              facilities, students work on an independent research project with a Ph.D.
              scientist as his or her mentor.  Topics for research projects range from
              systematic biology using traditional morphological and molecular techniques, to
              ecology, watershed monitoring, and the history of scientific collections. 
              Students gain experience by working side-by-side with curators and senior
              scientists and are involved in all aspects of collections-based research
              including collection and curation of specimens, field expeditions, and
              dissemination of results orally and in a written paper.  Most students publish
              their papers in peer reviewed scientific journals.  Students also benefit from
              a variety of group activities including weekly seminars, social gatherings, a
              camping trip, and end-of-summer banquet.
Natural history museums such as the
              Academy are becoming increasingly important for formal education in organismal
              biology because college and university biology departments are, on the whole,
              becoming more oriented toward cellular and molecular research.  Because of this
              shift in emphasis in biology teaching there is a decline in numbers of
              specialists dedicated to collections-based, taxonomic and ecological research. 
              Through the REU fellowship at the Academy undergraduate students gain valuable
              experience and education in organismal biology that they might not obtain at
              their undergraduate institution.  Most students publish the results of their
              research and a majority of participants choose to pursue careers in systematics
              and organismal biology based on their REU experience at the Academy.  Providing
              opportunities for undergraduate research to underserved minorities has the
              added benefit of increasing the diversity of students pursuing advanced degrees
              in the biological sciences, a change that will hopefully be reflected in an
              increase in the diversity of the scientific research community of the
              future.
	

