Title       : Research Experiences for Minorities in Marine and Environmental Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0097415

Award Number: 0097415
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Barans   (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy H. Ringwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : S C Dept of Natural Resour
	      
	      Charleston, SC  29412    /   -

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides renewed funding to support the Research Experience
              Undergraduates (REU) Site located at a variety of institutions in Charleston,
              SC. The program, called Minorities in Marine and Environmental Sciences
              (MIMES), would host six minority undergraduate students to actively participate
              in twelve weeks of research. Major objectives of MIMES include: 1) involving
              minority undergraduate students in mentor-guided, independent research projects
              in marine and environmental science; and 2) providing minority students with
              role models and training in basic principles of marine and environmental
              science and scientific theory through seminars, classroom work, laboratory and
              field experiences. The students prepare written and oral technical reports at
              the end of the program. The program is based on the theory that mentoring and
              networking are the most effective methods for recruiting students into a
              profession and for training young researchers. This program is well designed to
              encourage highly motivated students to continue the their pursuit of research
              careers in oceanography. It includes appropriate mentoring and research
              experience that will provide students with an excellent background for a future
              career in science. In addition, minority participation in the field of
              oceanography is unusually low. This program will encourage a diverse set of
              students to continue their education in the field of marine science and
              environmental science. These types of efforts are important to improving
              participation rates for minority students in the geosciences.
