Title       : REU Site: The Seneca Village Project: Developing an Archaeological Research
               Design, Years 2 & 3
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0097513

Award Number: 0097513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana Wall ddizw@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nan A. Rothschild  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for renewed support of an REU Site in archaeology
              conducted by CUNY City College along with Columbia University and the New York
              Historical Society.  The project consists of the archaeological study of Seneca
              Village, a 19th-century African-American and Irish immigrant community located
              in Central Park in New York City.   The project is made up of four parts.  The
              first includes working with a geophysicist and remote sensing equipment to
              ascertain whether or not archaeological remains of the village survive intact
              in the ground.  The second part involves historical research aimed at
              identifying the various buildings that made up the village and the various
              people who lived and worked in them as well as the locations and extent of the
              Village's three cemeteries.  The third part involves integrating both the
              historical and geophysical data into a GIS format.  Finally, each student will
              create a research design for planning archaeological excavations to address a
              research question related to this 19th-century multi-cultural community.  The
              project will involve eight undergraduate students per year who will focus on
              different portions of the village and different historical records for the
              eight week program.  Students will be selected from the colleges that belong to
              the New York City Archaeological Consortium, i.e., the colleges and community
              colleges of the City University, and the colleges of Columbia and New York
              Universities.  
This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts
              to attract talented students into careers in science through active
              undergraduate research experiences. 
