Title       : REU Site: Research for Undergraduates in Biomechanics and Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0097470

Award Number: 0097470
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy L. Lerner amlerner@me.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Dalecki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding for a three-year REU Site in Biomechanics and
              Imaging (RUBI) at the University of Rochester, under the direction of Dr. Amy
              Lerner.  The objective of this program is to provide research experiences for
              10 undergraduate students interested in biomechanical and imaging aspects of
              biomedical engineering during a 10-week summer program.  Opportunities will be
              provided in at least ten different laboratories on the university campus,
              including the School of Medicine and Dentistry, the School of Engineering and
              Applied Sciences and a Movement Analysis Lab affiliated with the Ithaca College
              Physical Therapy Progam.  An educational program of weekly seminars and
              laboratory tours will be developed to broaden the exposure provided to include
              a wide range of biomechanical and imaging research tools as well as information
              about careers in biomedical engineering research.  The eudcational program will
              also provide a framework for interactions between multiple faculty mentors,
              advisors and participating students.  Progress on research will be reported
              informally to faculty mentors and the other REU participants throughout the
              summer, and will culminate in a research poster session during the last week of
              the program.  To broaden the impact of this program local high school teachers
              will be invited to attend to learn more about the nature of biomedical
              engineering research and education.  Reporting and evaluation of the program
              will be handled largely through web pages dedicated to the program.
