Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Applied Research in Marine and
               Environmental Systems: Science, Engineering, and Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a0097455

Award Number: 0097455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Irlandi irlandi@fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides renewed funding to support the Research Experience for
              Undergraduates (REU) program at Florida Institute of Technology (FIT). During
              this program, eight undergraduate students will spend eight weeks in the summer
              working on research issues including ocean engineering, environmental science,
              and management of coastal zones. Students will conduct an independent research
              project under the direction of a faculty mentor. They will also attend seminars
              on topics such as experimental design and analysis, data management, graphic
              display of results, web design, Powerpoint presentations, environmental justice
              and ethics, and participate in a variety of field trips and a 3-day cruise
              aboard a 60-foot research vessel. Field trips will cover topics such as inlet
              management, restoration of salt marshes, re-diversion of flood control systems,
              installation and biological monitoring of artificial reefs, etc. Through their
              research, seminars and field trips, the students will have to opportunity to
              meet with individuals from private industry and government who work in the
              field of coastal management and coastal engineering. The program is based on
              the theory that mentoring and networking are the most effective methods for
              recruiting students into a profession and for training young researchers. This
              program is well designed to encourage highly motivated students to continue the
              their pursuit of careers in coastal oceanography. It encourages interest in
              interdisciplinary and applied research, and students will be exposed to a
              variety of careers in coastal oceanography. Students will conduct independent
              research and produce oral and written reports at the end of the internship. In
              addition, the program will encourage a diverse set of students to continue
              their education in the field of oceanography, and will particularly promote
              participation of women in coastal research. In the past the program has had 83%
              female participants and has drawn students from across the nation.  This award
              provides two years of support for the program.
