Title       : REU Site: Psychology as an Applied Science: Research Experience for
               Undergraduates at Baruch College - CUNY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0097405

Award Number: 0097405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288498             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin L. Sommer kristin_sommer@baruch.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Wiener  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : CUNY Baruch College
	      One Bernard Baruch Way
	      New York, NY  100105526    646/312-2205

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for an REU Site in Psychology at City University of
              New York, Baruch College.  Sixteen students, who attend colleges in New York
              City, will participate in the Site as a paid research assistant for three,
              12-week semesters.   The REU undergraduates will join existing research teams
              and contribute to ongoing empirical research programs in areas of applied and
              basic psychology.  Students will also propose and complete projects of their
              own under the direct supervision of a research scientist.  The REU project
              itself will be an experiment in research education evaluated with outcome data.
               The program will: (1) prepare students for advanced graduate training in
              scientific psychology and ultimately for careers in academic and applied
              settings; (2) identify early promising minority students and prepare them for
              careers in scientific psychology; (3) increase psychological scientists'
              interests in minority issues and concerns as research topics; and (4) develop a
              CUNY pipeline to provide a pool of talented and diverse students to become the
              research scientists of the future.  Each REU student will join a research team
              working in an area that matches the student's expressed interests.  Each team
              will focus in one area of psychology, planning and executing studies with the
              intention of presenting professional papers and submitting research reports to
              quality peer-reviewed journals.  Students will choose one of four ongoing
              research teams: (a) The psychology and law team; (b) the
              industrial/organizational team; (c) the social psychology team; and (d) the
              educational psychology team.  Students may also work with a faculty member
              whose research does not fit one of the four research teams.  Students will
              participate in the entire research process.

This award contributes to the
              Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in
              science through active undergraduate research experiences.
