Title       : Molecular Monolayers on CMOS for Nanoscale Chemical Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0097104

Award Number: 0097104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dror Sarid sarid@sarid.opt-sci.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1648,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project will concentrate on the preparation and characterization of
              polarizable molecular monolayers designed into CMOS circuitry for optical and
              chemical sensing, in collaboration with the Departments of Chemistry and
              Biochemistry, and Electrical Engineering, and the Center for Solid State
              Electronics Research at Arizona State University.  The active part of the
              proposed FET-based chemical sensors will be a molecular system that will be
              switchable between different polarization states.  The different dipole fields
              associated with each state would lead to a difference in threshold voltage that
              could me measured electrically.  The molecular species will be attached to the
              gate oxide of a split-gate SOI MOSFET by self-assembly.  Our group will
              fabricate the monolayers and characterize them using scanning probe microscopy
              techniques - STM, AFM, and conducting-tip AFM - under a controlled environment,
              such as vacuum or dry nitrogen.  These instruments will make it possible to
              better understand the molecular configuration of the surface monolayer.  The
              surface potential before and after the molecular monolayer is polarized will be
              determined from numerical simulations this surface potential can in turn be
              related to the dipole filed of the molecule and correlated with the physical
              structure as determined by the CT-AFM measurements.  By combining the
              measurements of the surface potential with structural information and molecular
              modeling we will be able to develop a thorough understanding of how the
              molecular monolayers self-assemble on oxidized silicon substrates, and how
              their electronic configuration changes after polarization.  The ability to
              correlate the physical structure of the molecules with their associated dipole
              field is a unique feature of the hybrid molecular-semiconductor heterojunctions
              that we are proposing.  The mix of chemistry, physics and electrical
              engineering will provide opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
              to work in a truly interdisciplinary environment.
 

