Title       : SGER: Novel Photocatalysts for the Degradation of Toxic Organics utilizing
               Visible Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0097347

Award Number: 0097347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42692              (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagiotis G. Smirniotis Panagiotis.Smirniotis@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: SGER: Novel Photocatalysts for the Degradation of
              Toxic Organics Utilizing Visible Radiation
Proposal
              Number:	CTS-0097347
Principal Investigator: Panagiotis
              Smirniotis
Institution:  University of Cincinnati

The objective of this
              proposal is to determine the feasibility of using doped titanium dioxide
              photocatalysts for the degradation of toxic organics with visible radiation. 
              Although titanium dioxide is a photocatalyst when illuminated with ultraviolet
              radiation, preliminary experiments by the PI have shown that doping of titanium
              dioxide with transition metals provides photocatalytic activity with light from
              the visible part of the spectrum.  This phenomenon may result from the creation
              of a narrow energy band within the original bandgap of the semiconductor, thus
              facilitating the generation of electrons and holes.  This two-stage excitation
              process can form electrons and holes utilizing lower energy quanta.  The
              proposed research will be an interdisciplinary program focusing on the
              synthesis and characterization of selected combinations of transition metals on
              different types of supports including three-dimensional mesoporous molecular
              sieves, large pore zeolites, and high surface-area titanium dioxide and silicon
              dioxide.  These catalysts will be tested with selected probe molecules to
              simulate different categories of toxic organics. If the proposed materials are
              proven to be successful photocatalysts, they will offer a potentially economic
              alternative for the destruction of toxic organics from aqueous and gaseous
              systems utilizing solar radiation.





