Title       : REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Integrative Evolutionary Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0097667

Award Number: 0097667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214670             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bert E. Ely Ely@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Austin L. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for the Department of Biological Sciences at the
              University of South Carolina to establish a Research Experience for
              Undergraduates (REU) Site in the area of integrative evolutionary biology. This
              REU Site will enable qualified undergraduate students to spend a summer doing
              independent research projects that involve the application of molecular
              techniques to evolution studies. Each student will conduct basic research under
              the direction of a faculty mentor who has an active research program in some
              area of evolutionary biology. Students learn about hypothesis generation and
              testing, as well as the techniques and experimental designs employed in
              molecular biology and one or more other sub-specialty areas -- behavior, life
              history evolution, systematics, population biology, and ecological physiology.
              At the end of the summer, each student will present a summary of his/her work
              in a departmental mini-symposium. Qualified applicants for the REU program will
              be recruited nationally via the internet and from nearby colleges and
              universities through personal contacts with faculty at these institutions.
              Additional applicants representing African American, Hispanic and native
              American minorities will be sought through contacts at AMP programs throughout
              the US and Puerto Rico. Previous participants have come from universities
              throughout the US and approximately 25% have been from underrepresented groups.
