Title       : An Immuno-Mimetic Sensor-Actuator using Novel Polymeric Vesicles as Artificial
               Lymphocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0097676

Award Number: 0097676
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria M. Santore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Vinci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manoj K. Chaudhury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1648,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An Immuno-Mimetic Sensor-Actuator
using Novel Polymeric Vesicles as Artificial
              Lymphocytes
Project Summary
In this program the principal investigator will
              develop a breakthrough sensor-actuator, mimicking the immune system to
              identify, amplify signal from, and respond to low levels of multiple target
              compounds in
a wet environment. This compact (and potentially chip-based),
              smart system will continuously
monitor a test space and provide independent
              real time chemical feedback to multiple stimuli.
Microelectronics could be
              integrated into this stand-alone device for added functions.
The proposed
              technology exploits novel polymeric vesicles that will act as
              artificial
lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. The polymeric vesicles are
              a new invention, made of
tough membranes that will encapsulate amplification
              or response molecules. Different surface
receptors on different vesicles will
              code for target compounds that, when present in the testing
environment, will
              activate particular vesicles. The test solution flows through an
              amplification
cascade (a rough mimic of bone marrow) to replicate only the
              activated vesicles. Replicated
vesicles (a crude mimic of plasma cells) will
              return to the test space to release response compounds
such as drugs or
              inhibitors to counteract the target compound(s) detected.
The replicator
              cascade is like a photomultiplier tube (PMT), with amplification occurring
              on
each of several stages. The proposed device is, however, more advanced
              because, of the many
target compounds cataloged, only those in the test space
              will be amplified. In the device, specific
adhesive interactions facilitate
              separation of activated vesicles from those not yet activated. While
the
              latter are recycled, activated vesicles are lyzed to release each test compound
              (or analog
thereof), at a concentration higher than that at the stage inlet.
              This solution passes to the next stage
where the process repeats, giving a
              powerlaw dependence of amplification on the stage number.
This program will
              conduct the science and device development necessary to form the basis
of a
              single stage that later could be combined with others to produce the cascade.
              At the stage
level, the goal is to maximize amplification, maintaining
              selectivity for activated vesicles (not
triggering the non-activated ones.) To
              accomplish this, the scientific investigation will address
how adhesive
              interactions between receptors on vesicle and separator surfaces could be
              tuned
through receptor placement and macroscopic parameters. Fundamental
              adhesive behavior will be
assessed using micropipette aspiration methods
              (paralleling studies of cell adhesion) and compared
with adhesive performance
              in device prototypes. Results will be interpreted using formalisms
established
              for cell adhesion, appropriate for specific adhesive groups on a membrane
              capsule in a
flowing solution.
The specialized vesicles and their replication
              cascade form a sensor-actuator system whose
end applications bridge a number
              of industries, from biomedical uses to chemical process control
and
              environmental monitoring (closed bodies of water) and response. The proposed
              scientific
investigation targets designs that meet the constraints for a
              robust technology that will be
implantable or submersible. The scientific team
              bridges academic disciplines and specialty areas to
combine expertise in
              polymer interfaces, biomimetics, adhesion, and MEMS. Graduate
              and
undergraduate students from different engineering and scientific
              backgrounds will benefit from this
synergistic approach to research, which
              preserves fundamental rigor and emphasizes engineering
creativity.
