Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Ecology in Human-Dominated Landscapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0097393

Award Number: 0097393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann L. Rypstra   (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Berg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Gorchov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Vanni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site will be established at
              Miami University focusing on The Ecology of Human-Dominated Landscapes.  The
              goal of this endeavor is to engage undergraduate students in collaborative,
              multi-disciplinary research that emphasizes ecological questions in landscapes
              heavily influenced by human activity. Students will learn that the scientific
              basis for solving environmental problems is established through collaborative
              research and thus will be better prepared to solve such problems. 

Each
              student will conduct an individual research project, but these projects will
              also be part of student-faculty research "clusters," each consisting of 3
              students and 3 faculty mentors. Students within a cluster will develop projects
              that are collaborative with other students. Clusters will be structured around
              a theme that ties together the research programs of several faculty members and
              they will develop a research program with faculty research mentors as well as
              student mentors and collaborators.  The activities of the clusters will be
              coordinated by a faculty cluster leader. In this way, the students will be
              exposed to a broad range of research and have the opportunity to work in
              multi-disciplinary research teams, structured similarly to research groups
              solving real-world problems.  In addition to research activities, each student
              will also participate in whole group activities, including a 10-week workshop
              course (2 hours per week) that covers the scientific process, scientific and
              environmental ethics, careers in ecology, how to prepare and deliver scientific
              presentations, and other research aspects. In addition, all students will
              attend periodic whole-group meetings, a two-day retreat/workshop at a field
              station, and the annual conference of the Ecological Society of America with
              their faculty mentors.  In addition, they will continue working on projects,
              with the guidance of their mentors, throughout the following academic year. The
              year will culminate with an electronic poster-session posted on the program's
              website, in which all students will present their research results.

As a
              part of this program the student participants and the faculty at Miami
              University will be engaged in research programs that are relevant to
              understanding and solving environmental problems nationally and
              internationally.  Through multiple levels of mentoring and collaboration,
              students will come away with a true appreciation for the manner in which
              science moves forward and gain a better appreciation for the complexity of the
              environmental issues we face.  In addition, the faculty at Miami University
              will benefit by strengthening their collaborations with one another and with
              students from a variety of background and perspectives in a focused and
              productive context.     



