Title       : Generating Image Trajectories and Direct Image Jacobians for Visual Servoing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a0097717

Award Number: 0097717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171571             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola J. Ferrier ferrier@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a three year standard award. Visual servoing, the use of visual feedback
              in the control of a robot end-effector, can provide a superior robot interface
              than those offered by teach pendants or tele-operated systems.  Visual servoing
              is advantageous when precise fixturing is impractical or impossible. In image
              based servoing, control is effected in the image.  This method has the
              advantages that one does not have to reconstruct 3D information about the
              robot's environment, and that control laws exist that are not overly sensitive
              to camera calibration errors.  However, there are problems with image based
              servoing that need to be overcome in order to develop robust, stable systems. 
              This project will address two issues impeding the application of image-based
              servoing.  First, image feature-point path planning methods will be developed
              and demonstrated.  Previous research efforts have focused on the form, and
              possible decompositions, of the "Image Jacobian", relating manipulator
              velocities to image motion.  In contrast, this project will develop methods to
              determining a path within the image to use as input to a "standard" image-based
              regulator. The PI's approach will both improve controller performance and also
              ensure the image features remain within the field of view during the
              manipulation task.  Second, a parameterized direct image-to-actuator model will
              be analyzed, evaluated, tested, and compared with classical approaches.  The
              error signal from the image together with the image Jacobian typically map to
              end-effector velocities which then must be converted to actuator velocities
              using the robot kinematic model.  A controller that converts image
              displacements directly to actuator commands would eliminate the intermediate
              step thus enhancing system performance, both in terms of speed and accuracy. 
              Addressing issues of robustness and sensitivity will facilitate application of
              these techniques outside of the laboratory.  Success of this project will
              facilitate the acceptance of image based servo techniques as a viable control
              method in production operations.  The key scientific contributions created by
              this effort will include advances in the design of image based visual servo
              controllers through (1) the introduction of superior robot motion command
              generation created through image path planning and (2) the introduction of a
              parameterized direct image Jacobian with appropriate understanding of the
              model's limitations.
