Title       : Crystal Growth and Energy Transfer in Cr2+:CdSe and Cr2+:CdSSe Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0097272

Award Number: 0097272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold Burger aburger@fisk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven H. Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fisk University
	      1000 Seventeenth Avenue North
	      Nashville, TN  372083051    615/329-8500

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks better understanding of materials properties/processing
              relationships in laser media based on Cr2+ doped chalcogenides. Two
              experimental focus areas will be pursued: 1) growth of bulk single crystals of
              Cr2+:CdSe and Cr2+:CdSxSe1-x crystals with a range (1016 -1019 ions/cc) of
              dopant concentrations by physical vapor transport (PVT) and high temperature
              solution zoning. Issues addressed include: thermodynamic limits of doping and
              defect formation at high dopant concentrations and the effect of S alloying;
              formation of other oxidation states of Cr (e.g. Cr+1 , Cr+3 , Cr+4 ) and the
              role of Cd or Se overpressure to control stoichiometry; 2) spectroscopic
              measurements will be conducted to address questions such as: do these crystals
              emit efficiently at the proposed wavelength of operation; are there
              satisfactory energy flow pathways such that the material can be
              pumped(activated) to produce the required inversion; are parasitic losses
              present that are substantial enough to inhibit laser action; what are the
              excitation pathways of Cr2+in this host, including the possibility of pumping
              higher energy states to achieve efficient infrared emission. Several intrinsic
              advantages of the CdSSe host are: demonstrated ability to achieve single
              crystals, presence of natural birefringence, possibility of tailoring
              properties by adjusting the S/Se ratio. Tunable solid state mid-IR lasers based
              on Cr2+:CdSe, and its related ternary compounds, represent an opportunity for
              developing practical light sources for remote sensing, pollution monitoring,
              military and medical applications. Close interactions and collaborations with
              industrial organizations and national labs will continue, helping to accelerate
              the development of useful optical devices in conjunction with materials
              research outcomes. 
%%% 
The project addresses both basic research issues and
              education, and the integration of research and education through incorporation
              of student teaching and training in an area of materials science of high
              technological relevance, serving to motivate students to pursue careers in
              related areas. Fisk University is a Historically Black College and University
              (HBCU) committed to increasing the participation of underrepresented minorities
              in physical sciences. This project will augment its long-standing effort to
              recruit, train and mentor students from underrepresented groups.
*** 

