Title       : P,N Ligands in Asymmetric Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0097236

Award Number: 0097236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Gilbertson srg@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Scott R. Gilbertson, of the Department of Chemistry at Washington University,
              is studying the synthesis of P,N-based ligands for application in catalytic
              asymmetric reactions. Professor Gilbertson is developing synthetic routes for
              new phosphine-oxazoline ligands which are chiral at phosphorus and position the
              phosphorus at the bridgehead of a [2.2.1] bicyclic ring system. In order to
              expand the range of accessible chiral ligands containing P-C bonds, Gilbertson
              explores the catalytic conversion of vinyl tosylates to vinylphosphines and
              thence to new ligands. New ligands are screened for their ability to assist in
              the catalysis of a mechanistically diverse range of reactions, including
              palladium catalyzed pi allyl addition, the Heck reaction, asymmetric
              hydroboration, and rhodium catalyzed [4+2] cycloisomerization.

Many of the
              organic compounds discovered to possess desirable properties (e.g., as
              pharmaceutical compounds) exist in two forms, related to one another as a right
              hand is to a left - i.e., as mirror images. Not infrequently, only one such
              isomer of a compound will display the desirable properties, while the other is
              at best an inactive contaminant and at worst displays harmful activity. The
              development of new techniques for the selective synthesis of only a desired
              compound and not its mirror image remains a crucial area for investigation.
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Scott R. Gilbertson, of the Department of Chemistry at Washington University,
              is developing novel classes of compounds designed to function, together with
              various metal ions, as catalysts for a variety of reactions affording such
              selectivity.
