Title       : REU Site: Increasing Science Education Through the Study of Scientific
               Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a0097643

Award Number: 0097643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melanie C. Page melanis@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles I. Abramson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for an REU Site in Psychology at Oklahoma State
              University.  The purpose of the Site is to provide twelve undergraduate
              research scholars with an intensive eight week summer research experience in
              experimental psychology.  In this unique experience they will learn all aspects
              of the research process, including formulating hypotheses, integrating and
              analyzing scientific literature, study design, data collection, data analysis,
              and oral and written presentation of findings.  The scholars will work on
              research teams in the areas such as infant memory, children's social
              development, adult cognition, and language processing.  It is expected that
              scholars will be able to conduct their own independent projects by the summer's
              end.  Contact will be maintained with all scholars to assure they are receiving
              adequate support to pursue such projects at their home institutions.  A special
              feature of this program is that the participants will attend several weekly
              seminars focused on statistics and research methods and attend workshops on how
              to apply to graduate school, how to write successful resume or vita, and how to
              study for the GRE.  Additionally, students will be paired with a graduate
              student mentor to enhance their summer experience.  Further, students will
              attend weekly brown bag research seminars in which the faculty mentors will
              present their programs of research.  The goal is to have students who are
              better consumers and supporters of science throughout their lives, enhancing
              the appreciation of science in the lives of those around them.

This award
              contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students
              into careers in science through active undergraduate research experiences.
