Title       : Regional Ecosystem Model Testbeds: A JGOFS Synthesis and Modeling Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0097285

Award Number: 0097285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie M. Friedrichs marjy@ccpo.odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen E. Hofmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              An important legacy of the U.S. Joint Global Flux Study (JGOFS) Synthesis and
              Modeling Project (SMP) will be the formulation of a broad suite of models
              designed to simulate biogeochemical cycling at the various process study sites.
              Although this set of models and modeling studies has already substantially
              advanced our understanding of these systems, few quantitative inter-comparisons
              of these models have been made. This project will begin to conduct these
              inter-comparisons, in order to critically examine which ecosystem structures
              and formulations are most robust, and to investigate and explore the reasons
              for their success. Furthermore, it will critically evaluate the feasibility of
              developing biogeochemical models that are applicable over a wide range of
              diverse ecosystems.
	The main objectives of the proposed work are: (1) to add
              to the mechanistic understanding of how and why euphotic zone production, and
              the associated export of carbon, vary among diverse oceanographic regions, and
              (2) to accelerate the development of mechanistically-based ecosystem models
              that are capable of simultaneously describing the primary biogeochemical
              features of multiple oceanographic regimes. In order to accomplish these goals,
              and to provide a forum for testing and comparing various ecosystem models, the
              investigators will develop a series of "regional test-beds," based on the high
              quality and large quantity of observations available from (i) the Arabian Sea
              Process Study (ASPS), (ii) the Antarctic Environment and Southern Ocean Process
              Study (AESOPS), (iii) the Equatorial Pacific Process Study (EqPac), (iv) the
              second iron enrichment experiment (IronEx-II), (v) the Bermuda Atlantic
              Time-Series Study (BATS), and (vi) the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT). Websites
              will be constructed for all test-beds and will include access to the physical
              fields required to force the models, as well as time-series of biogeochemical
              data that will be used for either evaluation or optimization/assimilation.
              These websites will be available as a community resource, and, in this study,
              will be used to facilitate both intra-site and inter-site model
              comparisons.
	This research will capitalize on work previously accomplished
              under the JGOFS SMP: the twelve co-investigators involved in this project (see
              letters of collaboration) will freely provide their regional expertise, model
              code, forcing fields, and biogeochemical data sets to this project. To further
              promote model inter-comparisons, this project will involve annual hands-on
              workshops in which scientists (including but not limited to the
              co-investigators of this proposal) will work together to quantitatively assess
              a number of different biogeochemical models and modeling approaches. Through
              these inter-comparison exercises and carefully designed simulations, the
              improvement of biogeochemical models will be accelerated, and the scientific
              community will be significantly closer to having a set of rigorously tested
              models that can be used for ocean carbon cycle prediction.

