Title       : Collaborative Research: Effect of Point of Loading on Lateral Resistance of
               Rigid Piles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0097334

Award Number: 0097334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193932             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sangchul Bang sbang@silver.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The lateral resistance of short/rigid piles depends on the point where the
              lateral load is applied. Experiments have shown that lateral resistance can be
              increased significantly by shifting the point of the load application downward
              to where the resulting mode of the pile movement becomes purely translational,
              i.e., no rotational movement. Through experimental studies, this point has been
              identified near the mid-height of the pile for cohesive soils, whereas it is
              toward the bottom of the pile for cohesionless soils. Analytical studies have
              been tried to identify this optimum point of the lateral load application, but
              they have been mostly in two-dimensions without considering the significant
              effects of three-dimensional development of stresses and movements.

The PI
              has developed a preliminary analytical formulation for the estimation of the
              lateral resistance of rigid piles considering the truly three-dimensional
              effects. A limiting equilibrium approach was used incorporating a
              tetrahedron-shaped failure wedge. The formulation considers circumferential and
              radial normal and shear stresses around and along the pile as functions of the
              depth and the magnitude of the lateral movement. The solution method considers
              an approach of progressive failure. For a given point of lateral load
              application, the thickness of the soil layer experiencing failure gradually
              increases from the ground surface (or from the bottom of the pile in case when
              the lateral load is applied near the bottom of the pile). At a given thickness
              of the soil layer experiencing failure, the corresponding pile lateral
              resistance and the point of the pile rotation are calculated from equilibrium
              conditions through iterative search methods. As the thickness of the soil layer
              experiencing failure increases, new values of the pile lateral resistance and
              the point of the rotation are calculated. The process continues until the
              maximum lateral resistance is obtained.

This preliminary analytical solution
              indicates that the ultimate lateral resistance can be increased by up to 170 %
              and 340 % for piles embedded in clay and sand, respectively, when the point of
              the lateral load application moves from the top of the pile to the optimum
              point.  The solution has also been used to compare with the centrifuge model
              test results reported in the literature.  Results indicate that the analytical
              solution, though preliminary in nature due to numerous assumptions introduced,
              is capable of estimating the measured pile lateral resistances as a function of
              the point of the lateral load application very closely   However, additional
              in-depth study is  necessary to improve the solution method before it can be
              used with confidence in accurately estimating the lateral resistance of rigid
              piles.  Centrifuge model tests will be conducted in both sand and clay soils. 
              The effect of pile insertion method and point of loading will be studied.  Pile
              rotation and normal stress measurements will be made during testing.  Digital
              photography will be used to verify pile rotation and document the
              tests.

This is a collaborative research proposal.  The South Dakota School
              of Mines and
Technology will be the lead institution, conducting the
              analytical portion of the study including the solution development and
              verification. The University of Florida will conduct the experimental
              centrifuge model tests.

