Title       : A Haptic-based Interface and Sculpting System for Virtual Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0097646

Award Number: 0097646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $546446             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Qin qin@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arie E. Kaufman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award.  
              Computer-integrated engineering design consists of a variety of complex and
              challenging processes, ranging from conceptual design, geometric modeling,
              evaluation, prototyping, manufacturing, assembly, to production.   To
              ameliorate CAD/CAM processes, as well as to revolutionize human-computer
              interaction technology, the PIs will develop an interactive and tangible
              virtual environment to advance the current state-of-the-art through the novel
              integration of dynamic modeling and real-time haptic sculpting.   To these
              ends, they will focus on critical fundamental issues relating to the rapid and
              accurate synchronization of multiple heterogeneous representations of geometric
              primitives and physical properties of virtual material in a software
              environment, including optimal algorithms and their time/space analysis, and
              numerical characteristics such as stability, robustness, and error bounds.  
              They will investigate haptic interaction techniques towards the next-generation
              design technology in a systematic way through the development of novel haptic
              sculpting toolkits and the evaluation of both toolkit utilities and human
              factors.  Finally, they will investigate the effective integration of haptic
              principles with mature geometric design techniques and develop an experimental
              virtual environment with haptic interface and real-time haptic sculpting
              capabilities.   The PIs will disseminate the novel haptic technology and its
              software to the U.S. design industry and computer enterprises.   To further
              broaden the accessibility of the new haptic technology in engineering,
              sciences, and medicine, the PIs will make extra efforts (through extensive
              collaborations) towards generalizing their prototype software system to other
              haptics-relevant applications such as surgical simulation and training, and
              haptic visualization of large scientific data sets, as time allows.
