Title       : A New Approach to High-Sensitivity, Wide-Bandwidth Sensing and Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0097324

Award Number: 0097324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben K. Sternberg bkslasi@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Dvorak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1648,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with electromagnetic sensing and imaging applications
              that require relatively high power levels over wide bandwidths.  In such cases,
              there may be interference between the wideband signal source and other licensed
              users of the electromagnetic spectrum.  Such interference is prohibited by FCC
              regulations.  We propose using reserved Industrial, Scientific, and Medical
              (ISM) frequency bands for the measurements. At the ISM frequencies, unlimited
              power can be used if necessary.

In order to synthesize a wideband response
              from narrow-band measurements at the ISM frequencies, we will investigate
              methods for using the observed response at a few closely spaced frequencies and
              then predicting the full wideband response.  A conventional time-domain
              response can then be calculated, or an interpretation in the frequency domain
              can be carried out.	 A critical feature of the proposed approach is that very
              accurate data must be obtained at the measured frequencies.  In the past,
              inaccuracies in the data have led to limited success with this approach in
              practical problems.  Using a newly developed  calibration method, we expect to
              be able to obtain the high accuracies that will be required. 

This proposed
              approach, we believe, has tremendous potential in many fields.  For example,
              ground penetrating radar (GPR) and non-destructive evaluation (NDE) techniques
              often require wideband, high-power electromagnetic fields in order to image
              covered objects. Other potential applications include medical imaging. 
              Although a source of EM fields in a medical application will probably not
              interfere with licensed radio stations, there is a growing risk that the
              proliferation of such wideband devices may cause interference with each other. 
              There are significant advantages in having each of the imaging devices in a
              crowded environment operate in a reserved, narrow frequency band, rather than
              over wide bands that risk interference with each other.





