Title       : Representation Theory and Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0097977

Award Number: 0097977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun Ram ram@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research problems of this proposal are in the field of
              combinatorial representation theory and have, as primary goals, combinatorial
              constructions of irreducible representations and their characters.  The
              algebraic structures under study are all groups and algebras which come from,
              or are generalizations of, Lie theoretic objects.  The primary funding request
              of this proposal is for support for three graduate students of the principal
              investigator. The graduate student research projects center on the
              combinatorial representation theory of (1) toroidal Lie algebras, toroidal
              quantum groups and toroidal Yangians, (2) complex reflection groups and (3)
              Yokonuma-Hecke algebras.  The research projects of the proposer are focused on
              the the combinatorial representation theory of affine Hecke algebras and
              Iwahori-Hecke algebras.  This research strongly uses both algebraic geometric
              and combinatorial tools.

Most interesting symmetries are complex enough that
              it is difficult to study them directly and a representation is a way of
              extracting information about these symmetries. Thus is born ``representation
              theory''.  However, very often the representations themselves are quite
              intricate and complicated and the goal of Combinatorial Representation Theory
              is to find elementary models which allow us to more easily determine properties
              of these representations: size, number of components, splitting and combination
              rules, and character.   The type of models that are the most useful have the
              flavor of games for children, like LEGOS or ERECTOR sets, and yet these models
              enable one to obtain very explicit information about the fine structure of the
              corresponding representations. In analogy with molecular biology, a general
              representation is a large and complex structure like a molecule and is composed
              of smaller ``irreducible components'', analogous to atoms.  The research in
              this proposal is directed towards determining the properties of the irreducible
              components and on determining which irreducible components appear in naturally
              occuring ``standard'' representations.
