Title       : Research Opportunities for Minorities Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0097542

Award Number: 0097542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251199             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Jackson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Massachusetts Bay Cmty Col
	      50 Oakland Street
	      Wellesley Hills, MA  024815359    781/239-3000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The ROMP began in 1994. The ROMP Program at Massachusetts Bay Community College
              (MBCC) is a very rigorous 12-month (minimal) to 24 month (maximum) research
              training program. The purpose of the ROMP is to confer on its participants an
              overwhelming competitive advantage that will ensure their completion of the
              terminal degree in the basic sciences with distinction. The ROMP is tightly
              linked to the associate degree programs in Biotechnology at MBCC:
              Biotechnology, Marine Biotechnology and Forensic DNA Science. ROMP participants
              must therefore be enrolled as full-time students in one of the Biotechnology
              Programs.

ROMP students undertake summer research projects at collaborative
              institutions worldwide, which are advanced in the ensuing academic year in the
              BT Program at MBCC. The Biotechnology Program's research laboratories at MBCC
              are a multi-million dollar facility and are considered the most sophisticated
              undergraduate research facilities in the United States. During the academic
              year students develop their independent research prowess through their
              collaborative projects, are required to give multiple research presentations
              and must generate at least one publishable abstract per year. Research
              opportunities in the ROMP are extensive and include molecular biology, marine
              biology, environmental science, and forensic DNA analysis of human, animal and
              plant genomes and DNA-based anthropological studies. Examples of ROMP research
              projects include: studies in the changes in gene expression in human cells;
              volcano-induced fish speciation on the Caribbean island of Montserrat; and
              tracing African-American roots using DNA analysis. The African-American "Roots
              Project" was begun in 2000 and has bought ROMP students international
              attention. Faculty- and peer mentoring are key components of the ROMP. Second
              year ROMP students must mentor first year participants to a high degree of
              scientific proficiency. In addition ROMP students are required to mentor
              primary school children of Boston during the course of the academic year. We
              expect that ROMP participants will instill a passion for science in young
              minority students during the critical formative years of primary school. 

A
              number of ROMP students are now enrolled in basic science doctoral programs
              nationwide. We anticipate that the ROMP will discernibly increase the number of
              active, nontraditional people in the American scientific community. 

