Title       : Summer Research Experiences in Materials and Manufacturing Engineering for
               Community College Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0097863

Award Number: 0097863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Omar S. Es-Said oessaid@lmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rafiqul I. Noorani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Marymount Univ
	      One LMU Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  90045    213/642-2700

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This REU Site at Loyola Marymount University (LMU) provides an opportunity for
              24 undergraduate students to participate in a 10-week summerprogram where each
              student will have an opportunity to engage in engineering research on
              meaningful projects in the area of the design and manufacture of metal alloys. 
              The students will be recruited from 20 community colleges in the Los Angeles
              area with the objective of attracting students from groups traditionally
              under-represented in the engineering profession.  The work will be conducted
              under the guidance of a staff that has had much success in directing
              undergraduate students in research work.  The students will also be directly
              monitored by industry and national laboratory personnel. Each of the students
              will be trained and given responsibility for the performance of an ongoing
              research project.  The students will be expected to publish, as co-authors, the
              results of their work and to earn university credit for their efforts. 
              Selected students will present the results of their work at conferences of
              professional organizations.  The program will include field trips to five of
              the top industrial research laboratories in Southern California.  Each
              participant will have access to the extensive information and computational
              resources of LMU's computer network.  In addition, hands-on workshops on word
              processing, spreadsheets, technical report writing, e-mail and the internet
              will be conducted.  Finally, the students will participate in weekly workshops
              where they will explore the ethical dimensions of engineering research. The
              goal of this program is to provide an exciting, productive and rewarding
              research experience that will inspire the participating students to complete
              their undergraduate studies in engineering and to engage eventually in advanced
              study and research at the post graduate level.  
