Title       : Costs and Benefits of Female Mate Choice in Pronghorn, Antilocapra americana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0097115

Award Number: 0097115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325242             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Byers Jbyers@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
It is now clear that females in many animal species do not mate randomly.  The
              behavior of females before mating suggests a sampling process in which the
              value of potential mates is assessed.  Although we now know that female mate
              choice exists, we do not know what benefits a female gains from choice, or what
              specific behavioral rules she uses to make choice.  The goal of this research
              is to evaluate evolutionary models that offer answers to these questions.  To
              evaluate the models, it is necessary to measure the energy cost of mate
              sampling and the effects of choice on offspring quality, and to record how the
              experiences of females during sampling guide their choice behavior.

This
              research will take advantage of a well-developed study site (the National Bison
              Range in northwestern Montana) where individually marked pronghorn may be
              studied at close range.  Each year, most pronghorn females sample potential
              mates over a two-week period, and then mate once.  The energy cost of sampling
              will be measured using detailed records of female movements during rut,
              reconstructed from 10-minute interval Global Positioning System locations. Sire
              effects on offspring performance will be measured by recording prenatal and
              postnatal growth rates of fawns, as well as size-adjusted body mass and first
              winter survival. Sire identity will be verified genetically. Information to
              test hypotheses about the mate sampling method will be obtained by recording
              the complete sequences of female visits to males and whether, at each visit,
              the female has had the opportunity to see the male perform vigorously. 

