Title       : REU Sites in Computer Graphics, Vision, and Content Based Image Retrieval at
               Oklahoma State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0097625

Award Number: 0097625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl H. Smith                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223193             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Heisterkamp doug@a.cs.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1713      WORKFORCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9218,9250,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0097625
Heisterkamp, Douglas R
Oklahoma State University

REU Sites: 
              REU Site in Computer Graphics, Vision, and Content Based Image Retrieval at
              Oklahoma State University

This is a three year proposal for an Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Oklahoma State University in the
              interrelated  fields of 3D computer graphics, 3D computer vision, and content
              based image retrieval.  The objective is to provide a hands on research
              experience for under-represented minority students from institutions without
              graduate programs.

The aspects of the program are as follows.  Ten students
              will be recruited each year.  The target population will be under-represented
              minority groups.  Students will be recruited from institutions without graduate
              programs.  The REU program will be divided into three phases.  The first phase,
              an introduction to research methodology and content background, and the second
              phase, the actual research project, will occur during an eight week summer
              program at Oklahoma State University.  The third phase involving a paper and
              presentation will occur at the student's home university.

Institution
              support from Oklahoma State University for the program is strong.   The
              previously funded REU programs conducted by the computer science department
              have been a great success.  This proposed program w ill continue with and build
              upon the efforts of the department's past REU site programs. 

The lasting
              impact of the program will be in its effect on the participating students. We
              want to use the concrete feedback available in the visual information
              processing field to improve the students awareness of their knowledge and
              capabilities, to increase their expectations of what they can do, and to
              motivate them to actively contribute to the computer science discipline
              throughout their career.  Throughout the program, we will provide information
              and encouragement to the students on continuing with a graduate education.

