Title       : Algorithms and Implementations for OFDM Based Wireless LAN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0097114

Award Number: 0097114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $443845             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian Li li@dsp.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl S. Gugel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Wireless local area networks (WLANs) have the advantages of inexpensive network
              reconfiguration
and user mobility over wired local area networks. However,
              WLANs are so far limited to niche applications due to their low data rate and
              data rate uncertainty. There is a tremendous user demand for WLANs with higher
              data rates and international availability. This research addresses the
              challenges of meeting the user demand. This research combines theoretical
              algorithm development with real-time implementation in hardware. It fosters
              multidisciplinary research and development among researchers at  the
              University
of Florida and the local industry as well as the technology
              transfer to the local industry.

The main objective of the research is the
              development and application of efficient and robust parameter estimation and
              symbol detection algorithms and their real time implementations for high data
              rate WLANs. The investigators  devise and evaluate efficient and robust
              parameter estimation and symbol detection algorithms for Orthogonal Frequency
              Division Multiplexing  (OFDM) based WLANs with one or more transmit
and
              receive antennas for both stationary and rapidly time-varying channels.  The
              most effective algorithms are implemented efficiently in hardware in real time.
              The investigators study the tradeoffs of effectiveness, simplicity,
              computational complexity, and practical hardware implementation  in real
              time.

