Title       : Supramacromolecules: Structure/Property Control via Self-Assombly with Well
               Defined Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0097126

Award Number: 0097126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry W. Gibson hwgibson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Macroscopic properties of solids, e.g., polymeric materials, result from the
              combination of molecular structure and macroscopic organization or order. 
              Polymer chemists have become adept at covalent synthesis of macromolecules that
              can be designed to be amophous, crystalline, bi- or tri-phasic, etc.  On the
              other hand the central aim of supramolecular science is to design building
              blocks with the proper structure that allows them to self-assemble by
              noncovalent boding at the molecular level.  Synergistic combination of the
              principles of these two fields should enable more precise design and control of
              macroscopic structure and properties by utilizing properly designed
              macromolecular building blocks, i.e., more macroscopic control should result
              from the use of such precisely defined structural units.  
%%%
The primary
              goals of this project are to apply self-assembly, to form pseudorotaxane
              structures, to well defined macromolecular host and guest species and study the
              structures and properties of the resultant supramacromolecular materials. 
              Using living polymerization protocols constructed and then allowed to
              self-assemble into a variety of noncovalent analogs of various types of block
              and graft copolymers, which will be studied and compared to the corresponding
              covalent analogs when these are available.  Pseudorotaxane formation is
              reversible and this feature can be exploited to enable facile melt processing
              of mechanically linked (vs. Covalently linked) polymeric systems, which
              disassemble upon heating to lower molecular weight and lower viscosity building
              blocks; upon cooling self-assembly is expected to produce solid state features
              of phase separation, blend compatibilzation and enhanced mechanical properties
              associate with classical covalent block and graft copolymers.  Additionally a
              great advantage of this modular approach is that from a few precisely defined
              macromolecular building blocks a large library of two and three dimensional
              structures can be self-assembled without further synthetic effort. 
              Furthermore, the pseudorotaxane linkage is selective in terms of the
              cyclic/linear components (in a complementary lock and key fashion) and this
              gives rise to the possibility of control over the orientation and connectivity
              of building blocks, allowing construction of novel ensembles, including
              noncovalent analogs of ABC triblock copolymers.

