Title       : Theory and Applications of Information-Based Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0097348

Award Number: 0097348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. Traub traub@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henryk Wozniakowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0097348
Traub, Joseph F.
Columbia University

There is huge
              interest in solving high dimensional problems. Many applications involve
              functions of hundreds, thousands or even an infinite number of variables.
              Examples occur in physics, chemistry,
mathematical finance, and economics.
              

It is the rare high dimensional problem that can be solved analytically.
              Generally one must settle for an approximate numerical solution to within an
              error e. The computational complexity is the minimal computational resource
              need to solve a problem to within e. Time is the resource considered
and is
              measured by the number of information operations, arithmetic operations and
              comparisons. An example of an information operation is the computation of a
              function value.

If a worst case deterministic assurance of an
              e-approximation is desired, then often the computational complexity depends
              exponentially on the number of variables d; the problem suffers the "curse
              of
dimensionality". Examples include integration, approximation,
              globaloptimization, integral and partial differential equations over typical
              isotropic classical spaces of r-times continuously differentiable
functions.
              If the computational complexity is exponential in either 1/e or d the problem
              is said to be  intractable. If the complexity is polynomial in 1/e and d, it is
              tractable.  If, in addition, the minimal number of information operations,
              arithmetic operations and comparisons is independent of d the problem is
              strongly tractable. 

Intractability may sometimes be broken by settling for
              a stochastic assurance of error; examples are randomization (for instance,
              Monte Carlo) or the average case. A second way in which intractability
              might
be broken is additional domain knowledge about the problem. An example
              of the domain knowledge is that the integrands in certain mathematical finance
              problems are non-isotropic. Additional domain knowledge can sometimes be used
              to make the problem strongly tractable even in the worst case deterministic
              setting!

Continuation of research on achieving tractability and strong
              tractability is proposed. In particular, one proposed area of research is under
              what conditions is a double-win achievable for high dimensional integration:
 
                * convergence faster than Monte Carlo,
    * with a worst case deterministic
              assurance.
The theoretical results will be used to improve the FinDer software
              system.

    More generally, research is proposed on the following topics:
 
                * Theory and Computer Experiments for Mathematical Finance,
    *
              Tractability of Quasi-Monte Carlo and Monte Carlo Algorithms,
    * Variable
              Smoothness, 
    * Generalized Tractability. 






