Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in Cell Signaling in
               Neurobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0097842

Award Number: 0097842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Kalivas kalivasp@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The research experiences for undergraduates (REU) program at the Medical
              University of South Carolina is designed to provide both didactic and
              laboratory research experience in cutting-edge neuroscience research.  The
              successful applicants will receive overview training in the neurosciences,
              exposure to one or more laboratories where they will have hands on experience
              in a specific research project, as well as an appreciation for the ethical
              responsibilities faced by researchers responsible for bringing new knowledge
              into society and training new neuroscientists.  Students will have the
              opportunity to use a variety of biological, chemical and biophysical approaches
              to understanding cell biology as it pertains to the functioning of neurons. 
              Research will be focussed on the cellular neuroplastic responses of in vitro
              and in vivo models of central nervous system functions, including studies of
              receptors, signal transduction pathways, signaling in development and cell
              differentiation, as well as in memory formation.  The research period will be
              for a period of ten weeks with an immediate goal of, 1) giving the students
              hands on experience in the excitement of scientific discovery in the
              neurosciences, and 2) an appreciation for what a career in research in the
              neurosciences would be like.  The overarching goal and significance of this
              proposal is that through exposure to the REU program we can attract an
              important human resource into the field of neuroscience research.  However,
              even if a career in science is not chosen, the REU program will give future
              decision makers in our society a strong appreciation for the discovery process.
