Title       : The Origin and Evolution of the Light Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0097945

Award Number: 0097945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Boesgaard boes@ifa.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0097945
Boesgaard

The chemical composition of stars holds the answers
              for many of the most fundamental questions about our Universe.  Although the
              composition of stars like the Sun is very similar to that of the Sun, the
              amounts of the elements lithium (Li) and beryllium (Be) show interesting
              star-to-star variations among solar-type stars. This non-uniformity provides a
              unique opportunity to probe the insides of stars through their Li and Be
              content; unlike most other elements that are forged by nuclear reactions inside
              stars, Li and Be are destroyed there. The degree of this destruction, as
              reflected in the surface content, provides clues about the mechanism that does
              the mixing between the surfaces and the interiors of stars. Several models have
              been proposed for this "mix-master"; each model predicts differing amounts of
              depletion for Li and Be so information from both elements together is required.
              In this work, Dr. Ann Boesgaard, at the University of Hawaii, will concentrate
              on Be, with a special emphasis on Be in star clusters of known age and metal
              content.
The enrichment over time of various chemical elements in the Galaxy
              reveals the history of formation of massive stars and the early production of
              supernovae. Tracking the increase of Be over time gives sensitive information
              about previous generations of massive stars and supernovae. Probing both the
              earliest times and the intermediate ages in more detail will result in a
              greater understanding of the evolution of the Galaxy.  Furthermore, the study
              of Be in star clusters of the galactic disk help to discern the evolution and
              mixing in the disk component of our Galaxy.

This research will take
              advantage of two of the world's largest telescopes, the Keck-I 10-m telescope
              and the Subaru 8.2-m telescope at the high-altitude Mauna Kea Observatory in
              Hawaii. They are equipped with state-of-the-art instruments and detectors.
              Their high-resolution spectrometers will be used to obtain the stellar spectra.
              Recent sophisticated models of stellar atmospheres will be used in the data
              analysis. The models of stellar interiors and of galactic chemical evolution
              will be constrained better by the results from the high quality data that is
              obtained during the course of this research.  When this body of work is
              completed we should have a more comprehensive portrait of the internal
              structure of stars like the Sun and how this structure changes with time, with
              mass, and with metal content.  Furthermore, we will have a more complete
              picture of the chemical history of our Galaxy.
***


