Title       : Control of Systems with MEMS Sensors and Actuators via Data Mining Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0097438

Award Number: 0097438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley W. Chu wwc@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Ming Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this interdisciplinary research is to analyze the vast amounts of
              MEMS sensor data using datamining techniques to discover relationships among
              actions at MEMS actuators and their impact on the system state. These
              relationships (captured in the form of rules) are then used to build a feedback
              loop for aircraft control. The input-output relationships for most systems
              (e.g., the delta wing aircraft) are highly non-linear. Traditional datamining
              approaches discard much important information from the datasets and cannot
              provide sufficient transfer function information, which makes them unsuitable
              for system control. This project develops a scalable multivariate datamining
              technique that discovers full sensor-actuator relationships and predictive
              models under a wide range of conditions (dynamic, temporal, spatial, etc.). The
              research includes collecting data for dynamic system behavior, extending the
              datamining algorithms for summarizing temporal rules, developing the rule
              selection strategy for actuation schema, and developing wind tunnel experiments
              to validate the approach. This work has the potential to advance the
              state-of-the-art in data mining substantially, as this problem has many
              features (real time feedback, spatio-temporal nature) that are not commonly
              found in other applications. The success of data mining techniques is expected
              to advance the MEMS sensor and actuation technology in system monitoring and
              control and in other engineering problems.
