Title       : Symposium: Plant and Animal Physiology Ecology, Comparative Physiology/
               Biochemistry, and Evolutionary Physiology, to be held Jan 2001, Chicago, IL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0097876

Award Number: 0097876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Feder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Biologists who study the plant kingdom and the animal kingdom may work in
              different worlds, attend separate meetings, belong to separate societies, and
              interact little with one another. Each community of biologists has developed
              insights and paradigms that could be extremely valuable to the other -- but are
              too seldom shared. At the Annual Meeting of the Society for Integrative and
              Comparative Biology in Chicago, the symposium on "Plant and animal
              physiological ecology, comparative physiology/biochemistry, and evolutionary
              physiology: opportunities for synergy" will break through this isolation by
              bringing together ambassadors from the plant biology and animal biology worlds.
              This symposium was jointly arranged by the largely plant-oriented Physiological
              Ecology Section of the Ecological Society of America and the largely
              animal-oriented Division of Comparative Physiology and Biochemistry of the
              Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, and follows a parallel
              workshop at the annual meeting of the Ecological Society of America in
              Snowbird, UT, in August. 

The key to this symposium is that plants and
              animals have evolved from common ancestors and have much similar biological
              machinery in their cells, but interact with their environments in very
              different ways. Plants usually must stay in one place (except for their seeds
              and pollen) and thus must tolerate whatever challenges their environment
              presents. By contrast, many (but not all) animals can move and use behavior to
              escape from or respond to environmental challenges. Both plants and animals
              have developed a wide array of chemical and physical defenses against
              environmental stress. Scientists who have studied either plants or animals have
              made spectacular discoveries about how each kingdom responds to environmental
              challenges and live in diverse environments. This symposium will bring together
              distinguished ecophysiologists from the plant and animal ecophysiology
              communities, in hopes of bringing new perspectives to these fields and
              stimulating new advances in each.

The design of this symposium is an unusual
              one. Teams of biologists, each including both plant scientists and animal
              scientists, will consider four related scientific issues of fundamental
              significance: How do or will organisms respond to global climate change? How do
              organisms sense that their environment has changed, and how do they coordinate
              the activities of their diverse cells in response? How can organisms turn
              themselves off temporarily in response to stress, and what does this mean to
              their populations? How can organisms respond to extraordinarily severe if not
              lethal environments? Each team will present broad and synthetic outlooks from
              their diverse perspectives. The plant member(s) and the animal member(s) will
              address the topic from the perspectives and paradigms prevalent in his/her
              field. Each pair or trio of presentations will conclude with a formal
              discussion led by an assigned discussant, and the entire symposium will
              culminate in a plenary discussion. Manuscripts based on the symposium
              presentations will be published in American Zoologist and thus undergo
              widespread dissemination beyond the meeting proper. 



