Title       : Undergraduate Research Training in Integrative Biology at Towson University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2002       
File        : a0097478

Award Number: 0097478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Forester dforester@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry E. Wimmers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The program provides a 9-week research experience designed to help student
              participants develop skills in the design, execution and interpretation of
              biological experiments and to improve their written and oral communication
              skills.  This experience will encourage and facilitate a career choice in
              scientific research.  During the program, students will work closely with
              faculty mentors on the identification of a project, development of an
              experimental design, research implementation, and dissemination of results
              through several on and off-campus venues.  A major role of the faculty mentors
              is to help students make the transition from research apprentice to independent
              researcher, a progression which encourages enthusiasm for research and thus a
              career choice in science.  Because the programmatic focus is broad (molecular
              biology, physiology, field ecology), emphasis will be placed on the development
              of collaborations between laboratories with diverse intellectual or technical
              foci. While the primary focus of the program is research experience, students
              will also participate in a variety of other activities including workshops,
              seminars, field trips to non-academic research sites, and symposia.  These will
              demonstrate the range of biological research fields and venues, and help them
              prepare for their careers.  During the program, all students will live on
              campus in university apartments and participate in social events that will
              promote interactions among students and faculty mentors.
