Title       : In Search of a Sociopolitical Community: The Cases of Egypt, Iran, and Jordan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a0097282

Award Number: 0097282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122777             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansoor Moaddel SOC_moaddel@online.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project consists of conducting face-to-face interviews on worldviews of the
              publics of Egypt, Iran and Jordan.  The study builds upon a NSF-funded pilot
              study that was designed and executed in collaboration with social scientists
              from the three countries. The purpose of these surveys of representative
              national samples is to: (1) analyze the value orientation of the publics; (2)
              understand the connection between social groups and value structures; (3)
              assess in conjunction with the existing comparative historical research the
              connection between secularization in the three countries and rational-legal
              authority and liberal democracy; (4) to explore the extent and forms of
              religiosity, and the relationships between religion and gender and between
              religion and nationalism; and (5) examine the degree of concordance of values
              in these societies.  

The project is informed by a set of historically
              significant issues raised in more than a century of ideological contentions
              that transpired in these countries.  The historical social transformation of
              Egypt, Iran, and Jordan in the modern era did not produce a national consensus
              in these countries regarding the most fundamental principles of social
              organization, such as the form of government, appropriate economic model, the
              relationship with the outside world, the status of women and a national
              identity.  Instead these societies experienced different cultural movements
              based on diverse values structures.  The included liberal-nationalism, Islamic
              modernism, pan Arab nationalism (in Egypt and Jordan) and Islamic
              fundamentalism.  

Several questions will be examined in this study.
(1)  To
              what extent is there public support for these diverse value structures in
              Egypt, Iran and Jordan? Do these value structures correspond to diverse social
              groups and classes?
(2) How do value structures of the publics of Egypt, Iran
              and Jordan differ from each other?  To what extent is there a shared set of
              beliefs among the peoples of these societies?
(3) How widespread are
              fundamentalist religious beliefs among these publics?  What factors are
              conducive of these beliefs?
(4) How strong is support for democracy?  How
              widespread are related orientations such as interpersonal trust and tolerance? 
              What factors are conductive to a democratic political culture?
(5) Do basic
              sociological generalizations hold in Islamic societies?  Is there a positive
              correlation between class and religiosity and between religious and political
              participation?  Are women more religious than men in these societies
              are?

The surveys are being conducted as part of the World Value Survey and
              key items on value orientations are the same one that have been included on
              surveys in a number of other countries will be included.  It is thus possible
              to analyze data from the Islamic world using comparative yardsticks that make
              the findings meaningful in a global context.

