Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates on Site at the Oklahoma Weather Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0097651

Award Number: 0097651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne Zaras dzaras@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark H. Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelvin K. Droegemeier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award is a continuation of a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
              site program.  Two principal concerns inspired the Oklahoma Weather Center
              (OWC) in previous years to establish summer REU programs: 1) the general lack
              of opportunities for undergraduates to gain research experience to complement
              their academic careers and 2) the lack of participation by women and members of
              ethnic minorities in research in atmospheric science.  The OWC in Norman boasts
              a unique environment that encompasses all aspects of meteorological research
              and can provide students with the opportunity to enhance their undergraduate
              careers.  Over a three-year period, thirty undergraduate students will
              participate in the OWC REU program.  The students will be involved in a variety
              of activities throughout the summer.  Each student will: 1) be matched with an
              atmospheric scientist based on his/her interest and abilities to conduct
              research on a related topic, 2) attend atmospheric science lectures, 3)
              participate in various workshops (technical writing, numerical modeling,
              meteorological tools, graduate school preparation, etc.), 4) participate in
              field trips and tours to regional sites, 5) discover various research methods,
              6) possibly collect and analyze field data (depending on availability of field
              programs each summer.) and finally 7) present their research in a written and
              oral format.  The planned  activities will introduce and expose each student to
              the many research possibilities within atmospheric science.  The various
              opportunities will also assist the students with their decisions regarding
              graduate school and potential futures as research scientists.

The students
              will conduct their research under the supervision of mentors from the OWC.  The
              OWC is a unique confederation of federal, state, and University of Oklahoma
              organizations that work together in partnership to improve understanding of
              events of Earth's atmosphere.  Organizations of the OWC that will participate
              in the REU are: Center for Analysis and Prediction of Storms, Center for
              Computational Geosciences, Cooperative Institute for Mesoscale Meteorological
              Studies, Environmental Verification and Analysis Center, Oklahoma
              Climatological Survey, School of Meteorology, National Severe Storms
              Laboratory, Norman National Weather Service Forecast Office, Storm Prediction
              Center, and WSR-88D Operational Support Facility.
