Title       : Stochastic Control Problems and Numerical Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0097447

Award Number: 0097447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367562             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold J. Kushner hjk@dam.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal deals with a large set of key problems in stochastic control and
              applications.
Concerning Numerical  Methods in Stochastic Control,  the aim is
              to have a large set of effective  algorithms  which can  be conveniently
              programmed,  have good numerical properties,  are robust, and  for which there
              are convergence theorems under realistic conditions, so that numerical methods
              can fulfill   their  role  as a practical and efficient approach to  both
              investigation and design.
The  foundations are the Markov chain approximation
              methods. Algorithms with faster rate of convergence for the ergodic cost
              problem will be developed. The methods will be extended to stochastic
              differential games.  This will allow  treatment of robust and risk sensitive
              problems as well In many problems, the intensity of the noise  is affected by
              the control.  We will  design  practical and well performing  algorithms.
              Numerical algorithms generally suppose that the drift  terms are
              bounded.
Problems with unbounded and controlled drift  occur in communications
              theory and appropriate convergent algorithms will be developed. The treatment 
              of ergodic costs with singular controls is  one of the key  remaining numerical
              problem areas, and is crucial in applications to communications theory and for
              heavy traffic limit models.  Well performing algorithms will be developed. 
              More generally, the theory of heavy traffic limits for the ergodic criteria 
              and singular controls will be completed.  We will also develop a complete
              theory of approximation methods for the modeling and control of  Mobile
              communications systems when the channels are rapidly time varying in an
              arbitrary way. The heavy traffic models and associated limit theorems provide
              good guides for the analysis  and control of a large variety of such systems.

