Title       : REU Site: Reviving the Past: Undergraduate Research Program in Biocultural
               Anthropology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a0097568

Award Number: 0097568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan G. Sheridan Sheridan.5@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for a Field School in Biocultural Anthropology at
              
the University of Notre Dame.  The program will engage a diverse 
pool of
              talented undergraduates in an experiential learning 
environment that immerses
              them in anthropological method and theory. 
Using the large Byzantine St.
              Stephen's skeletal collection from 
Jerusalem as the cornerstone for study,
              historical and archaeological 
information will be synthesized in a
              biocultural reconstruction of 
ancient monastic life. Students will engage in
              original research to 
develop a suite of methodological skills in the sciences
              and enhance 
their capability for collaborative research.  They will share in
              a 
field trip program to area research sites, libraries, museums, and a
              
functioning monastery to gain an understanding of the cultural 
parameters
              affecting human adaptability.  Exploration of ethical 
issues related to the
              politics of archaeology, treatment of 
artifacts, and repatriation will focus
              attention on scientific 
ethics, an important foundation for future research
              endeavors. 
Finally, a dynamic lecture program delivered by an international
              team 
of scholars in the fields of anthropology, biology, history, 
classics,
              geography, theology, and Near Eastern studies will 
crystallize the importance
              of a holistic approach for studying the 
past.   The biocultural field school
              will provide an 
intellectually energizing learning experience, which will
              equip 
participants with a suite of talents for viewing their surroundings.
              
The integration of practical research skills, ethical inquiry, and 
the
              synthesis of disciplinary paradigms for viewing human interaction 
will prove
              useful as students move into graduate or professional 
careers in the natural
              and social sciences.

This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing
              efforts to attract
talented students into careers in science through active
              undergraduate 
research experiences.


