Title       : REU: Undergraduate Summer Research Experience in Plant Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0097225

Award Number: 0097225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227465             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Normanly normanly@biochem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Alpert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elsbeth L. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Plant Biology Graduate Program at the University of Massachusetts will
              recruit ten qualified undergraduates to participate in a summer research
              program.  The objectives are to i) interest talented undergraduates in plant
              biology research and teaching, ii) increase the diversity of researchers and
              teachers in plant biology and iii) strengthen the regional infrastructure for
              plant science and education in New England.  Qualified undergraduates who have
              finished their junior year will be recruited nationally.  Emphasis will be
              placed upon recruiting students from small New England/New York Area colleges
              that have limited research opportunities for undergraduates, and recruiting
              minority students that are underrepresented in the life sciences.  The emphasis
              of this program is to provide undergraduates with an opportunity to immerse
              themselves in the day to day activities of a research laboratory.  The program
              will be eight weeks in duration and will emphasize independent research under
              the supervision of a plant biology faculty mentor.  Additionally, weekly
              activities are planned to foster a sense of community among the REU
              participants and to proivide useful experience in a variety of important skills
              used in a scientific research or teaching career.These include a field trip to
              a local habitat, workshops to develop presentation skills, a career option
              workshop featuring former REU participants and a poster session at the end of
              the program.




