Title       : Examination of the Oceanic Uptake of Anthropogenic CO2 and Other Trace Gases
               using Multiple Tracer Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0097316

Award Number: 0097316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge L. Sarmiento jls@splash.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anand Gnanadesikan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1650,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0097316

A major achievement of the last decade of oceanic
              observations by the Joint Global Ocean Flux  Study (JGOFS) and World Ocean
              Circulation Experiment (WOCE) has been the dramatic improvement in  our ability
              to use observations to estimate the oceanic inventory of anthropogenic carbon.
              This  improvement has been driven both by increased data and by the development
              of improved techniques for  analyzing the observations. An important role has
              been played by the rapid development of ocean general  circulation models that
              are now being used routinely to do tracer simulations and provide estimates of 
              anthropogenic carbon uptake. However, despite the great progress that has been
              made, there remain many  important issues that need to be resolved.

In this
              project, researchers at Princeton University will conduct model sensitivity
              studies to examine several hypotheses for model  differences.  They would make
              use of measurements from the JGOFS and WOCE surveys to  determine which model
              gives a more realistic simulation, and to improve estimates of the oceanic
              uptake  and storage of anthropogenic CO2, bomb radiocarbon, and
              chlorofluorocarbons (CFC).  The goal is to advance both the  development of
              reliable ocean models and the estimation of oceanic uptake of anthropogenic CO2
              from  observations with the aim of improving estimates of the oceanic carbon
              sink and our understanding of the  ocean carbon cycle.   First, the team plans
              to examine model simulated tracer-tracer relationships of anthropogenic CO2,
              bomb  14C,  and CFCs to evaluate aspects of model physics that believed to be
              important in determining  tracer distributions.   They will then attempt to
              improve the estimates of anthropogenic CO2 inventories by making use of the 
              model simulations in conjunction with observations to critically examine ways
              of separating  the anthropogenic CO2 from the background total CO2 and by
              exploring alternative  methods using the distributions of CFCs, bomb  14C, and
              CCl4.  A coordinated examination of these tracers that historically have been
              examined in relative  isolation promises a better understanding anthropogenic
              CO2, bomb  14  C, CFCs, and CCl4 uptake in ocean  models and in the real ocean.
               


