Title       : Higher Fidelity Etch Profiles and Reduced Charge Damage in Integrated Circuit
               Manufacturing by Neutralizing Charge Imbalances During Plasma Etch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a0097061

Award Number: 0097061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Collins collins@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0097061
Collins

For the past 20 years, conventional integrated circuit (IC)
              plasma etch processes have successfully employed a flux of positive ions to
              activate surface chemistry. As feature sizes are reduced to below 0.25 microns,
              spatial charge buildup on etch features already contributes to non-ideal etch
              profiles, limits etch feature size, and damages MOSFET gate oxide, resulting in
              lower chip yield. The PI seeks both a scientific understanding and a cure for
              this potential IC manufacturing showstopper for plasma etch of features down to
              0.1 micron.

The PI proposes to explore positive charge buildup
              neutralization via simultaneous electron irradiation of the IC during plasma
              etching, utilizing a CSU developed electron beam source. Proof-of-principle
              electron beam irradiation, described within, proves we can successfully
              transmit electron beams at current levels of up to ~1 mA/cm 2 through high ion
              density (N+ = 10 12 cm -3 ) plasmas to etching substrates. Etch profiles in
              preliminary experiments with and without electron irradiation are very
              distinct, indicating that the PO's approach of charge neutralization is a
              potentially effective technique.

The proposed two-part research program
              builds on the PI's prior proof-of-principle studies. Part one involves
              production, transmission, and characterization of an electron beam through a
              reactive plasma etching environment to an etch substrate. Experimentally
              measured beam spectra will be compared to numerical simulations for
              quantification of negative charge deposited on test structures prior to the
              onset of proposed etch profile and charge damage studies.

In part two, the
              PI will examine the effect of various controlled levels of electron beam
              irradiation on feature profiles during plasma etching, and isolate charge
              neutralization effects from other known contributors. Agilent Technologies
              Integrated Circuit Business Division will provide a variety of IC test
              structures with pre-etched high aspect ratio photo-resist features placed on
              top of dual plate capacitors to quantify both the positive and negative charge
              deposited. The existing Agilent Technologies database for plasma etching with
              ion fluxes alone will baseline his studies and provide the initial operating
              parameters where cumulative ion charge in microstructures is known to be
              deleterious.

In summary,the PI's research will construct a database of
              charge neutralization etch conditions. Both neutralization of positive charge
              in micro-features to improve pattern fidelity of high aspect ratio features as
              well as blanket charge neutralization to reduce MOSFET gate oxide damage during
              plasma etch will be quantitatively explored.

