Title       : REU Sites: An Undergraduate Research Participation Program in Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0097464

Award Number: 0097464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harriet G. Taylor                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143213             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert L. Dershem dershem@cs.hope.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 1713      WORKFORCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,9250,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 0097464
Dershem, Herbert
Hope College

REU Sites:  An Undergraduate
              Research Participation Program in Computer Science
    
   The Hope College
              REU program in Computer Science is designed to provide promising undergraduates
              with an intensive and meaningful research experience that will encourage them
              to consider a career in computer science research. Our goal is to expose
              students to the techniques, attitudes, and rewards of computer science research
              and to provide encouragement and direction in the pursuit of such a career
              through close collaboration with a faculty mentor on a significant project. We
              will make extensive efforts to include qualified female and minority group
              students among the participants. Each year a partner undergraduate institution
              will be selected where there is presently insufficient infrastructure for a
              strong undergraduate research program in computer science. One faculty member
              from the partner institution will be invited to participate in this program,
              joining three or four Hope College faculty members as research mentors. In
              addition, two students from the partner institution will join three Hope
              College students and three students from other institutions as student
              participants. The student participants will reside on the Hope College campus,
              spending a minimum of 40 hours per week on research activities for a 10 week
              period. Each participant will work in close collaboration with a faculty mentor
              and be given exclusive use of a workstation on the Hope College Computer
              Science network. The development of communication skills will be emphasized by
              having participants present their results during summer seminars, at their home
              institution during the following academic year, and at a regional or national
              conference. In addition, the participants will prepare a research report and an
              online poster describing their work.

