Title       : REU: Coastal Conservation Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0097635

Award Number: 0097635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260614             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger C. Wood roger.wood@stockton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanton L. Hales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R Stockton Coll of NJ
	      PO Box 195
	      Pomona, NJ  08240    609/652-1776

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	The goal of this program is to train students in conservation biology by
              providing 12 undergraduate students with an intense and comprehensive research
              experience during a 10-week summer program.  Students concentrate on one of
              several ongoing research projects in coastal conservation, such as the
              population ecology and genetics of threatened or endangered species,
              restoration ecology, impacts of habitat fragmentation and human disturbance on
              beach-nesting shore birds, exotic species assessments, and impacts and studies
              of species increasingly affected by different human activities.  During the
              summer residential program, the student researchers will participate in all
              phases of the scientific method-asking questions, developing hypotheses,
              designing and conducting field and/or laboratory studies, analyzing and
              interpreting data, and forming conclusions.  Student activities initially
              involve directed research activities on existing projects with a group of
              research scientists working along the southern New Jersey coast.  Scientists
              are affiliated with partner organizations, which include The Wetlands
              Institute, The Nature Conservancy, US Fish & Wildlife Service, and the NJ
              Department of Environmental Protection Program.  As they become skilled in
              those research activities, students will develop their own related, yet new
              projects in consultation with their research supervisors to be completed during
              the summer.
	All students will also participate in 1) weekly academic
              seminars, 2) periodic workshops on specific research tools including
              experimental design and biostatistics, 3) a variety of public education and
              stewardship activities, and 4) a bioethics program.  All students conclude
              their research experiences with presentations of their results at a student
              research symposium organized as a professional scientific meeting.  Selected
              students will attend and/or present their studies at regional or national
              scientific meetings.
	Along with training students in research, the project
              strengthens collaborations among community and government partners, thereby
              enabling them to improve their conservation efforts.

