Title       : Nonmonotonic Reasoning and Computational Knowledge Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0097278

Award Number: 0097278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550024             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miroslaw Truszczynski mirek@cs.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Marek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raphael A. Finkel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
IIS-0097278
Miroslaw Truszczynski, Raphael A. Finkel and Victor
              Marek
University of Kentucky
$146,167 - 12 mos



Nonmonotonic Reasoning
              and Computational Knowledge Representation




This is the first year
              funding of a three year continuing award.  The PI will study and implement
              computational knowledge-representation systems based on the paradigm of
              answer-set programming (ASP) with nonmonotonic logic that he recently
              identified, in order to demonstrate the practicality and effectiveness of the
              approach. Logic is most commonly used in knowledge representation as follows.
              To solve a problem we represent its constraints and the relevant background
              knowledge as a theory in the language of first-order logic (or its fragment).
              We formulate the goal (the statement of the problem) as a formula of the logic.
              We then use proof techniques to decide whether this formula follows from the
              theory. A proof of the formula, variable substitutions or both determine a
              solution.   Taking a different approach, the PI will study and develop
              computational knowledge representation tools based on nonmonotonic logics
              rather than on the first-order logic. In addition, he departs from the
              single-intended model approach dominant in logic programming.   Under the ASP
              paradigm, a theory in a nonmonotonic formalism is regarded as a specification
              of a family of sets - a collection of its intended models.   Each model is
              viewed as a representation of a different single solution.   The PI will
              investigate syntactic and semantic issues of ASP formalisms based on
              nonmonotonic logics, study methods for fast computing with these formalisms,
              develop practical implementations, and demonstrate effectiveness of answer-set
              programming engines and their applicability in knowledge representation.  If
              successful, the work will establish answer-set programming as a viable approach
              to declarative programming, which in turn will provide AI researchers and
              practitioners with a new generation of computational tools for knowledge
              representation.


