Title       : A New Generation of Sensor Designs based on Nonlinear Distortion and Signal
               Recovery for Health Assessment, Distributed Sensing and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0097719

Award Number: 0097719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander G. Parlos a-parlos@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Won-jong Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suhada Jayasuriya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,1639,1648,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

PIs: Alexander G. Parlos, Suhada Jayasuriya and Won-jong Kim, Texas
              A&M University

Proposal Number: 0097719

Proposal Title: A New Generation
              of Sensor Designs based on Nonlinear Distortion and Signal Recovery for Health
              Assessment, Distributed Sensing and Control

Project Abstract:

This
              research project addresses the development and experimental demonstration of a
              new methodology for smart sensor designs and their use in health assessment,
              distributed sensing and feedback control. This work is predicated on the
              philosophy that sensor cost is directly tied to its bandwidth and that sensor
              bandwidth should be just enough for an intended purpose. In the case where a
              sensor is only used for monitoring, its bandwidth is dictated by the signal
              contents. However, when measured signals are to be incorporated in a feedback
              loop, the sensors must have significantly larger bandwidths than the bandwidth
              of the controller which, in turn must be much larger than the required closed
              loop system bandwidth. An inherent limitation of current sensor designs is the
              implied need to maintain linearity. The proposed research will depart from this
              old paradigm and consider the deliberate introduction of nonlinear
              characteristics in the sensor hardware, enabling self-calibration. The
              possibility of using arrays of sensors, each with a much smaller bandwidth than
              a single sensor with large bandwidth, will be considered both for distributed
              sensing and for high performance feedback control systems. Furthermore methods
              for integrating the smart sensors envisioned in this work for health monitoring
              and condition-based maintenance will be pursued. Finally, all of these
              developments will be integrated into a single framework that will be tested on
              two experimental setups. The technical approach of the proposed project will be
              based on nonlinear estimation and multirate signal processing techniques for
              smart sensor development. The control methodology will be based on ideas from
              Quantitative Feedback Theory, whereas the proposed self-calibration will rely
              on stochastic modeling. It is expected that this research will significantly
              advance the state of the art in smart sensors.



