Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0097685

Award Number: 0097685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph G. Gindhart joseph.gindhart@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel C. Skvirsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposed REU site program will provide students with intensive summer
              research experience in the Department of Biology at the University of
              Massachusetts Boston.  Consistent with the mission of the University, the
              project aims to involve a diverse group of students, including non-traditional
              students from urban environments, minorities underrepresented in science, and
              women.  Ten undergraduates, recruited locally and nationally, will participate
              in research with faculty sponsors, enrichment activities that help students
              understand the issues surrounding modern biology, and field trips designed to
              create a better understanding of the environment and a spirit of fellowship
              among students.  Students will interact with faculty, graduate students, and
              other undergraduates pursuing research on campus to gain first-hand knowledge
              of the research process.  The program begins with a three-day retreat to a
              field station on Nantucket Island, MA, where students learn about the history
              and biology of Nantucket, discuss their expectations of the REU program, and
              form bonds and friendships that enhance their REU experience.  After returning
              from Nantucket, students engage in individual research projects in which each
              student works closely with an advisor/mentor and participate in weekly group
              discussions where students confront ethical issues, learn about the practical
              aspects of doing science, and become familiar with the research of their fellow
              students.  Potential research topics span the breadth of modern biology,
              including neurobiology, genetics, ecology, immunology, and cell and
              developmental biology.  At the conclusion of the program each student will
              prepare a report and present research results in a student research symposium. 
              The focus of the ethics component will be the research process and contemporary
              topics in biomedical ethics, such as the Human Genome Project.  Participants
              will also visit several field sites and learn directly about other student
              projects.  A hands-on workshop on molecular techniques will demonstrate the
              great potential of such methods for many aspects of biological research.  The
              REU Program in Biology will continue UMass Boston's tradition of successful and
              productive undergraduate research.
