Title       : Recursive Decoding for Reed-Muller Codes and their Modifications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0097125

Award Number: 0097125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308034             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilya I. Dumer dumer@ee.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recursive decoding for Reed-Muller codes and their modifications
	
Powerful
              error correction is in great demand in modern communication systems. However,
              practical performance of the best  codes is often limited due to infeasible
              decoding complexity or excessive length of the blocks to be used. In
              particular, optimum maximum likelihood decoding has huge complexity even on
              short blocks of one hundred bits. By contrast, iterative decoding combines low
              complexity and superior performance using long blocks that include tens of
              thousands bits. Therefore this research focuses on code constructions and
              decoding algorithms that can achieve good performance and low decoding
              complexity while using the blocks of moderate length. The particular goal of
              the research is to employ the blocks ranging from 100 bits to 1000 bits, where
              neither maximum likelihood decoding nor iterative procedures achieve good
              performance at a low complexity. Due to short lengths and fast decoding, the
              new codes can be used in a variety of high-speed applications arising in
              broadband and wireless systems.
	
To achieve this goal, the researchers
              employ fast recursive techniques that split original codes of length n into two
              codes of length n/2. These techniques are applied to Reed-Muller (RM) codes,
              their subcodes, and new code modifications. The basic procedure splits the RM
              code  (r, m)  into the two constituent RM codes  (m - 1, r - 1)  and  (m - 1,
              r). Decoding is then relegated further to the shorter codes. In all
              intermediate steps, the decoder only recalculates the reliabilities of the
              newly defined symbols. Finally, fast optimum decoding is performed on the basic
              RM codes of the first order. For longer codes, this repetitive multilevel
              recursion increasingly outperforms other low-complexity algorithms, such as
              bounded distance decoding and majority decoding.   The procedures are further
              enhanced by using very short lists of candidates taken in the intermediate
              steps of the recursion.   Another enhancement uses subcodes of RM codes, for
              which tracking a few plausible candidates already gives near-maximum likelihood
              decoding. In particular, even short RM codes of length 128 achieve low output
              bit error rates (BER) at a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 2.5 dB. Further
              research topics include:
	
General study of recursive decoding algorithms.
              The goals are:
	
(a) to estimate the output BER in each step of multilevel
              recursions;
	
(b) to choose the most protected subcodes of RM codes;
	
(c)
              to evaluate the output BER in recursive list decoding;
	
(d) to design new
              criteria for choosing short lists of candidates.	

Design of new recursive
              algorithms. The goal is to design more advanced constructions that:
	
a)
              split the original block into multiple subblocks with different levels of
              protection;
	
(b) use the recursions with new constituent codes different
              from RM codes;
	
(c) incorporate permutation techniques in recursive
              decoding;
	
(d) achieve efficient decoding for blocks up to 1024 bits used at
              SNR of 1 to 2 dB.

