Title       : A Maximum Entropy-Based Approach to Discourse Parsing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0097846

Award Number: 0097846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Marcu marcu@isi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three year continuing award.   Despite a
              number of successful applications, current discourse parsers are still far from
              human performance levels.  Two factors contribute to this situation.   First,
              the relationship between discourse structure and lexicogrammar is
              insufficiently understood;  we still do not know what lexicogrammatical
              features correlate with discourse structures and relations.  Second, the
              discourse parsing algorithms implemented to date do not take advantage of
              formalism and algorithms specific to information and probability theories,
              which have been shown to produce impressive results in the field of syntactic
              parsing.  The goal of this research is to address these two shortcomings.  To
              this end, the PI will focus on the following two directions:  (a) He will
              investigate empirically, using the principle of maximum entropy and the
              improved iterative scaling algorithm, the relationship between cue phrases,
              syntactic-, anaphoric-, and discourse-specific features/structures;  (b) He
              will develop robust probability- and maximum-entropy-based discourse parsing
              algorithms.  The empirical aspects of the project will contribute to a better
              understanding of the relationship between lexicogrammar, cohesion, and
              coherence, while the computational aspects will provide a thorough study of the
              features and search strategies that are best suited for probabilistic discourse
              parsing.  This work will also provide computational linguists with robust
              discourse parsers, enabling them to investigate how the high-level structure of
              text can be exploited in a variety of natural language applications.
