Title       : Nonlinear Model Based Information Synthesis and Health Detection with
               Applications to Drive-by-Wire Engines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0097807

Award Number: 0097807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Franchek   (Principal Investigator current)
              George T.-C. Chiu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,1648,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PIs: Matthew Franchek and George Chiu, School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue
              University
Proposal Number: 0097807
Title: Nonlinear Model Based Information
              Synthesis and Health Detection with Applications to Drive-by-Wire
              Engines

Abstract:
This proposed research will create sensor software
              technology from an Information Technologies (IT) point of view called
              information synthesis (IS).  This knowledge base starts from the premise that
              sensor and actuation information creates a critical data set which can produce
              nonlinear models that span the entire information space of a system. The IS
              technologies will be built by creating an online adaptive nonlinear (NL)
              modeling technology which is then integrated with analytical functions designed
              for health detection. The IS technology will be experimentally validated on a
              drive-by-wire internal combustion (IC) engine research to create fail-safe
              engines. Research support for the drive-by-wire portion of this work will be
              sought from industrial sponsors.

The scientific impact of this proposed
              research is the creation of an IS knowledge base applicable to a large class of
              physical systems. The proposed IS technology complements the data fusion
              knowledge base by synthesizing information via nonlinear dynamic models instead
              of I/O tabular maps. Therefore as the system ages, the IS online model
              adaptation will eliminate the need to create a new I/O mapping.  Furthermore,
              this model based IS approach will allow information extrapolation to a space
              corresponding to input signals not originally considered. The first
              contribution will be the creation of a NL dynamic system modeling technology
              that can be applied to either experimental data or numerical simulations, or it
              can be extracted from other NL models such as an artificial neural network. To
              maintain model accuracy over the product life, the second contribution of this
              research will develop a passive online model adaptation technology. The next
              contribution will be the development of an analytical design technology for
              health detection. Specifically, the adapted model coefficients will be analyzed
              to extract product health.  These IS technologies will be validated on a fully
              electronic drive-by-wire engine.  The engine is a Ford V-8 fuel injected engine
              fitted with an electronic throttle for fueling control and torque control
              management.  The goal here is to create a fail-safe drive-by-wire engine that
              can withstand sensor failures that would otherwise lead to engine power
              burst.

