Title       : Simple C*-Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a0097903

Award Number: 0097903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Huaxin Lin hlin@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Lin

The main goal of this project  is to classify nuclear  simple
              C*-algebras  by their K-theoretical data.  The principal investigator
              introduced a notion of tracial topological rank for C*-algebras. It has been
              established that this new rank is quite useful in classification of nuclear
              simple C*-algebras.  The investigator proposes to classify unital simple
              nuclear C*-algebras with tracial topological rank no more than one by their
              K-theoretical data. These C*-algebras include most known nuclear simple
              C*-algebras.  The investigator also proposes to determine tracial topological
              ranks for many naturally occurred simple C*-algebras.

The simplest examples
              of noncommutative C*-algebras are collections of matrices. In general,
              C*-algebras could be thought as collections of infinite matrices.  In quantum
              mechanics physical quantities are represented by operators on a Hilbert space
              i.e. by infinite matrices. C*-algebras appeared as an outgrowth of quantum
              physics.  But C*-algebras also provide the natural framework for generalizing
              geometry, topology and measure theory in a fundamental noncommutative way of
              wide applicability.  Simple C*-algebras can be viewed as the key to
              understanding quantum variables. They are the fundamental building blocks of
              more general C*-algebras as well as the typical noncommutative C*-algebras. 
              This research project is to study how to describe these C*-algebras via a few
              data which is topological in nature.  Immediate applications can be established
              in the study of dynamical systems.

