Title       : Paleoanthropological Research in the Kibish Formation, Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0097112

Award Number: 0097112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226356             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Fleagle jfleagle@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The origin of anatomically modern humans is one of the most exciting and
              hotly debated topics in human evolution today. The results of numerous genetic
              studies indicate that modern humans arose in Africa sometime during the last
              200,000 years and subsequently migrated to other parts of the world. While the
              paleontological record of human evolution in Africa during this time period
              seems to support this scenario, the evidence is beset by many uncertainties as
              many of the critical fossils are known from fragmentary remains and have proved
              difficult to date precisely. For example, the purported remains of early modern
              early modern humans from South Africa are very fragmentary, while the more
              complete remains from Tanzania and Kenya have proved very difficult to date
              confidently.  For over three decades, the paleontological remains from the
              Kibish Formation in southwestern Ethiopia have provided critical evidence of
              anatomically modern humans in subsaharan Africa more than 100,000 years ago.
              However, the Kibish fossils have also been the subject of debate because of
              uncertainties regarding their actual age, and the indications that two very
              different types of fossil hominid are preserved within these deposits- one
              relatively archaic and another more modern.  Resolution of the actual ages of
              these fossils will contribute substantially to our understanding of the timing
              of human evolution in Africa and the origin of lineage leading uniquely to
              modern humans.  
     An initial survey expedition in the Kibish Formation was
              undertaken in 1999 to explore the possibilities and promise of continued
              fieldwork there. Results of the 1999 season include a preliminary
              tephrostratigraphic framework for the Kibish Formation in the area where the
              1967 fossils were discovered and 40Ar/39Ar dates for tuffaceous deposits
              bracketing the 1967 cranial remains. These indicate that the Omo 1 and Omo 2
              cranial remains are unlikely to have come from the same stratigraphic horizon
              and that the hominids are between 100,000  and 200,000 years old with other
              deposits probably extending back to 300,000 years. We also doubled the
              mammalian fauna known from the Kibish formation and found stone tools
              throughout the Kibish Formation, including instances of tools associated with
              faunal remains bearing cutmarks. 
     The overall goals of the research are:
              1) To strengthen and refine the numerical control on the age of the Kibish
              Formation through additional fieldwork and analyses; 2) to refine the
              stratigraphic and temporal framework for previously collected fossils and
              establish a broad regional framework for future research; 3) to relate the
              sedimentology of the Kibish Formation to regional climatic changes; and 4) to
              locate additional paleontological and archeological localities within this
              chronometric, stratigraphic and sedimentological framework.  Accomplishment of
              these goals will greatly advance our current understanding of human evolution
              and modern human origins in Africa during the past 300,000 years, the place and
              time in which or species first evolved.



