Title       : Climatological Studies with Doppler Radar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0097116

Award Number: 0097116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian E. Mapes bem@cdc.noaa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fundamental understanding of the redistribution of heat and moisture in the
              atmosphere is important to understanding both climate and weather.  This
              project will undertake, and facilitate for others, fundamental studies of
              atmospheric convection and rainfall processes.  Examples include statistical
              characterization of the multiple space-time scales involved; inference of
              vertical structures of convective heating; and comparison of different regions
              and regimes.  Simultaneous sounding, surface, and satellite data sets will be
              assembled and examined to seek relationships and test hypotheses about the
              temporal relationships between convection and large-scale meteorological
              (weather regime) and climatic (land vs. sea, diurnal, seasonal)
              variations.

Initial analyses, focused on the Tropics, will elucidate the
              characteristics of not only the occasional organized deep convective events,
              but also the occasional suppressed conditions, and the more ubiquitous
              conditions with shallow cumuli and middle-topped showers, which are
              hypothesized to have a substantial role in the general circulation.

This
              project will compose, study, and make available to the community a carefully
              designed uniform hourly statistical digest of data from a large number of
              recent and future radar deployments.  Data access has been offered by several
              US groups with large data archives, as well as a Japanese group with a new
              high-quality shipborne Doppler radar.  Cylindrical binning (CYLBIN) is a novel,
              simple analysis technique for quantitative studies of both reflectivity data
              (potentially including multi-parameter data) and Doppler-derived wind and wind
              divergence profiles.  Pilot studies with several months of shipborne radar data
              from the Indian, and eastern and western Pacific Oceans are promising, as
              significant signals are frequently present even in sparse echo fields. 
              "Interleaved tilt angle" scanning strategies, designed by the PI with this
              analysis in mind, offer especially high vertical resolution in several data
              sets.

