Title       : Portrait of the Galaxies in a Young Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0097163

Award Number: 0097163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hyron Spinrad spinrad@bigz.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
AST 0097163
Spinrad 
How and when do galaxies form? Studies of the
              microwave background radiation show that the universe was spectacularly
              homogeneous at redshift of approximately 1000 (corresponding to ~ 3 x 10**5
              years after the Big Bang). Locally, ~ 13 Gyr later, at time 0, we find that the
              distribution of matter is lumpy, with baryons largely consigned to luminous,
              bound structures. such as galaxies and clusters of galaxies. These present-day
              structures can be explained by the gravitational collapse and coalescence of
              the overdense regions of the early Universe. A detailed understanding of this
              collapse, called galaxy and large-scale structure formation, stands as one of
              the primary challenges to astrophysicists today.

This project is a, three
              year systematic, observational study of the earliest phases of galaxy
              formation. It has three scientific objectives: (1) identifying galaxies at very
              high redshift (z > 4). (2) characterizing the galaxy population(s) at early
              cosmic epoch. and (3) performing detailed physical studies on a subsample of
              these objects as a window toward understanding the early population(s) as a
              whole. To conduct this study, this project will significantly augment the
              census of very distant (z > 4) galaxies using two proven techniques: (1)
              photometric selection of very high-redshift protogalaxy candidates from deep
              ground- and space-based imaging. and (2) slit spectroscopic searches for
              high-redshift line emission on deep exposures. Once these high redshift objects
              have been found they will be studied to find the cosmic star formation history
              at z > 5, the prevalence of dust in the early Universe, the surface density and
              distribution of galaxies at early, cosmic time, and the luminosity function of
              both photometrically -selected and line-emitting galaxies in the early
              Universe. In particular. how are these two populations related? Studying both
              populations is essential for obtaining the truest understanding of the earliest
              phases of galaxy evolution. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF
              program for Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***


