Title       : U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Integration of Mathematical Modeling, Physical
               Modeling and Field Research for Advanced Understanding of River Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0097059

Award Number: 0097059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce L. Rhoads b-rhoads@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Wade  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcelo H. Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 5946,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0097059
Rhoads

This three-year award for cooperative research in geography
              and regional sciences involves teams in the United States and in the United
              Kingdom.  The US team of Bruce L. Rhoads, Marcelo H. Garcia, Rebecca Wade and
              their graduate students at the University of Illinois propose to collaborate
              with Stuart Lane, James Best, Philip Ashworth at the University of Leeds,
              Robert Ferguson at University of Sheffield, and Keith Richards at Cambridge
              University along with graduate students from these institutions.  The US and UK
              teams will explore the three-dimensional structure of time-averaged fluid
              motion and turbulence in natural rivers and develop and empirically test
              numerical models of river-channel dynamics with functions for sediment
              transport and bank erosion.

Streams and rivers are agents of erosion and
              depositional change on the Earth's terrestrial surfaces.  Despite enormous
              amounts of research on fluvial forms and processes, there is a theoretical need
              for predicting quantitatively the behavior of river channels over time and
              space.   The proposed interdisciplinary collaboration addresses this problem
              through research on and development of a field-tested predictive model. The US
              and UK research teams are expert on computational fluid dynamics and bring to
              this collaboration different approaches, detailed measurements of model
              simulations from their respective laboratories, and expertise in computational
              modeling and field testing. 

