Title       : REU Site in Microbiology at The University of Iowa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0097361

Award Number: 0097361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359141             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Feiss michael-feiss@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Roller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Goals of the project: (1) To recruit and select bright students, including
              women, individuals with diverse backgrounds with respect to geographical origin
              and ethnicity, and students from non-Ph.D.-granting institutions where research
              possibilities are limited.  (2) To involve students in basic, experimental
              research in microbiology.  (3) To expose students to a broad range of
              bioscience research. (4) To develop each student's critical-thinking skills. 
              (5) To develop each student's ability to record, analyze, and present
              scientific information.   Overall, the goal is to promote the students'
              interests in scientific careers and to enhance their likelihood for success. 
              
Means of achieving the goals: The student participants will be integrated
              into faculty research programs and will be expected to perform like beginning
              graduate students.  Informal faculty-student discussions plus weekly seminars
              will supplement the laboratory research.  Weekly informal lunches, two picnics
              and a banquet will facilitate social and scientific interactions.  At the end
              of each summer's program, the students will prepare oral presentations to be
              given at a Summer Program Symposium.  Each student will also prepare a written
              research report, under the guidance of the student's mentor.   
Overall
              significance: Summer research programs are very valuable settings for bright
              students to experience basic scientific research.  A significant fraction of
              the summer students do not have research opportunities at their institutions
              and might choose non-science careers due to lack of exposure to basic research.
               Of course not all students who participate in summer research programs in
              basic science choose careers in basic science, but experience shows that nearly
              all of the students to go on to post-graduate training in a graduate or
              professional school.   The graduates of summer programs who do choose to go on
              to graduate school in science have a much better idea of what to expect, and
              they have a much greater chance of success.     


