Title       : REU Site at the Blandy Experimental Farm--University of Virginia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a0097505

Award Number: 0097505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184350             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Carr dec5z@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Bowers  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9250,
Abstract    :
              The Blandy Experimental Farm, a biological field stations of the University of
              Virginia, hosts a 10-week program where undergraduates learn:  1) basic
              principles of environmental biology, 2) methods by which scientists increase
              our understanding of the natural world, and 3) essential elements of scientific
              research and how to put these in a context that is intended to educate the
              general public about research and ecology.  The goal is to teach students, no
              matter what their major field of study,  how to "do" science, give them an
              opportunity to conduct original, and largely independent field research in
              areas of faculty expertise, and to package the results in a form that can be
              used to educate the public about scientific inquiry.  The Program is
              interdisciplinary, features research on individuals, populations , communities,
               ecosystem processes, and is built around a diverse team of five scientists and
              two educators.   Individual student research focuses on topics of basic
              scientific and/or applied importance (animal behavior, population
              dynamics/interactions, landscape ecology, and biogeochemical cycles) and
              especially those topics that have high heuristic or societal value.  In keeping
              with the mission of the Blandy Experimental Farm, the program formally combines
              scientific research with environmental education.
Students progress through
              three phases: Phase I-1- week of formal lectures and "hands-on" exercises
              detailing the scientific method, hypothesis testing, experimental design,
              statistics and an introduction to basic pedagogies; Phase II-8 weeks of data
              collection, data analyses, directed study, and experimentation; and Phase
              III--1 week of data analysis, interpretation, and communication of results.
              
The program includes students from a diversity of cultural backgrounds,
              interests, and home institutions.   Students reside in a field-station setting
              and are part of a larger research community of 15-25 other students taking
              courses, graduate students working on theses, post-doctoral researchers, and
              other faculty.  Field trips, weekly seminars, and journal clubs add to the
              student experience.  Exit and follow-up interviews are used to assess the
              program each year.  



