Title       : Magnetic Reconnection in the Solar Corona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0097227

Award Number: 0097227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237116             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana Longcope dana@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will examine three-dimensional magnetic reconnection in the
              solar corona. The main effort comprises three overlapping theoretical
              investigations. First, numerical magnetohydrodynamics simulations will test the
              fundamental assumptions of the Minimum Current Corona. These simulations will
              fix adjustable parameters of the original model and point to the need for
              modifications. Second, the existing Minimum Current Coronal model will be
              modified to include helicity and helicity transport resulting from
              reconnection. This modified model will permit more accurate representations of
              observed magnetic fields and will test the hypothesis that helicity transport
              rather than flux transfer is the most energetically important aspect of
              reconnection. Finally, the details of the coronal reconnection process may be
              responsible for many aspects of coronal morphology including the occurrence of
              narrow structures called coronal loops. This possibility will be explored
              through a third investigation, a kinematic model of reconnection at
              three-dimensional current sheets. The results of this investigation will shed
              light on the range of loop diameters theoretically expected and the amount of
              excess energy that may heat these loops after their reconnection. Magnetic
              reconnection is a fundamental process occurring in the solar corona and the
              Earth's magnetosphere. Early investigations of magnetic reconnection produced
              local models set in two-dimensional geometry. While useful for demonstrating
              the basic feasibility of the process these models have done little to provide
              quantitative energetics in complex three-dimensional settings. The Minimum
              Current Corona, whose development was supported by prior NSF funding, has
              provided recent strides toward a quantitative three-dimensional model. This
              model predicts that the evolution of complex magnetic field, such as the solar
              corona, will involve intermittent flux transfer events accompanied by energy
              release. Moreover, the model quantifies the relationship between the processes
              of flux transfer and energy release. This relationship sets the level of
              energetic activity in each portion of the solar corona or the coronae of other
              stars.
