Title       : LTREB: Role of winter sociality in the evolution of facultative social behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0097027

Award Number: 0097027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janis L. Dickinson sialia@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1196,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Janis L. Dickinson     			Proposal # 0097027

Proposal Title:  The role
              of winter sociality in the evolution of facultative social behavior

This is
              a proposal to continue a long-term study of a color-banded population of
              western bluebirds whose sons exhibit remarkable behavioral plasticity in the
              form of staying with parents for winter, breeding on their own, helping at
              their parents' nest, and feeding at nests of widowed females.  The specific aim
              of this study is to determine the benefits for young males remaining on their
              parents' territory through the first winter, a behavior that is a necessary
              precondition for further interaction with parents later in life.  Mistletoe
              berries are a stable winter resource that is key to year-round territorial
              behavior in this system.  An experiment that involves removing half the
              mistletoe from winter territories will determine the impact of mistletoe
              abundance on whether sons stay, their condition, and their success at acquiring
              a mate and breeding territory of their own.  The alternative hypothesis, that
              sons benefit by staying home due to the preferential treatment they receive
              when they remain with parents, will also be tested.  In fact, both access to
              parental resources and preferential treatment by parents may simultaneously
              explain why sons remain home.   This work is novel because mistletoe is a
              uniquely manipulable food resource and its availability only during winter
              allows for a clean separation of the importance of winter food for dispersal
              and family stability in a species with year-round territories.  Although the
              results of this study will address a basic question in evolutionary behavioral
              ecology, they will also address an issue of potential importance to the decline
              of western bluebirds in California.  If mistletoe quantity proves critical to
              the tendency for young males to stay home for winter and reduction of mistletoe
              has negative impacts on the condition and survival of stay-at-home sons, then
              we will have identified a key environmental variable regulating bluebird
              populations in California.

