Title       : A Research Experience For Undergraduates (REU Site) Training Program in
               Neuroscience at SUNY-Albany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a0097343

Award Number: 0097343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Lnenicka gregL@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl A. Frye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Neuroscience is the study of the brain and behavior.  It is a rapidly advancing
              and growing field, which in the 21st century will be poised to address some of
              the most important and fundamental questions in the biomedical sciences.  With
              these advances comes the hope for the treatment of a vast array of neurological
              problems.  This award will be used to establish a ten-week summer training
              program that is designed to provide undergraduates with an opportunity to gain
              in-depth training in neuroscience through participation in research.  Students
              will learn the questions addressed by current neuroscience research,
              experimental design and techniques, research ethics, the presentation of
              scientific data, and career options in the biomedical sciences.  During the
              program, the students will gradually develop as independent researchers.  The
              program will be administered by 11 neuroscience professors whose expertise
              ranges from molecular to behavioral neuroscience.  A diverse array of students
              will be encouraged to apply and 10 promising students will be accepted into the
              program each year.  Students will immediately begin to work under the direct
              supervision of their faculty mentor on a research project that will enable the
              student to gain  practical experience in neuroscience. This will be
              supplemented by classroom instruction where faculty will present their area of
              expertise.  This laboratory and classroom instruction will be rounded out by
              weekly Friday seminars given by neuroscientists from local universities,
              colleges and industries.  These seminars will cover a variety of research
              topics and illustrate different career paths in neuroscience.  In addition,
              there will be a one-day workshop on ethics in neuroscience to educate students
              about basic ethical concepts, to familiarize them with professional standards
              of ethical conduct and to introduce them to controversies in research ethics
              and the role of science in society.  Students will interact with graduate
              students in the lab and at arranged luncheons to discuss preparation for and
              the selection of graduate schools.  At the midpoint of the summer, students
              will attend a neuroscience picnic where they will interact informally with
              local area neuroscientists.  The end of the summer program will be celebrated
              by a poster session at which students will present the results of their
              research project.  Students will also present their results the following
              spring at a regional meeting, the North East Undergraduate Research
              Organization for Neuroscience (NEURON, http://www.albany.edu/neuron).  Students
              will receive regular feedback from their faculty mentors regarding their
              progress.  In addition, student and faculty participants will be asked to
              review the program at the midpoint and end of the summer, and the following
              spring so that changes in the program can be made as necessary.  This program
              will provide a rich experience, not found in the normal undergraduate
              curriculum, for the aspiring neuroscience.  It should provide a springboard for
              those interested in pursuing a career in biomedical research.  Interested
              individuals can learn more about the program through the web site: 
              http://www.albany.edu/neuron/summer   


