Title       : REU Site: Research in Psychology - Discovering the Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a0097459

Award Number: 0097459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Campbell scampbel@panther.middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michelle R. McCauley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for an REU Site in psychology at Middlebury College in
              Vermont.  The program is designed to provide undergraduate students the
              foundation of skills and knowledge necessary to become independent in the
              conduct and evaluation of research.  The program will provide ten students with
              the opportunity to work closely with a faculty mentor for eight weeks during
              the summer.  At least half of the students will be recruited from schools other
              than Middlebury College.  Research projects will cover a wide range of
              psychological topics, such as improving children's memory, gender differences
              in spatial reasoning, the relationship of attachment style to the evaluation of
              romantic relationships, and the effect of motivation on cheating behavior.  In
              addition, interns will participate in a weekly seminar to develop their
              understanding of the research process.  Weekly seminar topics will include a
              discussion of ethical issues in psychological research, the use of statistical
              software for cleaning and describing data, and a presentation by former
              psychology students now in graduate school about their research experiences.  A
              special component of the program involves the participation of a student mentor
              who, in addition to participating as a research intern, will work closely with
              the co-PIs to unify the group of research interns, provide guidance and advice
              to interns, and help organize and facilitate workshops and social activities. 
              Because Middlebury College is a highly competitive liberal arts college with a
              strong record of mentoring undergraduates in the sciences, it is an ideal
              setting for this program.

This award contributes to the Foundation's
              continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through
              active undergraduate research experiences.
