Title       : Channelling Bio-Majors into Research Careers in Cellular-Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0097845

Award Number: 0097845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Magda H. Morales mmorale@upracd.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose E. Garcia-Arraras  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project from the University of Puerto Rico,Pio Piedras Campus aims to
              motivate and prepare talented Hispanic undergraduate students for careers in
              the Cellular Molecular Biology fields of biology.  The long-term goal is to
              increase the number of undergraduate students from underrepresented minorities
              that continue research  oriented  careers.    Ten students from small colleges
              and universities with no or little access to research in the cellular and
              molecular areas  will be selected   based on GPA, research interest as well as
              on their  motivation and potential for Graduate Studies.   Students  are housed
              at the University Residential facilities or nearby the University premises
              during their  internship.  The central  objective of this ten week summer
              program is to provide the students an intensive hand-on research  experience in
              one of the  on-going  projects of the  participating  faculty from the
              Department of Biology.   Students are exposed to a wide range of  topics that
              have as a central theme  " the use of cellular and molecular techniques to
              address a biological problem".   Each student  is assigned  a specific research
              project to be developed under the supervision of a mentor.   Projects include
              topics such as: "cellular and molecular analysis of development", "gene cloning
              and gene expression", "molecular neurobiology and neuroendocrinology",
              "hormones and neurotransmitters action",  "cellular interactions".    A series
              of complementary  activities  to develop research related skills include
              workshops and colloquia on  literature searches  and computing literacy, 
              writing and  communication in science and  bio-ethical issues and practices.  
              To  place the students in the Graduate School's track  a series of workshops on
              topics related to admission and requirements are also offered.  In addition, 
              activities such as eco-trips  and social activities are included in the program
              to fully expose and integrate the students into the scientific community.  This
              research site provides  for a cultural diversified and bilingual environment.
              
It is expected that by integration on the every day activities of  research
              laboratories  students will learn modern concepts and techniques  and most
              important  will understand the significance of modern research in all
              biological areas, thus providing  a nurturing environment that triggers their
              development as researchers. 

