Title       : A Coupled Epipelagic Meso-/Bathypelagic Particle Flux Model for the Bermuda
               Atlantic Time-Series Station/Oceanic Flux Program Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0097288

Award Number: 0097288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456711             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Glover dglover@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen H. Conte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1389,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0097288

In this project researchers at the Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution will construct a mathematical model relating the
              fixing of atmospheric carbon dioxide by primary production in the North
              Atlantic Ocean to the export of that carbon to the deeper ocean.  They will
              combine observations  of deep-water sediment traps (in operation for 21+ years)
              at the Oceanic Flux Program (OFP), euphotic zone measurements  (10+ years) at
              the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Site (BATS), and historical meso/bathypelagic
              zooplankton  data with an ecosystem-based biogeochemical model of particle flux
              from the epipelagic to meso/bathypelagic  zone. There is a remarkably strong
              covariance between the upper ocean particle flux at BATS and the deep particle
              flux measured by the OFP traps, as well as intense modification and strong
              convergence of the  composition of the particle flux with depth to a invariant
              composition with respect to the magnitude of mass  flux. Of fundamental concern
              is how changes in ocean remineralization will affect the magnitude of material
              fluxes through the water column, which is one of the  major research
              trajectories of the Synthesis and Modeling Project of the U.S. Joint Global
              Ocean Flux Study. 

The central objective of the project is to
              mechanistically connect euphotic zone processes with meso- and bathypelagic 
              zone processes by means of a prognostic model that can be used to further our
              understanding of these unparalleled time-series data and to test hypotheses
              constrained by a battery of in situ data. To do this, the PIs will derive a
              meso/bathypelagic ecosystem structure and use it to model the flux of
              biogeochemically  active constituents (carbon, nitrogen and silica). The
              meso/bathypelagic portion of the model would be driven by a well-established
              epipelagic model coupling a moderately complex, yet robust, ecosystem model
              with a state-of-the-art physical upper-ocean mixing model. The choice of driver
              derives from the underlying  hypothesis that the meso/bathypelagic activity
              inferred from the sediment trap data is a response to time-varying responses of
              the upper ocean ecosystem to events of meteorological scale.


 

