Title       : REU Site: Summer Research Program in Lifespan Developmental Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0097491

Award Number: 0097491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon Mutter Sharon.Mutter@wku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Bilotta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for an REU Site in psychology at Western Kentucky
              University.  The Site is an 8-week summer research program for 12 undergraduate
              psychology students.  Each student will develop a research project in
              collaboration with one of six faculty mentors who has an active research
              program in an area of  Lifespan Developmental Psychology.  Across the mentors,
              developmental levels from prenatal to old age and developmental issues in
              neuroscience, perception and attention, memory and judgment, and emotion and
              social cognition are represented.  All of the faculty mentors are
              professionally active and all have a strong record of committment to
              collaborative research with undergraduates.  In addition to working on their
              research projects, REU students will attend workshops and special topics
              seminars that are designed to help them gain the technical knowledge and skills
              they need to successfully complete their projects (e.g., writing research
              reports, conducting basic statistical analyses; giving poster and oral
              presentations; ethical issues in the conduct of psychological research;
              planning for graduate study in psychology).  Students will also have numerous
              opportunities to interact with each other, with current graduate students in
              psychology, and with each of the faculty mentors.  These activities will ensure
              that students have a rich and meaningful research experience and that they gain
              knowledge of the variety of interesting problems that can be explored within a
              developmental framework.

This award contributes to the Foundation's
              continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through
              active undergraduate research experiences.
