Title       : The Pennsylvania State University REU Site Program: Biology and Chemistry of
               Nutritional Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0097697

Award Number: 0097697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143226             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill I. Patterson jxp54@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
         The Graduate Program in Nutrition at The Pennsylvania State
              
University is pleased to continue its offering of a summer program,
              
"Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program:  Biology and
              
Chemistry of Nutritional Processes."  The intended impact is to improve the
              
interest level and qualifications of participants to apply to and enroll in
              
post-graduate education, especially in preparation for careers in science
              
research and/or college teaching.

         This experiential learning
              program builds on the commitment and 
capabilities of fifteen faculty members.
               Research areas focus on nutrient 
metabolism related to neurological
              development, lipoprotein metabolism, 
antioxidant defense functions, skeletal
              development, endocrinology, 
immunology, inflammatory response, behavioral
              neurobiology, and food 
science.  The 10-week summer experience will provide
              10 students: (a) 
knowledge of the varied approaches, techniques, and critical
              thinking 
skills used in research; (b) excitement of hands-on scientific
              inquiry; (c) 
practice to improve communication skills; and (d) guidance in
              graduate 
programs and career planning.  Seven students will be recruited from
              a 
national applicant pool composed of minority students or students from
              
institutions with limited research activities; three students will come
              
from PSU.  Penn State will financially support 3 students, assist in
              
purchasing supplies needed for the student projects, as well as provide the
              
resources and mentoring available at a top research institution.

        
              Within the team environment of the faculty mentor and the graduate 
student or
              other staff person, each undergraduate student will design a 
research project
              that can be successfully completed within the summer 
timeline.  Students will
              attend seminars by faculty, as well as go to 
workshops to improve scientific
              communication skills.  Social events will 
complement the scientific community
              developed within the faculty members' 
laboratories.  Finally, the summer will
              culminate in a student research 
poster session, similar to that of a national
              science meeting.

