Title       : Efficient Computation in Finite Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0097995

Award Number: 0097995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Akos Seress akos@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is in the area of efficient manipulation of finite groups
              and estimation of their parameters. Potential application areas include
              computational group theory, graph isomorphism testing (of relevance to chemical
              documentation), efficient interconnection networks based on groups, and
              group-based cryptography.

Our work belongs to the areas of the Theory of
              Computing, Group Theory, Symbolic Algebra, and Combinatorics. Building on our
              previous results in the complexity theory of group algorithms, we propose to
              pursue several directions of research.

The main focus is the design and
              analysis of efficient algorithms for high degree per-mutation groups and for
              large dimensional matrix groups. We are looking for algorithms which satisfy
              both the requirements of fast asymptotic running time and good practical
              performance. In the permutation group setting, our nearly linear time
              algorithms achieved this goal for a quite broad class of algorithmic tasks; now
              we would like to extend this class of algorithms. We implemented most of our
              algorithms in the GAP programming language and they are available for the
              public as part of the standard library package of GAP. These algorithms
              represent the long-awaited marriage of theoretical and practical approaches to
              computational permutation group theory. We intend to continue the
              implementation effort.

Our major goal is the first polynomial-time algorithm
              for the basic manipulation of arbitrary matrix groups. In matrix groups defined
              over a field of characteristic p, we would like to give a polynomial-time
              algorithm computing the order and a composition series, provided that we can
              compute discrete logarithms in the fields GF(pe ). Our recent algorithms for
              the constructive recognition of certain classes of finite simple groups are a
              major ingredient in this plan.

Finally, we plan to investigate some "pure"
              algebraic and combinatorial problems, which are motivated by our algorithmic
              investigations or became more accessible through the methodological advances
              achieved in connection with our algorithmic results. In particular, we are
              interested in base size problems for permutation groups, problems concerning
              the action of groups on the power set of the permutation domain, and problems
              related to Cayley graphs: the diameter of Cayley graphs and the investigation
              of non-Cayley graphs with vertex-transitive automorphism group. Small bases are
              important for fast implementations and for improving the running time estimates
              of algorithms. Estimates of diameters of Cayley graphs are closely related to
              the expansion rate and through this to a host of basic questions of the Theory
              of Computing and Probability Theory.


