Title       : REU--Interfaces in Bioscience: Preparing Students for the New Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0097670

Award Number: 0097670
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60310              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy Ruscetti   (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Freyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DOE-Albuquerque Operatns
	      
	      Albuquerque, NM  87115    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This REU site program is designed to prepare undergraduate students for the
              revolution in biological research. The emphasis of this program is placed on
              the interfaces between discovery science and biocomputing with
              hypothesis-driven science. The overall objectives of this program are to
              provide students with rich and rewarding research experiences and to encourage
              participating undergraduates to remain in science and technology.  This program
              will recruit 10 students based on GPA, interest statement, and a letter of
              reference. Special emphasis is placed on students from institutions with little
              or no research facilities and students from typically underrepresented
              demographic populations.  Each student will be paired with a mentor and a
              specific project based on student interests and background for the 12 week
              summer internship.  The design of the individual projects and the one-on-one
              interactions between the students and their mentors will foster the students'
              independence and confidence.  Students will be expected to participate in
              weekly group meetings and an end of summer student symposium. Program alumni
              will receive yearly e-newsletters and continued interaction between mentors and
              former participants will be strongly encouraged. 
