Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences in Physics for Women and Minorities at the
               University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0097252

Award Number: 0097252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Wood chunnaic@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Physics Department at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) will
              establish a new REU site program for undergraduate physics majors. Ten students
              will be recruited each year, eight from outside institutions and two from
              within UWM. Priority will be given to women and minorities.  A full-time
              educator within the Department, who has direct experience of minority
              education, will be in charge of pre-program publicity and recruitment, and,
              later, the day to day running and administration of the program. Applicants
              will choose from a broad selection of experimental and theoretical projects
              including: optical spectroscopy and laser physics; LEED; infrared spectroscopy;
              molecular beam epitaxy and vacuum deposition; X-ray scattering and other X-ray
              spectroscopic techniques; UV and X-ray photoemission: electron microscopy;
              acoustic propagation in high Tc superconductors; computational techniques for
              the extraction of the geometrical and electronic structure of materials from
              electron and X-ray probes; and the analysis of data from the Laser
              Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO).   The 10 week program
              will start in early June.  As well as the formal research activities, the
              program will include daily (weekdays) one-hour enrichment classes, in which the
              REU students will be taken through core physics at an appropriate level.  There
              will also be a weekly colloquium. The Physics Department intends to provide an
              intellectually enriching atmosphere for REU students, and the Department is
              especially interested in attracting more women and minority students to the UWM
              graduate program.
