Title       : US-Tanzania Dissertation Enhancement: An Examination of the Role of Tourism in
               Pastoral People's Livelihoods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a0097074

Award Number: 0097074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5400               (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Terrence McCabe mccabe@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0097074
McCabe & DeLuca

This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US
              graduate student, Ms. Laura DeLuca, working under the guidance of Professor
              Terrence McCabe, in the Department of Anthropology at the University of
              Colorado Boulder, to conduct a comparative research study on livelihood
              diversification, especially the role of tourism work, among Maasai groups of
              northern Tanzania.  

In the past, raising livestock was the primary
              subsistence strategy of pastoralists living in the arid lands of Subsaharan
              Africa.  But the past few decades have seen large tracts of rangeland
              transformed into cultivated land, and many African countries are now faced with
              the often competing desires to protect their wildlife while also affording
              their populations a sustainable livelihood.  Tanzania has placed approximately
              one-fourth of its land in protected wildlife conservation areas, and tourism is
              now being promoted as a way that its indigenous peoples can economically
              benefit from these conservation programs.  While community conservationists may
              argue that tourism can provide economic benefits for the local community and
              may be more compatible with wildlife conservation than other livelihoods,
              pastoralists may perceive tourism as a threat to their culture, environment,
              and local pastoral economy. Ms. DeLuca hypothesizes that pastoralists: 1)
              engage in tourism only when their other livelihood options have been
              compromised; and 2) will only view their livelihoods, including tourism, as
              sustainable if they allow for maintenance of a pastoral means of production. 
              Using a political ecology approach, Ms. DeLuca will conduct an ethnographic
              study to investigate how local livelihood choices intersect with larger
              geopolitical and economic spheres.  The study will also consider such variables
              as gender, social status, education, and heritage.  Ms. DeLuca will conduct
              archival work on tourism and sustainable development policies and programs at
              the Tanzanian National Archives.  Ethnographic information will be collected
              through surveys (such as free listing), participant observations, interviews,
              and focus groups. Dr. Sosovele, with the Institute of Resource Assessment at
              the University of Dar es Salaam, will provide guidance on this project to Ms.
              DeLuca. 

The results are expected to increase current knowledge about
              sustainable livelihoods, especially in Africa, and will be of value to
              anthropologists, resource managers, and policy makers.  It is also expected to
              advance anthropological theory by identifying the connections between global
              policies and local livelihood options.  This project will also support an
              international research experience very early in the career of an outstanding
              graduate student. The project also includes a Tanzanian graduate student who
              will serve as a research assistant.


