Title       : Formal Methods for Extensible Object-Oriented Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a0097907

Award Number: 0097907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary T. Leavens leavens@cs.iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don Pigozzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project advances the theory and practice of extensible object-oriented (OO)
              software by investigating how to support careful design, specification, and
              reasoning. Enhancing theoretical understanding for specifying and verifying
              extensible OO software forms the first subproblem.  The project investigates
              several avenues: the soundness of proof techniques for behavioral subtyping
              among abstract data types with mutable objects, whose operations may have
              nondeterministic specifications; the extent to which the use of multimethods
              affects one's ability to prove behavioral subtyping; and the soundness of a
              specification and verification technique that allows the implementation of a
              subclass from a superclass's specification, without seeing the superclass's
              code.

The second subproblem comprises enhancing Java and a specification
              language for Java to better support extensible OO frameworks and libraries. The
              project implements and refines MultiJava, an extension to Java that supports
              both open classes and multimethods.  The former allow one to extend existing
              classes with new methods, while the latter allow one to easily extend both a
              set of data types and the methods that work on them.  The project also extends
              and refines JML, which is a behavioral interface specification language
              tailored to Java.


