Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates in the Geosciences (REU Site)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0097847

Award Number: 0097847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66297              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Christensen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Layer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Christensen

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site grant will
              support a minimum of eight undergraduates in Solid Earth Geophysics at the
              Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska Fairbanks. The program will give
              undergraduates majoring in geology, geophysics, physics, and closely related
              disciplines, experience in the types of research conducted at the Geophysical
              Institute. The program objective is to acquaint undergraduates with the
              exciting research opportunities in the various fields of geophysics
              concentrating on seismology, volcanology, geochronology, geochemistry,
              paleomagnetics, geodesy, tectonics, glaciers and sea ice, and remote sensing,
              and encouraging the undergraduates to go on to graduate school in these or
              other scientific areas. Women and minorities will be particularly encouraged to
              apply. In this program, students are assigned to work with individual principal
              investigators on projects assigned by the investigators. In their contacts with
              graduate students and by attending seminars and thesis defenses, the students
              will obtain an accurate perspective on graduate student life. It is our hope
              that this program will give undergraduate students, many from small liberal
              arts colleges, the opportunity for in-depth exposure to the fields of solid
              earth sciences before they must make decisions regarding graduate school. In
              addition there will be an organized series of weekly lectures and field trips
              to expose interns to other fields of research beyond the scope of their own
              project. 

