Title       : WORM-WEB: Georeferencing Computerized Data and Linking Databases in the Manter
               Laboratory of Parasitology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2002       
File        : a0097019

Award Number: 0097019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Gardner slg@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron Hosier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              WormWeb:  Geo-referencing computerized data and linking databases in the Manter
              Laboratory of Parasitology

The University of Nebraska State Museum Manter
              Laboratory of Parasitology (HWML) proposes to increase direct user access to
              the HWML collections via standard internet protocols by implementing WormWeb.
              The two primary goals for this activity include (1)  Associating each parasite
              specimen in the HWML database "PARASITE" with  geographic locality data using a
              relational database structure and first level normalization; (2) Entering the
              Bolivian Mammal Parasite Collection data in the  HWML into "PARASITE" --
              linking parasite data with the mammal source data using a  relational database
              structure and first level normalization. The HWML is one of  the most
              significant centers of Systematic Parasitology in the  world. 

Databases
              connected via the internet enable researchers to access and analyze data in
              ways never before possible, producing important new results and insights into
              causes of biological diversity, rates of speciation, and general evolutionary
              and ecological processes. The database in the Manter Laboratory of Parasitology
              (HWML) will be connected to other WWW  resources via WormWeb. Making HWML data
              available on the WWW will give researchers worldwide the ability  to obtain
              detailed information on parasites and their hosts. The establishment of such
              internet-based resources is  essential for the continued growth of biodiversity
              research. The addition of georeferenced data will vastly increase the
              usefulness of the database. Researchers will be able to quickly and efficiently
              determine where particular specimens and species of parasites were collected.
              Trends in species richness or abundance through time and space can be
              investigated. 

