Title       : Interfacial Phenomena Near Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0097119

Award Number: 0097119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce M. Law bmlaw@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate a variety of surface processes that occur when
              either a bulk or a surface phase transition takes place.  One topic consists of
              a polarization atomic force microscopy and microscopic interferometry study of
              the shape and line tension of droplets on surfaces, from scales of nanometers
              through to many microns, in the vicinity of a wetting transition.  These data
              should reveal the influence of surface interactions, surface heterogeneities,
              and temperature on such droplets.  A second topic is an atomic force microscopy
              and spectroscopic ellipsometry study of critical finite-size effects within
              thin critical films to ascertain the critical fluctuation force and composition
              profile within such films.  The final topic is an ellipsometry study of
              dipole-induced surface orientational order at the liquid-vapor surface of
              critical binary liquid mixtures to examine how dipole interactions influence
              the composition profile and orientational order at such interfaces. Line
              tension effects of droplets on surfaces and the universal aspects of surface
              critical phenomena, in both finite and semi-infinite systems, are poorly
              understood. Droplet line tensions strongly influence the nucleation and
              coalescence of droplets on surfaces, while, surface critical phenomena are
              particularly important in many supercritical extraction processes used in the
              food, pharmaceutical, and petroleum industries. An improved understanding of
              surface phenomena will lead to better control of surface related processes and
              ultimately to the ability to design surfaces possessing desirable
              characteristics on the molecular length scale. These projects will provide
              graduate students with excellent training using innovative surface techniques
              on topics at the forefronts of knowledge. This research will prepare these
              students well for academic, industrial, or government careers.
%%%
This work
              seeks a quantitative understanding of the physical origins of a number of
              liquid surface processes in the vicinity of either a surface or a bulk phase
              transition point where, respectively, either the surface or the bulk undergo a
              structural change as a function of temperature.  Innovative optical and force
              microscopy techniques will be used to study the orientation of molecules at
              surfaces, the topography and associated energies of droplets on surfaces, and
              the structure of liquid mixtures within thin films.  The data should reveal and
              how these phenomena are influence by surface interactions, surface
              heterogeneities, and bulk and surface phase transitions.  An understanding of
              droplet topography and how it is influenced by surface interactions and the
              presence of a surface phase transition is important in governing (i) the
              uniformity of surface coatings used in many manufacturing processes and (ii)
              the wetting or non-wetting properties of fabrics and fibers. Similarly, surface
              phenomena in the vicinity of a bulk phase transition plays an extremely
              important role in many supercritical extraction processes used in the food,
              pharmaceutical, and petroleum industries. An improved understanding of these
              processes will lead to a better control of surface related processes and
              ultimately to the ability to design surfaces possessing desirable
              characteristics on the molecular length scale. Students involved in this
              research will gain a comprehensive training in physics and material science
              which will prepare them well for careers in the academic, industrial, or
              government arena.

