Title       : Transport and Tunneling Studies of Electronic Materials at Quantum Critical
               Points
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0097242

Award Number: 0097242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Dynes rdynes@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will fund a project with a goal of
              understanding the nature of electrical transport in systems of one, two or
              three dimensions in the vicinity of the metal-insulator transition (MIT).  It
              is believed that in this regime, the behavior reflects a zero temperature
              quantum critical point that separates the metal from the insulator.  On both
              sides of this point, the behavior is believed to be reflective of quantum
              mechanical ground states but the extent to which this is understood is minimal.
               In part this is because the traditional description of a metal in terms of a
              Landau liquid is simply inadequate and the properties are dominated by coulomb
              correlations.  This investigator's laboratory has developed techniques to
              continuously "tune" through the MIT in all dimensions using a variety of
              methods...magnetic field tuning, continuous growth of films at low temperature,
              and adjustment of cross-sectional area of wires.  Transport, electron tunneling
              and Hall effect measurements down to a temperature of 20 mK and up to magnetic
              fields of 20T will be used to build an experimental description of the
              transition and to test theoretical models.  Graduate students will receive
              training both in condensed matter physics and technology.  The physics issues
              are current and address the unknown aspects of electrical transport in reduced
              dimensions.  The technology in materials and processing is state-of-the-art and
              will prepare them for a future career with a wide variety of options.

This
              individual investigator award will fund work that addresses one of the most
              fundamental aspects of the electronic properties of materials...the metal
              insulator transition.  This transition is at the apex of the differences
              between metals and insulators.  Furthermore, as we will study the electrical
              transport in one, two and three dimensions, it not only addresses the
              dimensionality of this transition,  the physics and materials issues that we
              learn will have practical importance.  As wiring on integrated circuits and
              electronic memory gets smaller, it approaches these dimensionality limits. 
              Graduate students will receive training both in condensed matter physics and
              technology.  The physics issues are current and address the unknown aspects of
              electrical transport in reduced dimensions.  The technology in materials and
              processing is state-of-the-art and will prepare them for a future career with a
              wide variety of options.


