Title       : River Basins Research Initiative NSF-REU Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0097306

Award Number: 0097306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Sargent ken.sargent@furman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Brannon Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Furman University
	      3300 Poinsett Highway
	      Greenville, SC  29613    864/294-3468

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Sargent

The River Basins Research initiative (RBR) NSF-REU Site will
              incorporate 12 undergraduate science majors into an extensive interdisciplinary
              research program that is focused on the systematic characterization of river
              systems throughout the upstate of South Carolina.   At present the RBR effort
              encompasses the Earth and Environmental Sciences, Biology, and Chemistry
              Departments in the sciences, and the Sociology, Economics, and Political
              Science Departments in the social sciences. The faculty involved in this
              program have developed a model system for interdisciplinary integration.  The
              result is a  symbiotic interaction between faculty and students from different
              disciplinary areas. The long-term goal of this research program is to quantify
              the extent of human impact on river systems in the Lower Broad River Basin in
              the upstate region of South Carolina. The Greenville-Spartanburg metropolitan
              area, one of the fastest growing metropolitan areas in the country, is located
              in the headwater region of the Lower Broad River Basin.  As a result, water
              quality and water resource issues are of increasing importance to the local
              community as well as the communities in the downstream portion of the Broad
              River/Santee River Basin.  Water quality data collected include chemical data
              (seven cations including trace metals, seven anions, and alkalinity),
              conductivity, dissolved oxygen, temperature, fish and aquatic insect abundance
              and diversity, bacterial abundances, and discharge. 

