Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Electroceramic Thin Films for Microelectronic
               Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0097018

Award Number: 0097018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ram S. Katiyar rkatiyar@upracd.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5919,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0097018
Katiyar

Description:  This award supports a US-India cooperative
              research project on Electroceramic Thin Films for Microelectronic Devices.  The
              collaborators are Ram S. Katiyar of the University of Puerto Rico (UPR) and
              Dinesh C. Agrawal of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur (IITK).  They
              will study fundamental structure-property relationships in electroceramic thin
              films, particularly novel ferroelectric (FE) and microwave dielectric
              materials.  They will use various techniques to probe their micro- to
              nano-scale composition, structure and characterization.  The aim is to enhance
              scientific knowledge of these novel materials and to consider their
              applications in memory and microwave devices. 
Scope:  This award will
              continue a collaboration between Katiyar and Agrawal and a partnership between
              the UPR and the IITK that was initiated by the Division of International
              Programs with support from the United States India Fund.  The IITK is one of
              the premier research institutions in India with excellent infrastructure for
              high quality research and training of graduate/undergraduate students.  UPR
              research activities have risen sharply and Katiyar has equipped an excellent
              facility there for research in electroceramic thin film materials.  He is a
              first-rate researcher and has mentored a large number of students, many of whom
              have made outstanding contributions in their respective fields.  This award is
              jointly supported by the Division of International Programs and the Division of
              Materials Research.     

