Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Statistical
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9623220

Award Number: 9623220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Kiessling miki@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623220  Kiessling    A basic strategy in statistical mechanics   of
              nonhomogeneous systems is to construct an asymptotically exact   nonlinear PDE
              problem with few variables which approximates the   original linear problem
              with its overwhelmingly many variables. In   the first part of the proposal we
              deal with two unsolved problems of   this kind, namely the microcanonical
              ensemble for: point vortices;  for classical gravitating hard particles. In
              both systems one has   encountered technical problems due to nonconcavity of
              the entropy.  We propose a new strategy that circumvents these problems by  
              reinstalling concavity in a higher-dimensional parameter space  from which the
              original problem obtains by some kind of projection.  Progress in this area
              should significantly advance our understanding   of nonlinear PDE without
              convexity and their relation to statistical  mechanics. In the second part of
              the proposed project we deal directly  with properties of systems of nonlinear
              PDEs that are firmly established  in their relationship to statistical
              mechanics. Our main interest is in   the symmetry properties of solutions. We
              recently constructed sharp   isoperimetric estimates for two-dimensional
              elliptic PDE systems and   compared them to a priori identities of
              Rellich-Pohozaev type, thus   firstly obtaining conditions under which
              solutions are radially symmetric   without requiring uniqueness or minimizing
              properties. We want to   continue this research and optimize the conditions for
              two-dimensional   elliptic systems such as Ginzburg-Landau and Bennett
              equations, extend   the technique to higher dimensions and apply it to
              Thomas-Fermi models,  finally extend the technique to parabolic transport
              equations such as  Landau-Boltzmann equations, which in particular should yield
              a global   existence result in time.   %%%  Long-lived vortices are an
              ubiquitous feature   in turbulent flows, with hurricanes in the Earth's weather
              system and   the great red spot in Jupiter's atmosphere being two promin ent
              examples.   Vortices also occur as structural defects in superfluids,
              superconductors.   Beside being of scientific interest, it is of pressing
              technical and   meteorological importance to understand precisely the
              conditions under   which such vortices do form. An integer part of the proposed
              project aims   at making a significant contribution to this endeavor. The
              mathematical   framework consists of certain systems of nonlinear partial
              differential   equations which are deeply rooted in the scientific discipline
              of statis-  tical mechanics. The techniques which shall be developed in the
              first part   of the proposed project will allow us to extract the relevant
              differential   equations from statistical mechanics under far more realistic
              conditions   than  treated so far. In the second part, we shall further develop
              a  recent technique of us that yields qualitative and quantitative statements 
              about the symmetry properties of the solutions to the nonlinear equations.  In
              favorable cases this reduces the complexity of certain equations  
              significantly. Beside vortices, we aim at applying our techniques to the 
              problem of controlling more realistic plasma structures than previously 
              treated, of the following categories: charged particle beams, which are   of
              preeminent interest in various branches of technology development;   stellar
              structures, which are of basic astrophysical interest. Finally,   we see the
              possibility of an extension of our techniques to a dynamical   set of transport
              equations for plasmas which have significance, in  particular, for peaceful
              thermonuclear energy research.   ***
