Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Two-Phase Viscous Drop Spreading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9623092

Award Number: 9623092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Braun braun@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9623092  Braun    Motivated by the complex transport associated with spreading
              process such   as the spreading of solder droplets and coating processes, a
              research   program is proposed on the spreading of a droplet that is covered by
              a film.    Often in soldering and other processes involving spreading, the drop
              may   become very thin which indicates the presence of multiple length scales. 
                Based on the author's previous research, the first approach proposed is a  
              multi-scale asymptotic analysis (lubrication theory) to derive nonlinear  
              diffusion equations for the free surfaces; those nonlinear diffusion equations 
               will be  solved using a spectrally-accurate implementation of the method of  
              lines.  All quantities of interest may be computed in this approximation   once
              the required free surfaces have been found. A second approach is also  
              proposed, via boundary integral equations, under the approximation of   Stokes
              flow in the drop and film.  This approach relaxes the  requirement   that the
              drop and film be thin, but still requires that the flow be slow.  We   propose
              making a direct comparison between the two approaches in order to   evaluate
              the utility of each in various situations.  The work proposed will   develop
              models only for the fluid dynamics, and inclusion of reactive   effects will be
              proposed in a subsequent project.    Important processes in manufacturing
              involve the spreading of a fluid   droplet in the presence of another fluid;
              one example is soldering, where, in   many instances, the presence of a thin
              layer of a second fluid, the flux, is   required for the process to work at
              all.  Because the use of lead-based solder   is no longer allowed,
              understanding of this droplet spreading process for   other kind of solder
              materials would be very helpful in understanding   alternative solder
              materials. The work proposed in the project is developing   some preliminary
              models necessary for the development of a complete   model for a spreading
              solder drop. The proposed program  is to develop   theory for the spreading of
              a droplet on a flat plate that is covered by a thin   film of a different
              fluid. Computer codes will be developed that predict how   fast the drop
              spreads, and the shapes of the drop and the film that covers the   drop. In
              summary, sophisticated mathematical techniques will be applied to   a problem
              of technological importance.  The computer codes resulting from   this project
              are expected to be applicable to related wetting problems in   different
              technological areas (e.g. coating processes) subsequent to the   completion of
              this project.
