Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9623079

Award Number: 9623079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sagun Chanillo chanillo@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Chanillo  9623079    The project consists of ten problems, all
              proposed in the field of   Partial Differential Equations(PDE). Eight of the
              proposed problems pertain   to questions arising in non-linear PDE, and two
              problems are proposed  to study over-determined systems of linear partial
              differential   equations. The non-linear problems all arise from various
              situations   that arise in Physics and Geometry. There is a stronger focus in
              the   proposal on systems of PDE than on single equations. The problems  are
              selected in part because solutions to them and understanding them   require
              some understanding of classical Harmonic analysis.     Very often the behaviour
              of a physical system is described by partial   differential equations. Thus it
              is important to know how to solve   these equations. Very often there are many,
              many solution families   and thus one may really not know all the possible
              solutions.  However if by some technique we can cut down the list  of solutions
              and show that only solutions of a certain category are the   the only
              possibility then the task of determining all solutions become   easier. For
              example if an equation exhibits symmetry one could try to   show that all
              solutions of the equation will have this symmetry manifest.  This will
              automatically rule out large classes of objects and focus our study   on a
              small class which will then tell us everything about the equation.   Recently
              there has been a great surge of interest in solutions of a  type of equation
              called the Ginzburg-Landau equation (GL equations),   named after  the Russian
              physicists, Ginzburg and Landau who first   used them in theories of
              superconductivity in the 1950's.   The GL equations also appear in string
              theories. A major part of   our project is devoted to classiying all the
              solutions of the   Ginzburg-Landau equation.
