Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Smooth Representations of Reductive P-Adic Groups via
               G-Types
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9623288

Award Number: 9623288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49833              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Morris LMorris@black.clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Morris  9623288  Admissible representations of reductive groups over local
              fields  have been the object of study for some time by virtue of the  Langlands
              program relating them to local and global number  theory.  Among these
              representations, the supercuspidal  representations have always played a
              distinguished role as  building blocks.  One way to construct them is via
              induction from  compact open subgroups, and this has led to the philosophy of 
              studying admissible representations of a reductive group by  restricting them
              to appropriate compact open subgroups.  Bushnell  and Kutzko have applied this
              philosophy with great success to the  general or special linear groups; this
              has led them to formalize  it via the very general notion of S-types.  This
              approach has  also been successful in studying the smooth representations of an
               arbitrary reductive group that contains a fixed vector under the  prounipotent
              radical of some parahoric subgroup (the "level zero  case").  Finally,
              preliminary results suggest this approach can  work more generally for other
              groups.  The PI will continue his  investigations in this area, and in
              particular, he will consider  the following topics: (a) The study of S-types
              for classical  groups; in particular the classification of the admissible dual 
              of classical groups, (b) Applications of (a) to the study of the  reducibility
              of generalized principal series of classical groups  and related arithmetic,
              (c) Further study of problems arising  from the level zero case; in particular,
              the classification of  the level zero part of the  admissible dual in terms of
              Langlands  parameters and applications of level zero S-types to the study of 
              reducibility and R-groups.  The Langlands program is part of  number theory. 
              Number theory is the study of the properties of  the whole numbers and is the
              oldest branch of mathematics.  From  the beginning problems in number theory
              have furnished a driving  force in creating new mathematics in other diverse
              parts of the  discipline.  Th e Langland's program is a general philosophy that
               connects number theory with calculus; it embodies the modern  approach to the
              study of whole numbers.  Modern number theory is  very technical and deep, but
              it has had astonishing applications  in areas like theoretical computer science
              and coding theory.
