Title       : Study of Interaction Between High Tc and Conventional Superconductors by
               Tunneling Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9623842

Award Number: 9623842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwok-Wai Ng kwng@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9623842  Ng  
               High  temperature superconductors (HTS) have many properties that  differ 
              from conventional superconductors, the anisotropic energy  gap  notable  among
              them.  Josephson tunneling provides  a  phase  sensitive   technique  to 
              examine  the  energy  gap   and   some  measurements  in  HTS  have suggested a
               zero  energy  gap  along  particular  directions indicating a different,
              d-wave,  electron-  electron   pairing  mechanism  compared  to  s-wave 
              pairing   in  conventional superconductors.  This research will investigate the
               transport properties across a HTS and conventional superconductor  interface. 
               Three  experiments are  planned:  to  determine  how  electrons  are reflected
              by the interface; to study how electrons  or  electron pairs behave after
              tunneling through the  interface;  and  to  investigate induced
              superconductivity in a normal  metal  film  in  close proximity to the HTS. 
              Student and post  doctoral  fellow  education  will  be supported and  will 
              provide  trained  professionals  in   the superconductor and related 
              semiconductor  industries.  %%%  High temperature superconductors (HTS) have
              important fundamental  properties   that   differ  from  conventional  low  
              temperature  superconductors.   Current  transport  that   is   uniform   with 
              direction  in conventional superconductors varies with  direction  in 
              crystalline HTS in response to a fundamental anisotropy.  The  goal  of  this 
              research is to investigate the  origin  of  these  anisotropic  properties.  
              In  particular,  this  research   will  improve  our  understanding of how
              conventional  low  temperature  superconductors and normal metals can be
              connected to the HTS and  how  current  will  be transported across that 
              interface.   Such  knowledge  is  important for the introduction and
              improvement  of  superconducting  devices  in the electronics, 
              telecommunication,  and  medical  diagnostic industries.  Professional edu
              cation  and  training  will  be  provided for students  and  a  post  doctoral 
              fellow.  ***
