Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Mechanics of Classical and Quantum Lattice
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1998  
File        : a9623509

Award Number: 9623509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95922              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Kennedy tgk@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Kennedy  9623509    Three types of lattice systems will be studied -
              quantum spin systems, weakly self-avoiding walks and real space renormalization
              group transformations for classical spin systems. The primary quantum spin
              system that we will study is the Heisenberg antiferromagnet on a ladder (2
              sites wide, infinitely many sites long). This particular model contains several
              interesting quantum spin models as limiting cases and should help us understand
              the relationship between the variety of exotic phases that occur in these
              models. Weakly self-avoiding walks are nearest neighbor walks on the lattice
              with the probability of a walk reduced according to the number of self
              intersections it contains. The goal here is to develop real space
              renormalization group transformations for the usual model and for a model in
              which the energy penalty for a self intersection decays as the length of the
              loop formed by the intersection raised to a power. This latter model has
              interesting behavior even in one dimension. For classical lattice spin systems
              like the Ising model, we   will continue our study of real space
              renormalization group transformations like majority rule. When this
              transformation is applied to the one dimensional Ising model with a power law
              interaction, there is a nice simplication when the power is close to one. This
              simplification should be the start of a rigorous definition of the
              transformation. We will also work on establishing the existence of the
              transformation in various two dimensional models.    This project is devoted to
              the mathematical study of several systems that originate in physics - quantum
              spin systems, self avoiding walks and classical spin systems. Quantum and
              classical spin systems are models for the interactions of the spins of
              electrons in crystals. These systems contain a huge number of spins, but
              typically each spin only interacts with nearby spins. Nonetheless these
              microscopic local interactions can   produce macroscopic effects, e.g.,
              magnetism and super conductivity. Self avoiding walks are models for very long
              polymers. Again, there are a large number of basic units, but the interaction
              is local - different sections of the polymer cannot occupy the same location.
              This local interaction affects how the size of the polymer grows as the number
              of basic   units making up the polymer increases. A common motivation for
              studying all of these models is to understand how simple local interactions in
              a mathematical model with a very large number of degrees of freedom produce
              global effects. One of the most remarkable discoveries in physics is that
              certain properties of these global effects do not depend on the details of the
              microscopic interactions. There are several quantifiable properties of   the
              macroscopic behavior know as critical exponents which are believed to be
              exactly the same for a wide variety of microscopic interactions. One of the
              goals of this project is to further our mathematical understanding of this
              "universality."
