Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Dynamics of Superconducting Vortices and Monopoles in
               Gauge Theories"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9623463

Award Number: 9623463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Stuart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623463  Stuart    The aim of  this research project is to understand the
              behavior of    superconducting  vortices in the equations of time-dependent 
              superconductivity (Ginzburg-Landau theory). Also the role of  particle-like
              objects in the Yang-Mills Higgs equations and other systems    will be studied.
              These equations are essentially systems of parabolic  and hyperbolic type 
              respectively. One of the aims of the work is to   understand how the dynamical
              properties of the ``particles''  are  reflected in the analytical properties of
              the equations. This is    interesting since the particles represent a genuinely
              nonlinear  effect. The particle-like objects are solutions which are
              independent  of time and are characterized by a  topological winding number. 
              Reduced descriptions of the dynamics of these ``particles''    in terms of
              finite dimensional systems  have been obtained together  with rigorous bounds 
              on the validity of the approximations. These  allow an understanding of the
              forces between the ``particles'' and  also their scattering properties.  This
              in turn leads to an    understanding of the original equations, in particular
              to conjectures  and theorems about the large time behavior of the solutions. In
              turn  it is to be hoped that a study of the large  time behavior of these 
              equations may be a useful tool in analyzing the static particle-like  solutions
              themselves.   %%%    In mathematical descriptions of the physical world there
              is a division  between ``fields'' and ``particles''. The former are continuous
              media  in which information propagates in a  wave-like fashion, while the 
              latter are discrete objects. However certain equations which give a  ``field''
              description of some physical situation have solutions which  are themselves
              ``particle-like''. This provides a bridge between the  two types of
              description. A real world situation in which this occurs  is superconductivity:
              vortices appear in superconductors as  particle-like objects within a continuum
              description. They are very   important in technological applications of
              superconductors because the  vortices produce a resistance to passage of
              current through the  material and hence reduce the efficacy of the material in
              modern  technology. It is therefore extremely important to be able to   
              understand the interactions of vortices with each other and with the  rest of
              the material in order to fully realize the great technological  potential of
              superconducting materials in  high speed computer design,  power transmission, 
              modern rail systems and other areas.  ***
