Title       : Career: Research Plan: Simulation of Surface Waterflow and Transport in a
               Parallel Computing Environment Teaching Plan: Engineering Futures and
               Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a9623592

Award Number: 9623592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Kolar kolar@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate scalable parallel algorithms for the solution of
              the hydrodynamic flow and transport equations.  The algorithms studies will be
              implemented on a variety of platforms, including clusters of workstations and
              massively parallel systems.  The mathematical model will be based on the
              generalized wave continuity equation for surface elevation, the
              non-conservative form of the momentum equations for the velocity field, and the
              advection-diffusion equation for transport. Alternative numerical solution
              techniques, such as mixed finite element methods, will be investigated.  There
              are five phases to the research.  The first phase will use domain decomposition
              in conjunction with an existing hydrodynamic model to achieve parallelism.  In
              the second phase, parallelism will be realized by exploring new algorithms
              specifically designed to take full advantage of parallel hardware, e.g., domain
              decomposition techniques.  In conjunction with the second phase, a third phase
              will expand the codes capabilities by incorporating more physics into the
              governing equations.  For example, baroclinic terms, which account for driving
              forces due to density variations, would  be added so that simulations of, say
              fresh water/salt water interactions could be modeled.  The fourth phase will
              rigorously test and validate the model against field data and analytical
              solutions.  In the fifth phase, the code will be disseminated to users in
              academia, consulting, and industry, where it will be used to research topics,
              such as freshwater flow requirements in sensitive coastal ecosystems.
