Title       : Foam Structure and Rheology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9623567

Award Number: 9623567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Durian durian@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9623567 
              Durian    This  project seeks to elucidate the nature of the random packing 
              structures  of bubbles in liquid-based foams and the consequences  of such
              structures, their dynamics, and their time evolution, for  the  macroscopic
              rheological behavior. This included  efforts  in  two  main  areas: (a) The
              propagation of light through  foams  by  multiple-scattering and the use of
              this generic phenomenon  as  a  structural  probe,  and  (b)  The  influence 
              of  evolution   and  shear-induced structural rearrangements on linear shear 
              rheology  and  time  evolution.  Special interest is in  determining  if  a 
              linear  regime exists, if structural rearrangements  can  play  a  role 
              equivalent to thermal fluctuations and hence be assigned  a  "temperature", 
              and  if flow can affect time evolution.  Rheology  measurements  will be
              accomplished with a commercial  device  and  also  with a custom Couette-cell
              which allows simultaneous access  for  measurement of the bubble-packing
              structure and dynamics  by  multiple    light   scattering   techniques.   The 
                fundamental  understanding  thus  achieved may provide a  framework  for 
              more  complex  systems  where  dense random  packing  and  irreversible 
              structural rearrangements dictate macroscopic behavior,  such  as  dense
              emulsions, colloidal suspensions, and granular media.  %%%  Liquid-based foams
              consist of a large number of gas bubbles  very  closely  packed together in a
              small amount of liquid, as familiar  from everyday life. The proposed
              experiments are designed to help  achieve  a  fundamental understanding of the
              important properties  of  these materials, namely their stability and flow
              behavior, in  terms  of their microscopic structure and composition. Little  is
               yet known due to the fact that light is strongly scattered by the  bubble 
              interfaces,  thus restricting visual observation  of  the  bubble-packing
              structure to the surface bubbles. However, we have  re cently   developed  new 
              experimental  techniques  which   take  advantage of multiple light scattering
              and which reveal  for  the  first time details of the packing structure and its
              behavior. The  fundamental   understanding  achieved  through   use   of  
              these  techniques   may   enable  rational  design   of   foaming-liquid 
              formulations, foaming techniques, and anti-foaming  agents.  This  could 
              benefit diverse industries where foams are currently dealt  with  by 
              trial-and-error:  food,  cosmetic,  detergent,  mining,  petroleum,  pulp  & 
              paper,  paint & coating,  textile,  leather,  polymer, and waste and water
              remediation.  ***
