Title       : Viral Diversity and Mortality of Phyto- and Bacterioplankton in the Arctic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9623130

Award Number: 9623130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farooq Azam fazam@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Proposal  No: OPP-9623130    Principal Investigator:  Azam, Farooq   
              ABSTRACT    Viral Diversity and Mortality of Phyto-and Bacterioplankton in the
              Arctic Ocean    This proposal requests funding to investigate the magnitude and
               variability of bacteria and phytoplankton mortality due to viral attack in the
              Arctic Ocean.  Viral distribution, abundance and variations in composition and
              diversity of viruses in the study area will also be investigated.  In addition
              to the examination of natural viral communities, samples will be screened for
              the presence of sewage-derived bacterial viruses as an indicator of the
              penetration of terrestrial biological pollutants into the Arctic Ocean. 
              Collection, fixation and concentration of sea water samples will be
              accomplished at sampling sites by deployment from a U.S. Navy submarine. 
              Subsequent analyses will be conducted in the   laboratory.  Total counts of
              viruses and the frequency of viral infection in phytoplankton and bacteria will
              be determined by electron microscopy on fixed samples. To examine natural
              community diversity, concentrates of viruses will be purified and subjected to
              pulsed-field gel electrophoresis to separate viral DNA based on genome size. 
              From the number, positions, and staining intensity of different bands, the
              diversity, genome sizes, and abundance of viruses in each sample will be
              estimated.  Sewage derived viruses will be detected by amplification of target
              DNA sequences using the polymerase chain reaction and by plaque assay. Through
              coordination with other researchers, viral abundance, the frequency of viral
              infections, and viral community diversity will be related to hydrographic and
              biological variables in order to determine those which may be important in
              regulating viral propagation.
