Title       : CAREER: Synthesis and Characterization of Metal/Silica Multicomponent Classes by
               the Sol-Gel Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1999       
File        : a9623570

Award Number: 9623570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349206             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert E. Stiegman stiegman@chem.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1045,1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9623570     Stiegman    The two principal goals of this research are
              to advance study of  the chemical parameters that effect the synthesis and
              processing of  multicomponent glasses by the sol-gel process, and to fabricate
              and  characterize entirely new metal/silica multicomponent glasses.   Three
              primary activities will be conducted:      1. The synthesis of new metal/silica
              xerogels. Several metal and  metal-centered functional groups will be
              incorporated into the  silica xerogel matrix using the synthetic protocol
              established for  the oxovanadium materials. Central to this effort is the 
              optimization of conditions to insure homogeneity for each metal.  The metals
              chosen for incorporation will be based on their  anticipated reactivity and on
              their position as part of a series of  systematically varying materials for the
              elucidation of  structure-property relationships.     2. Elucidation of the
              chemistry of the sol-gel process under  multicomponent conditions. This will
              involve determining the  effects of the metal on the kinetics and mechanism of
              gelation, the  processes of aging, drying and stabilization. This will provide
              a  fundamental understanding of the chemical processes that occur in  the
              solgel process when many kinetically different components are  present.     3.
              Characterization of the properties and reactivity of the new  multicomponent
              glasses.  The characterization of the hybrid  materials will entail two primary
              activities: (1) characterization  of the coordination geometry and electronic
              structure of the metal  center as it is found in the silica matrix; and (2) 
              characterization of the physical and morphological properties of  the bulk
              xerogel.   %%%  Homogeneous multicomponent glasses, comprised of differing
              ratios  of metal and semimetal oxides, have attracted considerable  attention
              due to their diverse and potentially useful properties  and reactivities. Among
              the applications predicted for these  materials are as heterogeneous catalysts,
              chemical sensors and   environmental monitors, and optical and electronics
              components.  While the sol-gel process has been used successfully to prepare 
              specific materials, problems have precluded its general employment  as a method
              for preparing homogeneous hybrid glasses. These  problems arise from the widely
              differing gelation kinetics of the  various constituents and by the many
              variables associated with  aging and drying these materials; all of which can
              lead to  heterogeneity in the final product. The aim of this work is to 
              optimize the conditions needed to produce a homogeneous glass, and  provide a
              detailed and comprehensive picture of the formation and  properties of hybrid
              metal/silica glasses to contribute  significantly to bringing this class of
              materials into the sphere  of real applications.
