Title       : CAREER: Assessment and Control of Motor Vehicle Emissions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9623385

Award Number: 9623385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Harley harley@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1045,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9623385  Harley    Because motor vehicles are the largest contributor to air 
              pollution in most U.S. cities, improved control equipment is  required on all
              new cars and trucks, and reformulated clean-  burning fuels are required for
              older vehicles in order to  achieve immediate emission reductions.  To address
              motor  vehicle emission problems, the research will: (1) develop  new, accurate
              inventories of motor vehicle emissions; (2)  study the causes of excess vehicle
              emissions; (3) develop  and use mathematical models to study the formation of 
              photochemical air pollution; and (4) determine the effects  of reformulated
              gasoline on ambient concentrations of ozone  and other air pollutants.  An
              alternate approach to  calculating emissions will be developed using infrared 
              remote sensing measurements of emissions from thousands of  in-use vehicles. 
              Measurements of vehicle emissions under various operating  conditions will be
              used to assess the robustness of emission  control systems.  In addition, the
              frequency of emission  control system failures will be studied as a function of
               vehicle age.  The air quality impacts of various  technological approaches to
              controlling vehicle emissions  will then be compared.  An Eulerian
              photochemical air quality model will be  developed to assess the impact of
              motor vehicle emissions on  ozone.  The chemical mechanism in the air quality
              model will  be extended to include the reactions of relevant oxygenated 
              compounds such as methyl-butyl ether (NME) which are  required in reformulated
              gasoline.  Performance of the air  quality model will be verified using
              measurements from  historical air pollution episodes in the San Francisco air 
              basin.  The air quality model will then be used to predict  changes in ozone
              formation due to use of reformulated  gasoline.  Novel approaches to control of
              vehicle emissions  will be assessed and compared.  The proposed educational
              plan has the following objectives:  (1) to develop and teach new environmental
              engineering  lecture  courses; (2) to develop and test new experiments to  be
              included in a new environmental engineering lab class;  and (3) to encourage
              minority students in local schools to  apply to college-level science and
              engineering programs.
