Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Spatial Scale and Population Persistence: Insights from a
               Plant-Herbivore-Parasitoid System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9623801

Award Number: 9623801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Frank safrank@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              962301  Frank  This research focuses on how populations persist in nature.  This
              goal is pursued in two ways: (1) Investigations of dynamics within local
              populations to identify factors that may stabilize population fluctuations, and
              (2) investigations on a broader spatial scale to determine whether interactions
              among local populations can bring about regional persistence.  This study
              system consists of the harlequin bug (Murgantia histrionica), a herbivore on
              bladderpod (Isomeris arborea), and two parasitoids that attack bug eggs. 
              Patchy distribution of the host plant clearly delineates the units on which
              local and regional dynamics will be investigated.  On the local scale,
              parasitoid exclusion experiments will be conducted to determine whether the
              presence of two asynchronously acting parasitoids leads to host population
              stability.  On the regional scale, host and parasitoid dispersal will be
              manipulated in experimental archipelagoes to determine whether dispersal among
              local populations leads to regional stability.  Dispersal manipulations will be
              complemented by examination of distance and density-dependent effects of
              dispersal, and by empirical and theoretical explorations of how interactions
              among dispersal and environmental heterogeneity influence asynchrony among
              local populations.  The results of this study will be important for several
              reasons.  First, there is much current interest in the dynamics of subdivided
              populations that are interconnected by dispersal because of the practical
              implications for habitat fragmentation and conservation.  Second, the choice of
              study system allows investigations of how habitat patchiness influences the
              interactions among species and the community-level processes that affect
              extinctions.  Multi-species interactions in a spatially subdivided setting can
              also provide insights into biological control of insect pests.  Understanding
              how complex species interactions persist in subdivided habitats is perhaps the
              most important issue for the science of con servation biology.
