Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Finite Element Methods for Nonlinear PDE's and Adaptivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9623394

Award Number: 9623394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo H. Nochetto rhn@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,9216,9263,AMPP,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623394  Nochetto    Problems governed by nonlinear partial differential
              equations (PDEs) which   exhibit sharp or diffuse, but rapid, transitions are
              of primary importance in   science and engineering. Liquid-solid phase
              transitions, multicomponent   alloys, anisotropy and junctions, epitaxial
              growth, multiphase   incompressible fluids, and advection dominated flows are
              relevant   multiscale examples considered in this project. The design, analysis
              and   implementation of innovative finite element methods which handle the  
              presence of free boundaries, thin layers and constraints, and the same time  
              cope with possible numerical pollution effects via adaptively refined   meshes
              is central to this project. A priori stability and error analyses,   together
              with a posteriori error control are quite delicate aspects of the   proposed
              research that reveal the limited value of linear theory in the   context of
              strongly nonlinear PDEs. A posteriori error estimates for   degenerate
              parabolic PDEs must reflect the  distinctive presence of free   boundaries and
              thin transition layers. Related PDE and computational issues   (implementation,
              recursive refinement/coarsening algorithms, multilevel   solvers) will also be
              investigated.    This project is expected to shed light on the efficient and
              reliable adaptive   finite element computation of phase transitions in
              materials science, and   thus have impact on high performance computing of
              phase transitions with   surface tension effects. Understanding and computing
              nonlinear evolutions   of corrugations observed in epitaxial growth is of
              fundamental importance   in electronics and materials science. Novel finite
              element methods will be   designed and used to explore a simple model for
              stress driven instabilities in   solids. Validation of a taxis model describing
              coexistence and interaction of   several marine species in response to
              foraging, predators and environmental   conditions is crucial in ecology and
              environmental sciences. Mixed finite   element me thods will be used in
              conjunction with exponential fitting to   better exploit the structure of taxis
              in the underlying system of nonlinear   PDEs in both extremes of advection and
              diffusion dominated flows.
