Title       : Tunneling and Transport in Ordered and Disordered Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9623477

Award Number: 9623477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen M. Goldman goldman@physics.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9623477  Goldman      The  study  of two dimensional superconducting films
              allows access  to  several  important paradigms in contemporary Condensed
              Matter  Physics  including   the  superconductor-insulator  transition,   the  
              quantum  tunneling  of  vortices,  and other quantum  properties  of  Abrikosov
               vortices.   The hallmark of the work is the extension of the parameter  space 
              to  very low temperatures and very high magnetic  fields.   The  focus  of work
              on the superconductor-insulator transition will  be  on  resolving whether the
              transition is governed by a variant of the Boson-  Hubbard  model or, is a
              consequence of decreased screening by disorder  of  the repulsive
              electron-electron interaction.   The work on quantum  tunneling  of vortices
              should reveal new features of the  dynamics  of  vortices,  in  particular the
              extent to which their  behavior  can  be  fundamentally quantum mechanical. The
              other investigations of  quantum  properties  of  vortices, including studies
              of quantum vortex  lattice  melting,  superconducting  analogs of the  quantum 
              Hall  effect,  and  vortex  shot  noise will contribute to a coherent picture
              of  electron  transport and superconductivity in two dimensions.  %%%  The  
              study  of  two  dimensional  superconductors  impacts  important  paradigms  in
               contemporary  Condensed Matter  Physics  including  the 
              superconductor-insulator  transition, and  the  quantum  tunneling  of 
              vortices, an important dynamical property of Abrikosov vortices.   The 
              investigation of model problems and model  systems  in  two dimensions, in
              addition to their intrinsic scientific  interest, will contribute to our
              knowledge of the mechanism of high-Tc  superconductivity, and to our
              understanding of vortex  dynamics.   The  dynamics  of  vortices,  which  exist
              in superconductors  in  magnetic  fields, are of interest because vortex motion
              causes dissipation.  The  promise of superconductivity to bring about changes
              in electrical  and  electronic  technology   is connect ed with reduced 
              dissipation.   The  understanding  of  the mechanism of high temperature
              superconductivity  will  aid  in the search for new materials. The
              understanding  of  the  fundamental  limits on performance  resulting from
              vortex motion  will  contribute  to  our  understanding of factors which  could
               limit  the  technological usefulness of superconductors.  ***
