Title       : SBIR Phase II: Molecular Engineering of a Biocatalyst for the Destruction of
               Chlorinated Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9623832

Award Number: 9623832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Steffan Steffan@Envirogen.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Envirogen, Inc.
	      4100 Quakerbridge Road
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086484702    609/936-9300

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1184,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9623832 Steffan    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              is aimed at producing cost-effective biological catalysts for use in the
              bioremediation of chlorinated solvent-contaminated environments.
              Toluene-4-monooxygenase (T4MO) is a multicomponent enzyme from Pseudomonas
              mendocina KRl capable of oxidizing chlorinated solvents, which directly leads
              to their bioremediation.  During Phase I, several regions of amino acid
              sequence were identified that control the reactivity of T4MO. In vitro
              mutagenic techniques (either site-directed or random primed polymerase chain
              reaction) were then used to alter the amino acid sequence in these regions.
              This effort resulted in the creation of new, catalytically-active mutant
              isoforms of T4MO.  One of the most promising of these new isoforms has an
              increased oxidation rate for halogenated hydrocarbons such as trichloroethylene
              (TCE) and chloroform, while several other isoforms exhibit changes in substrate
              specificity relative to the wild-type enzyme. These results demonstrate the
              soundness of the project's strategy to improve the catalytic versatility of the
              T4MO enzyme via genetic engineering. Both of these mutant isoforms may prove
              valuable in commercial applications. The proposed Phase II project will
              evaluate the commercial potential of these promising mutants in detail,
              including further characterization of oxidation rates, substrate specificity
              ranges, product distributions, catalyst stability, bioreactor scale-up
              parameters, and other relevant structural and functional properties of these
              novel, engineered biocatalysts.         The biocatalysts developed during this
              project will be commercially applicable to remediate many of the Nation's
              contaminated aquifers and soils at both government and private sites. Initial
              application will be in contained vapor-phase bioreactors, and future
              applications will include in situ treatment. ***
