Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Polynomials and Polynomial Inequalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1996       
File        : a9623156

Award Number: 9623156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64611              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamas Erdelyi terdelyi@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9623156  PI: Erdelyi    Polynomials pervade mathematics.
              Virtually every branch of mathematics, from algebraic number theory and
              algebraic geometry to applied analysis, Fourier analysis, and computer science,
              has its corpus of theory arising from the study of polynomials. This project
              intends to study polynomial inequalities and their applications in classical
              analysis, approximation theory, orthogonal polynomials, and number theory. The
              proposed research is about polynomials in a general sense, so it includes
              Chebyshev spaces, Markov spaces, Descartes systems, Muntz polynomials, rational
              function spaces, as well as polynomials with various constraints such as
              restricted zeros, integer coefficients, and nonnegative coefficients in various
              bases.  The project continues several years of successful work on a variety of
              topics and describes various new directions.            Polynomials are one of
              the most basic concepts of mathematics. Throughout history people have found
              problems concerning polynomials especially fascinating. Each of the "three
              famous problems" in the "Heroic Age" dealt with zeros of polynomials: squaring
              the circle, duplicating the cube, and trisecting an    angle. Historically,
              questions relating to polynomials, for example, the solution of polynomial
              equations, gave rise to some of the most important problems of the day. Besides
              the natural intellectual interest in them, polynomials, and in particular
              extremal problems involving polynomials, arise not only in almost every field
              of mathematics, but also in other sciences, especially in engineering. However,
              it is often the case that polynomials related to a practical problem belong to
              a restricted class. Depending on the nature of the problem, some additional
              pieces of information on the polynomial may be known. For filter design,
              polynomials with coefficients from {-1,0,1} are very useful, because, if they
              are used, then the filter can be implemented without the use of
              multiplications; their implementati on requires only additions and
              subtractions. This reduces the cost of implementation. The problem is to find
              such polynomials which have a "lowpass" behavior on the unit circle of the
              complex plane. Roughly, that is, they approximate 1 in a neighborhood of 1 and
              approximate 0 in a neighborhood of -1. The project plans to study extremal
              properties of polynomials with coefficients from {-1,0,1, {0,1}, and {-1,1}.
              Unimodular polynomials (with coefficients that are complex numbers of modulus
              1) are also important in engineering. In some other problems related to
              physics, in particular electrostatics, information about the distribution of
              the zeros of the polynomial is known. "Gaped" polynomials (polynomials with a
              large number of zero coefficients) are used to analyze, for example, the
              time-optimal boundary controls for the one-dimensional heat equation. The
              proposal intends to explore further applications of polynomial inequalities as
              well as to offer a systematic study of naturally arising questions regarding
              polynomials subject to various constraints.
