Title       : Representation Theory of Reductive Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9623035

Award Number: 9623035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Siddhartha Sahi sahi@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Sahi    The research will consist of two parts.  The first part is
              concerned with constructing explicit models for small unipotent representations
              of reductive Lie groups, and with using these models to study the decomposition
              of tensor products and restrictions of such representations. It is expected
              that this will provide a natural context for extending the
              theta-correspondence.  The second part of the proposal gives an extension of
              the theory  of Jack polynomials, which are themselves generalizations of
              spherical polynomials for GL(n) where one replaces the root multiplicity by an
              arbitrary parameter. The polynomials we describe are obtained by varying the
              half-sum of positive roots, hence depend on n  auxiliary parameters. It is
              expected that a study of these polynomials will lead to new and interesting
              results.    The first part of the proposal will have applications to Number
              Theory, a deep and beautiful area of mathematics that has often had unexpected
              and profound implications for practical problems of various kinds. For example
              in the design of networks, in order  to facilitate efficient dissemination of
              information, it is desirable to have a high degree of inter-connectivity. It
              turns out that some of the best networks are constructed by using
              number-theoretic considerations.  The second part of the proposal has relevance
              to diverse areas such as Physics, Multivariate Statistics, and Combinatorics.
