Title       : Vortex Dynamics in Organic and High Temperature Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9623306

Award Number: 9623306
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fulin Zuo zuo@physics.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9623306  Zuo  The objective of this proposal is to find the generic features 
              common to both the layered organic and the high temperature  superconductors in
              order to better understand the vortex dynamics  in these systems.  Several
              experiments will be performed to this  purpose.  First, the phenomena of
              anomalous magnetization where  magnetization increases abnormally with
              increasing field in the  mixed state will be studied in both organic and the
              Thallium  based cuprates superconductors where the superconducting  transition
              temperature can be varied.  Second, interlayer  transport measurements will be
              performed to correlate  with a  magnetic transparent state observed in the
              neodymium-cerium based  superconductors as well as the thallium based ones to
              test the  model of the Josephson decoupling between the superconducting 
              layers.  Third, a point contact technique will be applied to test  a model of
              spontaneous creations of free vortices due to thermal  fluctuations in layered
              compounds.  Fourth, an important  phenomena of quantum interference of moving
              vortex lattice with a  rf electromagnetic field will be tested in the organic 
              superconductors.  The organics may prove to be an ideal system to  establish
              the quantum interference picture because of  its  extremely weak pinning. 
              Current voltage response will be  measured as a function of flux flow velocity
              and the rf  field.  Understanding of the vortex dynamics in the layered 
              superconductors is important for its industrial applications,  it  is also
              interesting in terms of fundamental physics.  %%%  Understanding of the
              magnetic properties in the high temperature  superconductors is critical for
              applications of these materials  as current carrying devices.  It is equally
              interesting in  terms  of fundamental physics involved.  The high transition
              temperature  and the layered structure introduce new features in the behavior 
              of quantum vortices in the mixed state.  For example, the  magnetization or
              critical current in the mixed state incre ases  abnormally with increasing
              field.  Preliminary studies suggest it  is due to dimensional crossover when
              the quantum vortices changes  from 3 dimensional lines to 2 dimensional
              pancakes.  This  proposal aims toward establishing a generic picture by
              comparing  the high temperature superconductors with a structurally  analogous
              low temperature organic superconductors.  Several key  experiments will be
              performed to test the models proposed for the  layered superconductors.  These
              include comparative studies of  anomalous magnetization in both systems, direct
              measurement of  coupling between the superconducting layers, detection of 
              spontaneous generated thermal vortices, and an interference  effect between the
              quantum vortices and an incident  electromagnetic wave.  The knowledge gained
              from this study will  provide better understanding of physics in the mixed
              state, as  well as novel applications of these materials.  ***
