Title       : Career: Development of Design Models for Integration of Advanced Transistors
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9623964

Award Number: 9623964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joy Laskar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623964  Laskar  The objective of this research is to systematic
              characterization and integration of GaAs and InP transistors, the focusing upon
              the noise characteristics and high frequency properties of the devices studied.
               The anticipated results of this investigation include: (1) Greater
              understanding of the physical properties that lead to superior noise and high
              frequency performance and (2) Development of practical design models for the
              optimization and implementation of critical circuit components.    This
              research will lead to an improved fundamental understanding of the role of
              coherent transport and noise mechanisms in advanced transistor structures. 
              Based on this effort, significant impact is expected upon the development of
              robust device design models for wireless applications between 1 and 100 Ghz. 
              This research will provide improved device small-signal and large-signal
              models, enhanced frequency dependent noise models, development of CAD models in
              an industry standard format and practical demonstration of the impact of high
              performance, wide bandwidth electrical components.  This work also has the
              potential for commercialization of:  the experimental techniques, enhanced CAD
              models, and improved integration techniques for InP based transistor and
              circuit processes.  Most importantly, the proposed research tasks represent
              collaborative efforts with leading industrial and academic laboratories which
              provide a direct path for commercialization and manufacturing.    My teaching
              plan during the CAREER award period addresses the education of students from
              grade school to graduate school.  I have a strong interest  in developing
              talented students and giving opportunities to students who traditionally may
              have been left out of graduate studies in electrical engineering.  I would like
              to continue to involve students in meaningful design project both in the
              classroom and the laboratory.  I believe it is critical that the students
              receive a "real-world" educational experience which should  prove most
              rewarding in their future careers.  ***
