Title       : Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Fluids on Weak Binding Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9623976

Award Number: 9623976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Taborek ptaborek@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Rutledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9623976  Taborek  The recent discovery that alkali metal surfaces interact very 
              weakly with helium has provided a model system for the study of  wetting
              transitions.  The proposed research further exploits  Helium-alkali metal
              systems to study fundamental issues of the  thermodynamics and kinetics of
              fluids on surfaces.  The  experiments are divided approximately equally between
               thermodynamic measurements based on adsorption isotherms using  quartz
              microbalances, and thermodynamic and kinetics measurements  using optical
              techniques.  The microbalance technique will be  used to study Helium-3 on
              Cesium at low temperature to look for  predicted wetting effects due to Fermi
              statistics.  Helium-4 on  Rubidium and Hydrogen substrates will be studied to
              examine the  possibility of T=0 prewetting, and the possibility of coexisting 
              superfluid surface phases.  Optical techniques will be used to  investigate the
              properties of superfluid drops and super flows  with a three-phase contact
              line.  %%%  Wetting is a ubiquitous phenomenon which governs processes  ranging
              from crystal growth to spreading of droplets.  The recent  discovery that
              alkali metal surfaces interact very weakly with  helium has provided a model
              system for the study of wetting  transitions.  The proposed research further
              exploits  Helium/alkali metal systems to study fundamental issues of the 
              thermodynamics and kinetics of fluids on surfaces.  The  experiments are
              divided approximately equally between  thermodynamic measurements based on
              adsorption isotherms using  quartz microbalances, and thermodynamic and
              kinetics measurements  using optical techniques.  Microbalances will be used to
              study  Helium on Cesium look for quantum effects in wetting.  Optical 
              techniques will be used to study superfluid droplets and  superfluid flows with
              edges.  ***
