Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Classical Harmonic Analysis and Applications
               to Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9623120

Award Number: 9623120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Loukas Grafakos loukas@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Grafakos    The investigator proposes to pursue research in the area
              of multilinear singular integral operators and partial differential equations
              in connection with Hardy space techniques. His techniques include compensated
              compactness methods, atomic decomposition, and estimates for singular integral
              operators. The investigator also proposes to obtain sharp estimates for maximal
              operators on Euclidean spaces.  In particular, he is interested in computing
              the operator norm of the Hardy-Littlewood maximal function on different
              Lebesgue spaces.    This proposal has two parts. In the first part the
              investigator plans to use mathematical analysis techniques, (in particular
              harmonic analysis), to solve problems in differential equations which naturally
              arise in the study of dynamics of fluids or in the study of motions of waves.
              The researcher believes that the methods that he proposes to use will give new
              insight to some problems that arise in these areas and will strengthen the
              connection of mathematics with applications.  In the second part, he proposes
              to work on better quantitative understanding of averaging operations. The
              averaging of a function is an important and useful operation since it
              regularizes a given set of data by smoothing out its singularities.  The
              investigator proposes to study how sharply are certain quantitative properties
              of functions transferred to their averages.
