Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Mathematical Problems in Meteorology, Oceanography
               and Climatology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9623071

Award Number: 9623071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shouhong Wang showang@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623071  Wang       The investigators studies the partial differential equations
               arising in meteorology, oceanography and climatology.  The work  is the
              mathematical analysis part of an ongoing project, jointly  with J. L. Lions
              (College de France) and R. Temam (Indiana  University); that project involves a
              combination of modeling,  mathematical theory, and scientific computing.  Among
              the partial  differential equations are the core equations in climatology such 
              as the primitive equations of the atmosphere-only, the  ocean-only, and the
              coupled atmosphere/ocean systems.  Part of  the mathematical theory has been
              attained in previous work about  these core equations of the atmosphere, ocean
              and coupled  atmosphere-ocean.  A large amount of work such as the existence 
              and properties of strong solutions and long time behavior remains  to be done,
              however.  Also, the mathematical analysis of sea ice  equations and some free
              surface models is also addressed.  Another  part of the proposed work is to
              justify from the mathematical  viewpoint the geostrophic asymptotics and the
              associated  quasi-geostrophic equations (well-posedness and long time 
              dynamics).       The phenomena of the atmosphere and ocean are extremely rich 
              in organization and complexity.  The study of these complicated  phenomena and
              the relevant scientific issues are very challenging  and necessitate a joint
              effort of scientists in many fields.  The  proposed work takes up this study
              from the mathematical point of  view.  As is now well-known and as pointed out
              by John von Neumann  in the fifties, understanding and prediction of the
              weather and  climate involve a great deal of mathematical analysis and a great 
              deal of calculation.  This project aims at a better understanding  of the
              mechanisms of the turbulent behavior of the air and  seawater, as well as tools
              for better prediction of the weather  and possible global change.
