Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Diversification of Spider Venoms: Patterns and Correlates
               of Variation within Individuals and Across Populations and Phylogenies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9623468

Award Number: 9623468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne P. Maddison wmaddisn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623468  Maddison        The  role of spider venoms in predation strategies or 
              defense varies  widely among spiders.  The chemical  composition  of  venoms
              also  varies  among spider species  and there is  even  evidence  of variation
              within species.  In this study, we will use a comparative approach  to test 
              for the influence of ecological demands on  venom  diversification.  We will
              determine phylogenetic  levels  at  which variation  in venoms  exists,  and
              then  determine  whether  venom  changes  are  more  pronounced  in  systems 
              with behavioral  and ecological variability.  First, we will assay nongenetic 
              variation by  determining the effect on adult venom  expression  that  results
              from  rearing broodmates  on  different  diets.   Second,  we  will determine 
              amounts of  variation below the species  level in three  spider  systems:   (1)
               Agelenopsis aperta, a  species with  known behavioral differences among
              populations; (2)  Tegenaria agrestis, a species  with  evidence of 
              interpopulational differences  in  venom pharmacology; and  (3) populations of
              Hawaiian Tetragnatha that  are similar  ecologically but isolated on different
              islands. Finally, we  will  determine venom differences above the species level
               and investigate  ecological and behavioral correlates of  these  changes in 
              Hawaiian  Tetragnatha, a clade which has  undergone a  radiation involving  a
              shift in foraging behavior.  The ability  to  predict  venom  characteristics,
              based on phylogenetic position  or ecological circumstances,  would  help to 
              streamline the ongoing  search  for novel toxins  with useful physiological
              applications.
