Title       : Local and Global Behavior of Solutions of Schrodinger Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9623520

Award Number: 9623520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lev Kapitanski levkapit@math.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Kapitanski  9623520    The work under the proposed project will focus
              on the analysis of the properties of solutions for both nonlinear and linear
              Schrodinger equations. The principal investigator will study the uniqueness of
              the global weak solutions of the Cauchy problem for a semilinear Schrodinger
              equation with critical Sobolev exponent. He will also study the basic questions
              of global existence, uniqueness and persistence for solutions in more general
              situations: in the case of a curved metric, in the presence of a magnetic field
              and/or a confining or singular potential. Such generalizations pose nontrivial
              problems concerning   space-time integrability properties and formation of
              singularities for solutions of the corresponding linear Schrodinger equations.
              The analysis of these linear problems is a part of the proposed project. In
              comparison with the parabolic and hyperbolic equations, the equations of
              Schrodinger type are much harder to work with because of the lack of local
              estimates. The investigator has developed techniques  based on  microlocal
              constructions and weighted estimates, that will allow him to get around this
              difficulty in the analysis of   solutions of linear and nonlinear Schrodinger
              equations.       The Schrodinger equation is one of the basic equations of
              mathematical physics. It provides the mathematical foundation to
              nonrelativistic quantum mechanics, which is the source of much of our
              understanding of the structure of matter. In a rich variety of circumstances
              the models based on the Schrodinger equation and its nonlinear  
              generalizations give the correct description of the physical reality. From the
              mathematical point of view, the Schrodinger equation is an unfailing source of
              deep and challenging problems. The proposed investigation, aiming at the
              analysis of the basic properties of solutions of linear and nonlinear
              Schrodinger equations, has  direct bearing on  some of the fundamental issues
              facing researchers in partial differential equations and harm onic analysis.
