Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Robust and Sampled Data Control of Distributed Parameter
               Systems"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9623392

Award Number: 9623392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50193              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Rebarber rrebarbe@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623392  Rebarber  This research will address several important problems
              associated with the  stabilization of distributed parameter systems.  The main
              issue concerns the   possibility of stabilizing a system in the absence of
              complete information about  the system. For instance, a feedback control which
              stabilizes a system might  have unmodeled small time delays in the feedback
              loop that adversely affect  the stability of the system.  It is therefore
              important to determine when and  how this occurs, and to decide what
              modifications in the feedback loop are  needed to alleviate the problem.  A
              related issue concerns systems in which the  only data available for use in a
              control design is a sampled-data observation of  the actual system, or a
              numerical approximation of that system. This research  will determine when
              stabilization of an unknown system is possible based on  such limited
              information. The approach taken is system theoretic in the sense  that results
              are developed for a large class of abstract state space systems and  frequency
              domain systems, and then applied to vibration control problems for  specific
              systems.  Many of the problems require approaches which combine  partial
              differential equation techniques, frequency domain techniques and state  space
              techniques.  %%%  One of the principal issues in the design of stabilizing
              feedbacks for vibrating  systems is that of design of a feedback control based
              on incomplete  information of the system.  An important paradigm of such a
              system occurs in  structural acoustics.  In this problem, sound waves are
              present within a cavity,  such as an airplane cabin, and part of the boundary
              of the cavity is subject to  vibrations due, for example, to an aircraft engine
              mounted near one of the walls  of the cabin.  Wall vibrations may either
              amplify or attenuate the sound waves,  and one of the applications of this
              research is to use the wall vibrations to  accomplish the latter.  Modern
              techniques used to accomplish this use  piezoceramic patches th at impart
              bending moments on the vibrating wall when  voltages are applied to them. 
              Numerical experiments suggest that some of  these stabilization schemes may be
              rendered ineffective by very small time  delays that naturally arise in the
              feedback loop.  Such delays cannot be  precisely determined, so it is important
              to decide what modifications in the  feedback loop are needed to alleviate the
              problem.  This project is will address  precisely such issue in the general
              context of stabilization of infinite-  dimensional vibrating systems based on
              incomplete information of the system,  or based on sampled data.  ***
