Title       : Formal Methods in Concurrent and Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1996 
File        : a9623229

Award Number: 9623229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107127             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Prasad Sistla sistla@cs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the widespread use of distributed and concurrent  systems and with the
              increase in the complexity of software  for such systems, it becomes important
              to develop various  methods for ensuring the quality of concurrent software 
              systems. This project explores various methods for automated  and
              semi-automated analysis and verification of concurrent  and distributed
              systems. In particular, the research seeks  methods based on temporal logic
              model checking for  verification of concurrent systems.    Although model
              checking has been applied fairly successfully  for verification of quite a few
              real-life systems, its  applicability to a wider class of practical systems has
              been  hampered by the state explosion problem (i.e. the enormous  increase in
              the size of the state space). In this research,  symmetry based techniques are
              used to overcome the state  explosion problem. In particular, symmetry is
              exploited for  verification of liveness properties of real-life concurrent  and
              distributed software systems. The effectiveness of  symmetry-based methods for
              model checking requires efficient  solutions to the orbit problem. A solution
              to the orbit  requires checking if two given global states are equivalent 
              under the symmetry. An efficient solution to this problem  facilitates the
              construction of the quotient structure by  collapsing each set of equivalent
              states into a single  state. The project investigates various efficient
              algorithms  for the orbit problem for many of the symmetries that occur  in
              practical systems. It is implementing an on-line model  checking system that
              exploits symmetry by simultaneously  constructing reduced global state graph
              (i.e. the quotient  structure) and exploring the partially generated quotient 
              structure for existence of certain fair strongly connected  components
              containing an incorrect computation.  ***
