Title       : Teaching and Research at the Interface of Chemistry and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9623828

Award Number: 9623828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicole S. Sampson nicole.sampson@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9179,9184,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is to investigate protein-protein interactions   that
              occur during mammalian fertilization.  The ligand interactions that   occur
              upon binding of the sperm protein fertilin to the egg plasma   membrane,
              presumably at a receptor, will be dissected.   Specifically,   peptido-mimetics
              of the glutamate- cysteine-aspartate disintegrin loop   and the epidermal
              growth factor-like module of fertilin will be   synthesized and tested for
              their ability to inhibit sperm-egg fusion.    Mutant peptides will be tested to
              identify residues important for   inhibition and good inhibitors will be
              developed into affinity labels.   These labels will be used to identify the
              receptor(s) in the egg-plasma   membrane.  Also, the domains of fertilin will
              be expressed using   recombinant DNA methodology and will be tested for their
              ability to   inhibit sperm-egg fusion.  The domains will be used as affinity
              ligands   for the isolation of their receptors and information about the
              structure   of the domains will be obtained with NMR spectroscopy. 
              Site-directed   mutagenesis experiments will identify residues important for
              binding,   fusion and signaling.  The educational plan will focus on
              undergraduate   course development and also on the development of a Ph.D.
              training   program at the interface of chemistry and biology.  With this CAREER
                award, the Synthetic Organic Program supports the research and   educational
              activities of Dr. Nicole S. Sampson of the Department of   Chemistry at SUNY,
              Stony Brook.   Professor Sampson will focus her   research efforts on
              investigating the protein-protein interactions that   occur during mammalian
              fertilization.   The benefit of the work lies in   the development of better,
              more specific contraceptives and in   discovering  the genetic reasons for
              infertility which could then be   circumvented.  The educational plan will
              focus on the development of an   undergraduate course on trends in biological
              chemistry and the the   construction of a teaching plan for a Ph.D. training
              program at the   interface of chemistry and biology.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
