Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Bayesian and Nonparametric Methods for Time Series
               Analysis with Environmental & Economic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1996        
File        : a9623884

Award Number: 9623884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie K. Ray borayx@m.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623884    This project develops and implements new statistical methods for
              modeling complicated features of time series using computationally
              computationally intensive techniques. First the Principal Investigator
              developes applications of Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods to analyze multiple
              time series in a Bayesian framework. She shows how to incorporate features such
              as seasonal variation, random interventions, endogenous variable relationships,
              and long-range dependence in a Bayesian linear model for multivariate time
              series. The Bayesian framework allows for incorporation of prior information,
              such as knowledge about the covariance structure between series, and results in
              computationally feasible likelihood evaluations. The Bayesian model proposed
              can be used to describe some of the time series features observed in practice,
              but is restricted by its linear structure. The second area of research focuses
              on methods for modeling complicated nonlinear time series relationships in a
              non-Bayesian setup. The theoretical framework is based on recent advances in
              nonparametric function and density estimation in the regression setting. First,
              a test is developed for nonlinear periodic behavior and show how to model that
              behavior. Next simplified linear relationships among multiple nonlinear series
              using a nonparametric test applied to linear combinations of nonlinear series
              are explored. The simplified relationships can be used to improve forecasts of
              the individual series. Finally, full multivariate nonlinear models are
              developed using multivariate kernel density methods and local fitting of vector
              autoregressions. To help promote use of the new methods in practice, part of
              the effort is devoted to developing algorithms that are computationally
              feasible. The third project area focuses on educational innovations to improve
              statistical training and communication skills among engineers and applied
              statisticians. Improvement of these skills will help foster interactions with
              investigators in other discip lines.    The overall goal of the research is to
              develop methods that can be used to better understand complex relationships
              among real-world processes. Statistical tools are developed that can be used,
              for example, to investigate long-range dependent relationships between
              environmental series in order to assess global changes in the earth's
              atmosphere, or to analyze important nonlinear relationships among economic
              series. To help insure that future statistics practitioners have sufficient
              training to use such methods, educational innovations are developed, in
              parallel, aimed at improving data analysis, computing, and communication skills
              at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. By better educating students in
              the application of statistics to real-world problems, they will be better
              equipped to use statistical methods for understanding complex real-world
              dynamics and making intelligent policy decisions.
