Title       : Excitation Dynamics of Random Magnetic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9623195

Award Number: 9623195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond L. Orbach Raymond.Orbach@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9623195  Orbach    This  project  deals  with  the experimental  study  of  the 
              microscopic  order-parameter of spin-glasses. This  here-to-  fore  solely 
              theoretical concept controls the  dynamics  of  these  complex systems. The
              results of this study will  have  relevance  to  the  fields  of evolution, 
              protein  folding,  neural  networks,  and other physical phenomena  which  obey
               hierarchical  structure in the arrangement of their  states.  The  parameter
              of interest is the non-linear magnetic  field  dependence  of  the 
              zero-field-cooled magnetization,  Mzfc.  This   quantity  will  be  determined 
              over   a   range   of  temperatures, from very low values up to the vicinity of
              the  spin-glass  temperature, Tg. Using a theoretical description  developed 
              by  the  investigators,  the  derivative  of  the  logarithm  of Mzfc with
              respect to the magnetic  field  will  generate  an  explicit  form for  P(q), 
              the  Parisi  order-  parameter   for   spin-glasses.  Using  other  
              experimental  "calipers", the study will attempt to extract the  branching 
              ratios  for  the hierarchical tree which governs  spin-glass  behavior.  %%% 
              Random  magnetic  systems, in particular, spin-glasses,  are  measurable 
              representations of a wide  variety  of  behavior  found  in  nature. Their
              properties can shed light  on  such  diverse  fields as human evolution, the
              behavior of proteins  in  solution,  and the functioning of the  human  brain. 
              It  appears that these seemingly random structures in fact  obey  very
              constricted geometries, an immense simplification. This  project  has  devised
              experiments which  should  enable  the  extraction  of  the  underlying
              geometry  by  measuring  the  magnetic properties of dilute magnetic alloys.
              The materials  will  be  investigated over a wide range of temperature  and 
              magnetic   field  with  the  objective  of  extracting   the  microscopic
              parameters which define their dynamic  behavior.  This will have relevance not
              only to this important class of  physical  s ystems,  but also to a wide 
              variety  of  natural  phenomena.  ***
