Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics of Spigelia (Loganiaceae): Tropical/Temperate
               Relationships and the Origin of a Temperate Disjunction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1996       
File        : a9623495

Award Number: 9623495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9930               (Estimated)
Investigator: Billie L. Turner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert K. Jansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623495  Turner   Graduate student Katherine Gould, with direction from advisers
              Billie Turner and Robert Jansen at University of Texas, is studying the
              American plant genus Spigelia of the Loganiaceae family, which has an estimated
              50 species distributed in North, Central, and South America.  Samples are being
              drawn from herbarium collections and from field expeditions in Mexico and
              elsewhere, to provide materials for both intensive morphological studies and
              for molecular analyses of nuclear DNA variation and chloroplast DNA
              restriction-enzyme variation.  The goals are to assess morphological features
              that will provide reliable characters for distinguishing the species in the
              genus, and to infer a phylogeny of sections within the genus with the two
              molecular data sets, testing for concordance between them and integrating them
              in a combined-DNA database.  One major test will focus on the three native
              species in the U.S. and assess whether these comprise a single evolutionary
              unit (a clade) or represent separate speciations into the north temperate zone.
               A subsidiary test will assess relationships between spigelias on opposite
              sides of the Mississippi River, in Texas and in Florida.  %%%   Modern
              taxonomic studies of plants combine morphological studies with newer molecular
              analyses.  The morphological studies evaluate variation in vegetative and
              reproductive characters within and among populations in order to designate
              reliable features for identification and assess species status.  Molecular
              (DNA) data allow measurement of mutational differences between species and the
              inference of phylogenetic (genealogical) relationships among them.  With this
              phylogeny as guide, the geographical distributions of the species can be
              analyzed to detect migration pathways through time, and to determine whether
              single or multiple invasions have occurred.  ***
