Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Study of Nonlinear Waves in Compressible Flows and
               Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9623025

Award Number: 9623025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tai-Ping Liu liu@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623025  Liu    We are interested in studying the behaviour of nonlinear waves 
              for  quasilinear hyperbolic-parabolic partial differential equations.  Physical
              systems include the compressible Navier-Stokes and Euler  euqations, MHD, and
              nonlinear elasticity equations. We are also  interested in the nonlinear waves
              for the finite difference  schemes  for the computations for these systems. The
              approach based on  nonlinear superpositions and the Green functions for
              nonlinear  waves has proved effective in studying the nonlinear waves  for PDE
              in one space variable. For instance we show that shocks  more or less
              compressive than the classical gas dynamic shocks  depend  on the dissipative
              variable in sensitive ways previously  unsuspected. We intend to generalize and
               refine the approach to numerical waves and also to PDE in  more than one space
              variable. Preliminary success in the study  of dissipative schemes and
              nonlinear stability and instability  of 2-dimensional weak and strong shocks
              indicates that the  approach  is suitable for more general studies.  %%% 
              Physical phenomena occur in gas flow, solar wind, combustions,  solid materials
              are often highly nonlinear. Compression,  expansion, shearing, bending of
              materials give rise to  waves, whose behaviour is made richer by the chemical
              reactions,  electro-magnetic and other effects that are also present.  There
              are several different types of waves which interact  nonlinearly. The goal of
              the present proposal is to study  these noninear phenomena using mathematical
              technique recently  introduced by the proposer, which are able to detect the
              local as  well  as global effects of wave interactions.  Of importance to our
              project is the understanding of numerical  schemes for the computations of
              these problems. Our  approach is beginning to yield the intricate wave
              phenomena  for the schemes which will help us to design effective schemes  for
              computing complex physical situations such as that of  combustions.  ***
