Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Modeling, Analysis and Control Of Multilayer Plates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9623144

Award Number: 9623144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47429              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott W. Hansen shansen@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623144  Hansen  This research involves the modeling and analysis of multilayer 
              plates in which  the effects of shear deformation within layers may be
              important.   Specific  examples include laminated plates, constrained layer
              plates and  plates with  surface-mounted actuators.  The project will (i)
              develop new  dynamic multilayer  plate models and refine existing ones;  (ii)
              determine the range  of validity of the  various models with respect to design
              parameters in the models;  and (iii)  determine how to design controls and
              stabilizing feedbacks that  are robust with  respect to parameter uncertainties
              in the models.  The  Reissner-Mindlin theory  of shear-deformable plates is
              used to obtain an initial model  that allows  independent shear deformations in
              each layer.  Lower order  approximate models  which are more amenable to
              computations and simulations will then  be obtained  by perturbation
              techniques.  The range of validity of the various  models will be  investigated
              by analyzing the continuity properties of the  solutions of the initial  model
              with respect to the appropriate perturbation parameters.   Once the  continuity
              properties of the solutions of the various systems are  developed,  issues of
              robustness and sensitivity with regard to parameters  and uncertainties  will
              be analyzed.  %%%  This research involves the modeling and analysis of
              multilayer  plates in which  the effects of shear deformation within layers may
              be important.   Specific  examples include laminated plates, constrained layer
              plates and  plates with  surface-mounted actuators.  The research is applicable
              to a large  class of  modeling problems that arise in the design and control of
               multilayer composite  materials.  Such materials are used in a wide range of 
              applications, from  sporting goods to ship hulls, and often need to be
              constructed to  meet various  design criteria, such as optimal strength-to-mass
              ratio, or to  have certain optimal  damping properties.  In many applications,
              active feedback  control  will be utilized  to enhance the performance of the
              material in its intended  application.  This  research will provide a unified,
              rigorous, mathematical  foundation for the  modeling of such materials and
              their dynamic properties, and will  develop  various control-theoretic
              properties of the models.  Such a  theoretical foundation  is needed in order
              to keep pace with the rapidly increasing speed  of sensors   and actuators and
              to take full advantage of modern manufacturing  capabilities.  ***
