Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Positron Emission Tomography: Modelling, Analysis and
               Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1998     
File        : a9623077

Award Number: 9623077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard A. Mair bam@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Murali Rao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9183,9216,9263,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9623077  Mair  The proposers investigate a refinement of the Shepp-Vardi 
              probabilistic model for positron emission tomography (PET), and the 
              corresponding expectation-maximization maximum-likelihood (EM-ML) 
              reconstruction algorithm. This model replaces the usual finite linear  system
              with an integral equation in which the unknown is a Borel  measure. The
              research includes an analysis of the convergence  properties of this algorithm,
              numerical methods of implementation by  spline and wavelet bases, and an
              analysis of the smoothing effects of  these bases.  The convergence results
              provide mathematical reasons in  terms of the regularity properties of Borel
              measures, for the  seeming divergence of the numerical implementations of the
              finite  dimensional EM-ML algorithm. Also, since the EM-ML algorithm has been 
              recently extended to linear integral equations in which the kernel and  the
              unknown function are nonnegative, these results provide important  insight into
              the open problem of convergence of this algorithm. In  addition, the research
              introduces, analyzes, and develops novel  algorithms for dealing with data
              errors due to accidental coincidences  and attenuation. The proposers also
              investigate the mathematical  properties of the probability functions which
              link the emissions to  the detector geometry in both PET and single photon
              emission computed  tomography (SPECT). Preliminary work for SPECT links these
              functions  to the classical Poisson kernel. This study is important for 
              developing accurate, efficient, fast, alternatives to the EM-ML  reconstruction
              algorithm.  %%%  The mathematical realization of many problems in science,
              engineering,  and medicine, give rise to inverse problems which are ill-posed
              in the  sense of Hadamard, and in which positivity plays an important role. 
              This proposal deals mainly with the particular example of such a  problem
              occuring in the nuclear imaging procedure of PET. In this  procedure, a patient
              is given a radiopharmaceutical which is absorbed  disprop ortionately by
              various regions of the organ of interest and  emits positrons according to the
              amount absorbed. These emissions are  collected by PET scanners which surround
              the region of interest and  then used in reconstruction algorithms which
              generate images  containing important information about the metabolism of an
              organ or  region of interest. This information is extremely useful for blood 
              flow and metabolic activity studies. For instance, it is a valuable  tool in
              the diagnosis of tumors, in determining their rates of growth;  in
              psychological studies for mapping activation areas of the brain to  cognitive
              tasks, in determining the effects of various drugs on the  brain, and in
              quantitative measures of the health of the human heart.  The proposers develop
              a refined mathematical model for the PET process  and introduce novel
              mathematical and numerical methods for the  reconstruction of PET images. These
              reconstruction algorithms are  sufficiently flexible to deal with significant
              errors in the PET data,  caused by anatomical obstructions which prevent some
              of the emitted  photons from being registered in the appropriate detector. An 
              important component of this work is the development and evaluation of 
              efficient, reliable, accurate algorithms for reconstructing PET  images. 
              Although primarily directed to PET studies, the  results obtained in this
              reserach are also applicable to other medical  and engineering problems, such
              as those which occur in liver biopsies,  nondestructive evaluation of
              manufactured items, and the restoration  of blurred images from outer space.   
              ***
