Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Evolution, Adaptive Radiation, and Geographic
               Diversification in Calochortus (Liliaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9623690

Award Number: 9623690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Givnish givnish@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623690  GIVNISH   Mariposa lilies and their relatives (Calochortus) comprise
              one of the largest and most ecologically diverse plant genera in western North
              America.  Their flowers are often strikingly beautiful and vary from open,
              tulip-like blossoms, to showy nodding globes, to bizarre forms with a dense
              layer of hairs over the inner surface of the petals.  Most species have narrow,
              non-overlapping distributions, in habitats ranging from deserts to chapparal,
              coniferous forests, and subalpine meadows.  Several species grow on serpentine,
              gypsum, or other unusual substrates; many are now close to extinction.  
              Principal investigators Givnish (supervisor) and Patterson (doctoral candidate)
              will evaluate the relationships among Mariposa lilies by extracting chloroplast
              and nuclear DNA from previously- and freshly-collected specimens.  They plan to
              derive a molecular family tree for the plants based on DNA sequences, determine
              the amount of agreement between trees based on DNA sequences and those based on
              morphological traits, and establish whether species that live in close
              proximity to each other are near or distant relatives.  They will also assess
              whether certain traits have appeared once or more than once in the family
              history of Mariposa lilies; for instance, whether lilies that can grow on
              serpentine soils are closely related (one appearance of the trait, expressed
              only in plants descended from the first to have this ability) or distantly
              related (multiple appearances of the trait).   Research will focus on two of
              the three sections of Calochortus, with collaborators planning to study the
              remaining section.  The investigations should shed light on the processes
              underlying the diversity of one of the WestOs largest - but most rapidly
              disappearing - groups of plants.
