Title       : Parsing Spontaneous Dialogue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9623665

Award Number: 9623665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $524352             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Allen james@cs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recent progress in the speech recognition field suggests great promise for
              practical spoken language interfaces within the next decade. But this
              technology is not yet ready for many applications because of the lack of
              effective methods for handling spontaneous speech. This project focuses on
              techniques that can provide additional information to a natural-language parser
              beyond the output of the speech recognition system. This extra information will
              be used in handling the following problems that arise in spontaneous dialogue:
              the segmentation of utterances into meaningful units, the identification and
              correction of  speech repairs, the detection and correction of speech
              recognition errors, and the interpretation of the intended speech act  from
              surface structure, lexical cues and intonation. The approach involves using
              stochastic techniques to identify likely recognition errors, speech repairs,
              utterance unit boundaries and prosodic features and then passing this
              information on to a parser which determines the best interpretation given all
              the information. The results of this project will help the development of
              accurate speech recognition  systems for spontaneous dialogue. The techniques
              developed will be evaluated using a series of empirical tests on a corpus of
              human-human dialogues, and by integrating the  techniques into a fully
              functional dialogue system.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
