Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Wave and Heat Processes in Fractal Boundary Layers".
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9623727

Award Number: 9623727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanislav Molchanov smolchan@math.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Boris Vainberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623727  Molchanov/Vainberg    The goal of the proposal is to study the
              phenomena of reflection,  absorption and scattering by fractal boundaries. Well
              known physicist  M. Berry formulated three hypotheses about possible physical
              and  mathematical effects of fractalness: 1) intermittent structure of the 
              scattering amplitude 2) a slower decay of scattered (coda) waves, 3)  existence
              of a large number of states in a thin boundary layer which  leads to a
              nonstandard asymptotic behavior of the spectral function . It  turns out that
              properties of wave and heat propagation in domains with  fractal boundaries
              depend on geometrical properties of fractals, and  more profound analysis
              requires, first of all, classification of fractals.    The authors of the
              proposal singled out three broad classes of fractals:  cabbage type (domain
              contains a system of flat cuts accumulated to the  outer boundary), bubble type
              (domain contains a system of bubbles  accumulated to the outer boundary), and
              web type (with a system of  thin cylinders). There are many natural objects
              with a similar boundary  structure: the earth lithosphere, boundary layer of
              polymer materials in  the process of aging, recrystallized or tempered layer of
              metals, etc.  Similar structures can also be formed artificially to create a
              material  with new properties. The authors proved that the eigenvalue counting 
              function of the Dirichlet Laplacian in cabbage type domains has two-  term
              asymptotics with the order of the second term equal to one half of  the
              Minkowski dimension of the boundary, i.e. the modified Weyl-  Berry hypotheses
              is valid. They also show that this hypotheses fails for  bubble and web type
              domains.    It is proposed to find the spectral asymptotics (eigenvalue
              counting  function, theta-function, zeta-function) for the Dirichlet problem
              for the  Laplacian in bubble and web type domains, and find geometrical 
              characteristics of the fractal which determine the second term of the 
              asymptotics. It is proposed to classify the spectru m of the Neumann  Laplacian
              for cabbage and bubble type domains (determine when the  spectrum is absolutely
              continuous, dense pure point, discreet) and find  conditions when the Weyl law
              (existence of the main term of spectral  asymptotics) is valid or the second
              term of the spectral asymptotics  exists. It is also proposed to find large
              time behavior of the solutions  to exterior mixed problems for the wave
              equation in bubble and web  type domains, and in particular , to find large
              time behavior of the  scattered waves.  %%%    The goal of the proposal is to
              study the phenomena of reflection,  absorption and scattering of waves by
              obstacles with very irregular  (fractal) boundaries. It turns out that
              properties of wave and heat  propagation in domains with very irregular
              boundaries depend on  geometrical properties of boundaries, and more profound
              analysis  requires, first of all, geometrical classification of irregularity of
              the  boundary. The proposers singled out three broad classes of obstacles: 
              cabbage type (obstacle contains a system of flat cracks accumulated to  the
              outer boundary), bubble type (obstacle contains a system of bubbles 
              accumulated to the outer boundary), and web type (with a system of  thin
              cylinders). There are many natural objects with a similar boundary  structure:
              the earth lithosphere, boundary layer of polymer materials in  the process of
              aging, recrystallized or tempered layer of metals, etc.  Similar structures can
              also be formed artificially to create a material  with new properties.    It is
              proposed to find characteristics of the obstacles (they will be  different for
              cabbage, bubble and web type obstacles) which determine  wave and heat energy
              reflected, absorbed or scattered by a thin  boundary layer of the obstacle and
              find long time behavior of the wave  and heat processes.    ***
