Title       : Dissertation Research: Mendel's First Law of Segregation Revisited: Variation in
               Chromosome Transmission Through Female Meiosis in Drosophila Melanogaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1996     
File        : a9623970

Award Number: 9623970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Langley chlangley@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623970  Langley   Meiosis is the biological process in which a diploid organism
              produces haploid gametes (i.e. eggs or sperm).  It is traditionally assumed
              that each chromosome of a given homologous pair has an equal probability of
              being transmitted into a gamete.  Violations of this assumption in which
              certain chromosomes are transmitted more or less frequently are referred to as
              segregation distortion.  Examples of segregation distortion are found in a wide
              variety of organisms and can profoundly influence the dynamics, levels and
              patterns of genetic variation in natural populations.  Genes whose function is
              to ensure chromosome transmission through meiosis would seem to be ideal
              candidates to exhibit segregation distortion.  Yet, for a variety of reasons,
              the study of this class of genetic loci has been neglected by population
              geneticists.  The research funded by this award takes advantage of recent
              advances in the understanding of the genes and the mechanisms of meiosis in the
              model organism, Drosophila melanogaster, to address this  the gap in our
              fundamental  understanding of segregation distortion.   In this project,
              variation in the fidelity of chromosome transmission through female meiosis for
              will be assessed for fifty African X chromosomes.  This experiment is designed
              to detect deviations from the assumption of equal probability of transmission
              into gametes. A series of X-linked genes which act during meiosis will then be
              surveyed.  Specific polymorphisms detected during this survey will be
              correlated with the observed variation in chromosome transmission.  Finally,
              the effects of telomeres, centromeres and polymorphic candidate loci on a
              chromosome's "transmission phenotype" will be directly measured through a
              series of genetic assays.  The  mechanisms of segregation distortion revealed
              in this work are important to applied as well as theoretical genetics,
              impacting genetic engineering, gene therapy, and breeding programs to improve
              plant and animal resources.
