Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Application of Operator Theory to Random Matrices and
               Random Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1996       
File        : a9623278

Award Number: 9623278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Estelle L. Basor ebasor@calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9623278  PI: Basor    The main objects of study in the
              theory of random matrices are certain Fredholm determinants. These arise to
              describe the level spacing distribution functions for random matrix models.
              Other random variables  also have distribution function given by Fredholm
              determinants. The primary focus of this research is to describe the
              distribution function of random variables for different matrix models. In the
              classical case the operators are convolution operators, but for other models
              the operators are generalizations of the convolution type. The techniques
              already developed to study the classical Szego limit theorems will be
              generalized for use in the more complicated cases. If the random variable is of
              a certain discontinuous type, then the operators have singular symbols. The
              known theory for discontinuous symbols will be extended to apply in the more
              general setting. This will involve extensions of the Fisher-Hartwig conjecture.
                 Many physical systems possess such complicated behavior that exact
              predictions become impossible. However, it is sometimes still possible to
              describe the average or statistical properties of the systems. For   example in
              slow nuclear reactions it is important to understand the average properties of
              the energy levels of a compound nucleus. Quantum mechanics tells us that the
              energy levels of the system are simulated by   the eigenvalues of a large
              Hermitian matrix. A matrix is a square array of numbers and the eigenvalues are
              a set of fundamental numbers associated to the matrix. The purpose of the
              proposed research is to   study the statistical properties of the eigenvalues
              for different classes of randomly generated matriaes. The theory of random
              matrices also occurs in other areas of mathematics and physics, such as the
              distribution of  the zeros of the Riemann zeta function, the study of
              disordered conductors and chaotic systems.
