Title       : Computational Geometry in the Physical World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a9623851

Award Number: 9623851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonidas J. Guibas guibas@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As the application of computers to the physical world widen,  there is an ever
              increasing need for computational tools to deal  with the physical attributes
              of objects, such as their geometry.  The field of Computational Geometry has
              made impressive strides  in the last twenty years in providing an algorithmic
              foundation  for the solution to many geometric problems in computer graphics, 
              computer vision, robotics and manufacturing, and many other  application areas.
              The purpose of this proposal is to develop a  set of novel geometric
              representations and algorithmic techniques  that will make computational
              geometry more useful in modeling  physical-world objects and processes. The aim
              is not to obtain  universal, domain-independent solutions --- such as a
              complete  solution to robustness concerns in geometric computing. Instead  the
              focus will be on certain key issues, such as scale-  sensitivity, shape
              variability, and motion, that arise in many of  the important uses of geometry
              in modeling physical objects and  systems. Geometric models that properly
              capture certain key  aspects of the uncertainty or variability in models of
              physical  objects and processes will be investigated, and efficient  algorithms
              for manipulating these models effectively will be  developed.  It is expected
              that this set of research directions  will generate new mathematical and
              algorithmic problems that will  be interesting and worthy of study on their own
              right, in  addition to producing geometric tools that are well-tailored to 
              physical world applications.  ***
