Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hypergeometric Functions, Zeta and Gamma Values in Finite
               Characteristic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9623187

Award Number: 9623187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42291              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dinesh Thakur thakur@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thakur  9623187  The investigator will explore analogies between Number Theory
              and  Geometry.  The hypergeometric function is one of the most  important
              special functions in mathematics and mathematical  physics.  Many of the
              functions that arise in various branches of  mathematics and physics-Bessel,
              Legendre, and Jacobi functions,  and many interesting orthogonal
              polynomials-are special cases of   the hypergeometric function.  Similarly, the
              q-hypergeometric  functions arise in the study of mathematical physics.  The 
              investigator has introduced an analogue for function fields, and  he will
              develop their theory and applications.  A classical  problem in Number Theory
              is to understand the nature of the  values of the Riemann zeta-function.  Euler
              showed that the   values at even integers s are rational multiples of powers of
              pi.  For odd s, the only known result is that the zeta-function is  irrational
              at s=3.  Carlitz considered an analogue of the  zeta-function by taking a sum
              over monic polynomials with  coefficients in finite fields, and established an
              analogue  of  Euler's result.  In the joint work with Anderson, the PI showed 
              that for  any positiveminteger s, the values are logarithms of  algebraic
              numbers, and are therefore transcendental.  It was also  shown that the
              analogue of Euler's  result for odd s does not  hold in this case.  The
              proposer plans to generalize thismresult  to general function fields.  The
              order of vanishing of zeta   functions gives important arithmetic information. 
              The PI plans  to complete  new partial results that he has obtained about these
               orders. Also, the PI  plans to workmout the relations of special  values with
              the cyclotomic theory, in light of recent work of  Anderson.  The special
              values of the classical gamma function  have also been extensively studied. 
              The PI introduced a new   gamma function for function fields.  He has
              established special  values results for its interpolations at finite primes for
               general function fields and for interpolati on at the infinite  prime only for
              the rational function field.  He plans to settle  the remaining case.  This
              research falls into the general  mathematical field of Number Theory.  Number
              theory has its  historical roots in the study of the whole numbers, addressing 
              such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of one   whole number by
              another.  It is among the oldest branches of  mathematics and was pursued for
              many centuries for purely  aesthetic reasons. However, within  the last half
              century it has  become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in areas 
              such as data transmission and processing, and communication  systems.
