Title       : Multicomponent Correlated Electron Systems: Fabrication andPhysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1998      
File        : a9623511

Award Number: 9623511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansour Shayegan shayegan@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9623511 
              Shayegan    This  research  involves  a study of the  materials  science  and 
              physics   of   the   growth   of   very   high-quality   gallium- 
              arsenide/aluminum-gallium-arsenide   hetero-junction   structures  using  the
              molecular beam epitaxy technique, and the new electron  interaction physics
              expected to emerge in such ideal systems. The  project   emphasized   studies 
              of  novel   quasi-two-dimensional  electron  and hole systems with an
              additional degree of  freedom.  These  include  systems  which contain  two  or
               more  layers  of  electrons   in   close  proximity  so  that  interlayer  
              Coulomb  interactions  are  strong,  and  electron  systems  in  aluminum- 
              arsenide  quantum wells where the conduction band  has  a  multi-  valley 
              degeneracy.  The additional degree of  freedom  in  these  structures is
              expected to lead to new collective states which  we  plan to probe via low
              temperature magnetotransport measurements.  %%%  An  experimental investigation
              of electron interaction physics in  quantum-confined semi-conductor
              hetero-structures will  be  made.  The  emphasis of the program is on both the
              fabrication, via  the  molecular  beam  epitaxy technique, and the electronic 
              transport  measurements  at low temperatures and high magnetic fields  where 
              electron  correlation  effects dominate.  The  proposed  systems,  name, novel
              high-quality electron and hole systems in selectively-  doped 
              gallium-arsenide/aluminum-gallium-arsenide hetero-junction  structures,  are 
              among  the  cleanest (lowest-disorder)  carrier  systems   available.  Such 
              structures  provide  a  crucial   and  important  test-bed for new many-body
              physics.  The  results  can  also  have  an  impact on the realization of  new 
              devices  whose  fabrication and/or operation is based on semiconductor
              structures  of similar type.  ***
