Title       : Experimental Studies of Convective Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9623612

Award Number: 9623612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penger Tong ptong@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9623612  Tong    The research project will utilize light scattering and laser 
              Doppler   velocimetry   techniques  to   study   statistical  properties   of, 
              and  correlations  among   the   velocity,  temperature,  and  vorticity 
              fields  of  turbulent  thermal  convection  in water.  The experiments will
              investigate  (1)  the  spatial  structure  of  the coherent  motions  and  the 
              correlations   between   the   velocity   and    temperature  fluctuations  in
              turbulent convection, and (2)  new  scaling  laws  of  velocity  and  vorticity
              statistics  over  varying  Rayleigh  numbers  and length scales in the 
              turbulent  core  region  and  near  the boundary layers.   The  project  will 
              provide a body of reliable data to test current theories for  turbulent
              convection and to understand key features  in  the  turbulent heat transport
              and in the atmospheric convection.  %%%  The research project will utilize
              light scattering and laser  Doppler velocimetry techniques (similar to
              automobile  laser  radar)   to study statistical properties of turbulent motion
               in  thermal  convection.  The proposed  experiments  are  of  fundamental 
              interest  for  understanding  the   nature   of  convective  turbulence, and
              they are also relevant  to  many  practical   applications  in  engineering, 
              geography,   and  meteorology.   The project will provide a body  of  reliable 
              data  to  understand  key features  in  the  turbulent  heat  transport  and in
              the atmospheric convection.  Understanding  the   heat  transport  phenomena 
              under  different  boundary  conditions will shed new light on technological
              improvements  for  more  efficient  heat transfer  in  various  industrial 
              applications  ranging  from heat  exchangers  in  a  nuclear  reactor  to  a 
              reentry vehicle.  The development  of  novel  laser  light  scattering 
              techniques  will  have  additional  applications in the discipline of fluid
              mechanics.  ***
