Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Operads, Representation Theory and Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9623044

Award Number: 9623044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail M. Kapranov kapranov@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Kapranov proposes to extend the prior study of moduli spaces of stable curves
              by means of operads and their duality to more sophisticated moduli spaces of
              stable maps and Fulton-McPherson compactified configuration spaces. He proposes
              to relate two  branches of representation theory which previously were not
              connected: theory of automorphic representations and theory of affine quantum
              groups, by looking at Eisenstein series and their functional equations from a
              new point of view.  He also proposes to study Hecke operators on vector bundles
              on algebraic surfaces over finite fields,  in order to establish an analog of
              the geometric Langlands correspondence, a fundamental principle in the theory
              of vector bundles on curves. Working with V. Ginzburg, Kapranov proposes to
              study natural analogs of Hecke algebras for matrix groups over 2-dimensional
              local fields like the field of power series in two variables over a finite
              field. In addition,  Kapranov proposes to generalize the theory of Drinfeld
              modules to algebraic varieties of arbitrary dimension, again with the aim of
              finding the correct analog of the Langlands correspondence. He also proposes to
              look for a generalization of the theory of character sheaves   to the case of 
              $p$-adic fields, which would involve stacks.     This research is in the 
              fields of algebraic geometry and representation theory. Algebraic geometry is
              one of the oldest branches of mathematics which initially studied plane
              geometric images defined  by simple equations but in last few decades has
              developed very extensively, finding applications not only inside mathematics
              but in such diverse fields as particle physics (geometry of microscopic degrees
              of freedom), car design (use of algebraic surfaces  to develop new
              aesthetically appealing shapes), robotics, theoretical computer science and
              others. In particular, algebraic geometry over finite fields (to which a large
              part of this proposal is devoted) has found applications in constructing
              error-correcting codes, optimal net works and  in  several other important
              problems  related to communications and information transmission.
