Title       : Structure and Magnetism of 4d Transition Metal Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9623246

Award Number: 9623246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald R. Harp harp@helios.phy.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                     9623246  Harp    Multilayer  magnetic thin films containing 4d elements 
              (Nb,  Mo,  Ru,  Rh, Pd) are fabricated as candidate materials  for  enhanced 
              magnetic properties.  Properties of  interest  are  magnetic moment, magnetic
              anisotropy, magnetoresistance, and  Kerr  rotation.   All of these properties
              are  critical  for  magnetic  recording applications.  Magnetic  properties 
              are  characterized using magnetometry, magnetotransport,  and  x-  ray 
              diffraction.  The students involved with this  research  will  be  employable
              in the magnetic data storage  industry,  and  are encouraged to gain experience
              relevant to industry,  such as with sputter deposition of thin films.  Students
              are  given   support   for   summer  internships   in   industry.  Furthermore,
               an upper level undergraduate course  in  solid  state physics is developed
              that uses computer simulations to  demonstrate basic concepts.  %%%  Of  all 
              the  more than 100 elements, only three  transition  metals,  iron cobalt, and
              nickel are ferromagnetic  at  room  temperature.  As a result, these three are
              incorporated into  nearly  every  device  that  uses magnetic  materials,  from
               electric motors to computer hard disk drives.  This research  aims  at  making
              new ferromagnetic materials by  sandwiching  very  thin  layers of some other
              transition  metals  between  layers  of iron, cobalt, nickel, or other
              materials.   These  layers  are  only a few atoms thick.  Theories predict 
              that  such  `multilayer' structures may possess properties  useful  to improved
              computer hard disk drives. The students involved  with  this research will be
              employable in the magnetic  data  storage  industry,  and are encouraged  to 
              gain  experience  relevant  to  industry, such as with sputter  deposition  of 
              thin   films.   Students  are  given  support   for   summer  internships  in 
              industry.   Furthermore,  an  upper   level  undergraduate  course  in solid
              state physics  is  developed  that   uses   computer  simulations  to 
              demonstra te   basic  concepts.  ***
