Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry and Analysis of 3-Dimensional CR-Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9623040

Award Number: 9623040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Epstein cle@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-962304   PI: Epstein     CR-geometry is the natural odd
              dimensional analogue of complex geometry.  From work of Kohn, Boutet de Monvel,
              and Harvey and Lawson it is known that any compact strictly pseudoconvex
              CR-manifold of dimension 5 or greater can be realized as the boundary of a
              compact normal Stein space.  A CR-manifold with such a realization is called
              embeddable.  It has been known since the 1960s that the situation in
              3-dimensions is quite different: the generic perturbation of an embeddable
              CR-structure is not embeddable. Our goal is to describe the set of embeddable
              CR-structures on a compact three manifold as a subset of the set of all
              CR-structures. For the case of deformations of the unit 3-sphere the small
              embeddable perturbations are essentially an infinite dimensional and infinite
              codimensional analytic submanifold of the set of all CR-structures.  The
              research outlined in this proposal is directed towards extending such results
              to more general classes of 3-manifolds. In earlier work the investigator
              introduced a stratification of the set of embeddable CR-structures. Locally the
              stratification is defined by formally analytic relations. A major thrust of the
              proposed work is to analyze these equations using methods arising from the
              Nash-Moser implicit function theorem. It is hoped that it can be shown that the
              strata have a transverse analytic structure. General position arguments and a
              generalization of a result of Kiremidjian being sought by the investigator and
              G. Henkin would then show that the stratification has only finitely many
              distinct strata. This would imply that the set of embeddable structures is a
              closed subset in a reasonable topology. Using extremal determinants analogous
              to those used by Osgood, Phillips and Sarnak it is hoped to define a natural
              exhaustion function for the space of embeddable structures.    The importance
              of mathematics in physics, economics, chemistry, engineering, etc. stems from
              the fact that EQUATIONS describe the rela tionships among the variables that
              arise in these fields. Making predictions is thereby reduced to solving the
              equations. One therefore needs criteria to determine whether the equations have
              solutions, and algorithms for solving them. In practice this can only be done
              approximately so it is important to have an estimate for the size of he errors
              one is making. In this proposal we consider a FAMILY of related equations that
              arise naturally in analytic geometry. These equations often do not have
              solutions. Even though the equations in the family are closely related, the
              property of solvability can change very wildly as one moves through the family.
              Our principal aim is to understand this instability and give criteria that
              describe the well behaved members of the family. There are similarities between
              the issues that arise in this analysis and problems encountered in image
              reconstruction techniques used, e.g., in CAT scans. It is hoped  that a better
              understanding of the case at hand will provide insight into other cases where
              similar instabilities arise.
