Title       : Electrostatic Charging Effects in Perovskite Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9623889

Award Number: 9623889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaoxing Xi xxx4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9623889  Xi  
               This  project  studies carrier doping effects on  the  insulator-  metal 
              transition and the electronic and magnetic  properties  of  perovskite   oxides
                which   exhibit  strong   electron-electron  correlations.  The technique
              used is electrostatic  charging,  in  which  the  carrier density is changed
              electrically in  a  field-  effect  transistor-like structure without 
              introducing  disorder,  lattice   distortion  or  a  structural  phase 
              transition.   One  objective of the project is to induce superconductivity  in 
              high  temperature superconducting cuprate samples which are  originally  not 
              superconducting and study the carrier density dependence  of  the 
              insulator-super-conductor  phase  transition  and  transport  properties  in
              this process. A long-term goal of this project  is  to  establish electrostatic
              charging as an important tool in  the  research  of  doping  effects in
              perovskite  oxide  systems  with  strong electron-electron correlations.  %%% 
              Metal  oxides  are a class of materials with a  wide  variety  of  novel 
              properties such as high temperature superconductivity  and  colossal 
              magneto-resistivity. Electron charge carrier doping  in  these  materials, in
              which electrons interact strongly with  each  other,  is  the  key  to the
              understanding of  these  properties.  However,  the  usual  approach  of 
              chemical  doping  is   always  accompanied   by   disorder   and  sometimes  
              structural   phase  transitions.  This  project studies the doping  effects 
              using  a  different  approach,  i.e.  the  electrostatic  charging,   which 
              changes  the  carrier  density electrically  without  introducing  other 
              effects.  One objective of the project is to  transform  a  nonsuperconducting
              cuprate sample into a superconductor by adding  charge  carriers  into  it. The
              long-term goal  is  to  establish  electrostatic  charging as an important tool
              in the  research  of  metal oxides with strong el ectron-electron correlations,
              which is  potentially  of  great scientific and technological  significance 
              for  advanced  superconducting  and  magnetoresistive  electronic  devices. 
              ***
