Title       : Matrix Normality Riesz Products and Diophantine Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9623045

Award Number: 9623045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney W. Forcade   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew D. Pollington  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is for an investigation that comprises two subprojects  in Number
              Theory; the common unifying theme is representation of  real numbers in 
              non-integer bases. The first subproject concerns  problems in uniform 
              distribution. The major problem under  consideration is higher dimensional
              normality. The "bases" become  n by n matrices and the "numbers" become points
              in n-dimensional  space. The problem has been completely resolved by Brown and 
              Moran for commuting (almost) ergodic matrices. The investigator  is, in
              collaboration with Moran, attacking the non-commuting  case. Another  problem
              in this subproject is Mahler's question on  uniform distribution of the
              sequence consisting of a real number  x times powers of 3/2. The  second
              subproject concerns  approximation spectra. The investigation is dealing with
              two  problems on this topic. The first is the conjecture of  Barnes  and
              Swinnerton-Dyer on inhomogeneous minima of quadratic forms.  They conjecture
              that the maximum of the inhomogeneous minima  occurs at a rational point and is
              isolated. The second problem  concerns higher dimensional  approximation
              spectra. The  investigator and J. Lagarias have recently  shown that the 
              Markoff spectrum can be obtained from the Szekeres  continuous  algorithm in a
              natural way. They are attempting to use a similar   analysis of the appropriate
              continuous algorithm to obtain new  information about the two (and higher)
              dimensional approximation  constant.    This research falls into the general
              mathematical  field of Number Theory.  Number theory has its historical roots 
              in the study of the whole numbers,  addressing such questions as  those dealing
              with the divisibility of one  whole number by  another. It is among the oldest
              branches of mathematics and  was  pursued for many centuries for purely
              aesthetic reasons. However,  within  the last half century it has become an
              indispensable tool  in diverse  applications in areas such as data transmission
              and  processing, and  communication systems.  Th e higher dimensional  rational
              approximation  techniques used in this project are of  significant interest for
               intelligence applications.
