Title       : Mathematical Sciences: RUI Inverse Problems in Thermal Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1998     
File        : a9623279

Award Number: 9623279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lester F. Caudill, Jr. lcaudill@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt M. Bryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              959623279  Caudill/Bryan  This research project concerns the study of inverse
              problems which arise  in using thermal methods for the nondestructive
              evaluation of materials.  The focus is to investigate the mathematics involved
              in the use of  techniques for imaging inaccessible portions of some object,
              e.g., an  inaccessible part of the boundary, or the interior of the object. 
              Such  inverse problems arise when one uses thermal methods for corrosion 
              detection.  The program includes the study of uniqueness and continuous 
              dependence questions, and explores the nature of the dependence of  solutions
              on relevant model parameters. The results of this analysis  serve as a
              foundation for designing inversion algorithms which are both  theoretically
              sound and computationally efficient and reliable. The  investigators also
              consider other thermal imaging problems, including  the location of interior
              cracks, delaminations, or voids.  %%%  Inverse problems arise naturally when
              one mathematically models physical  systems. Such systems almost always have
              certain unknown properties  which one cannot easily measure directly.  Instead,
              one gathers more  readily available information and uses mathematical analysis
              to infer  something about the unknown quantities. For example, by measuring the
               energy of an x-ray beam passed through a human body one can create  images of
              the interior of the body, a process known as a CAT scan.  Other important
              examples of inverse problems are medical imaging using  MRI and PET scans,
              acoustic sonograms, and non-destructive evaluation  of metal parts using
              electromagnetic methods, e.g., eddy currents.  This project concerns the
              investigation of inverse problems which arise  when one uses thermal methods to
              detect the presence and extent of  corrosion in the interior of material
              objects such as aircraft wings  and fuselages.    ***
