Title       : RUI: Mathematical Sciences: Spherical Characters on P-adic Coset Spaces and the
               Relative Trace Formula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9623125

Award Number: 9623125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48030              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cary B. Rader cbrader@mps.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Rader     This award provides funding for a project in the Langlands program.
              The  Relative Trace Formula (as initiated by Jacquet) is a new tool for  
              studying automorphic L-functions and functoriality in the Langland's  program.
              Rader and S. Rallis have been collaborating to prove some  of the local results
              they think necessary to make the Relative  Trace Formula a theorem instead of
              just a collection of examples. They  have shown that many of the results known
              for usual character and   central orbital integrals generalize to the case of
              spherical characters  and double coset integrals on certain p-adic symmetric
              spaces. They  plan to expand their research to include spherical subgroups such
              in  the sense of M. Brion. Although it will take many years to complete  such a
              project, it seems to be the natural domain for relative trace  formulae,
              because (probably) one dimensional representations of H occur  in irreducible
              smooth infinite dimensional representations of G with  finite multiplicity.
              Rader also plans to complete a collaborative effort  with Marie-France Vigneras
              investigating the geometric Zelevinskii   involution for nilpotent orbits in
              certain Lie algebras. This should have  applications in constructing modular
              representations of Hecke algebras,  after Kazhdan-Lusztig.    The Langlands
              program is part of number theory. Number theory is the  study of the 
              properties of the whole numbers and is the oldest branch of  mathematics. From
              the beginning problems in number theory have  furnished  a driving force in
              creating new mathematics in other  diverse parts of the  discipline. The
              Langland's program is a  general philosophy that connects  number theory with
              calculus;  it  embodies the modern approach to the  study of whole numbers.  
              Modern number theory is very technical and deep,  but it has had  astonishing
              applications in areas like theoretical   computer science and coding theory.
