Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Operator Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1998   
File        : a9623211

Award Number: 9623211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald W. Hadwin don@math.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623211  HADWIN         The principal investigator plans to continue his work in
                operator theory in the areas of reflexivity, approximation,   and invariant
              subspaces.  We have developed a very general   way of viewing reflexivity, and
              we have used it to discover   new results and easier ways of proving old ones. 
               We are   now developing techniques that make it possible to prove   that a
              subspace is reflexive or hyperreflexive by looking at   small "pieces" of it.  
              We hope to prove that a subspace with   a strictly separating vector and a
              strongly disjoint strictly   separating subspace must be hyperreflexive.  We
              are   studying approximation by characterizing closures of   certain classes of
              operators and by determining when   there are unique approximants.  Our
              approximation   results aid in our study of stable invariant subspaces   of
              operators.  We are working on a notion of ranked   operator spaces, which,
              combined with our work on   strong limits of similarities, should help
              determine the   closures of joint similarity orbits in finite-dimensional  
              spaces.        The theory of operators on Hilbert space is a part of  
              mathematics that generalizes to infinite dimensions the   basic ideas of linear
              algebra.  The growth of this subject   was stimulated by, and has applications
              to the study of   integral and differential equations, quantum mechanics   and
              control theory.  The general goal of operator theory   is to understand the
              structure of various classes and   collections of operators.  The principal
              investigator plans   to approach this goal by continuing his work on  
              approximation (i.e., which - and how closely - operators   can be approximated
              by ones that are well understood),   reflexivity and hyperreflexivity
              (operators determined by   their invariant subspaces), and developing simple
              algebraic   techniques to solve difficult analysis problems in operator  
              theory.
