Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical and Numerical Problems in Material Sciences
               and Fluid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9623137

Award Number: 9623137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weinan E   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9162,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9623137  E  The proposed work is the initial phase of  PI'slong term project  
              on ``Complex Materials and Complex Fluids''. The plan is to  explore and   
              develop ideas from non-equilibrium thermodynamics, advanced  numerical  
              techniques, asymptotics and rigorous mathematical analysis for  prototypical  
              problems, to reach a solid, coherent and practical level of  understanding  
              for the dynamical issues in polymeric liquids, high temperature  
              superconductors, etc. PI's work will be carried out in close  collaboration 
              with chemists and experimental physicists. In this initial phase,  PI proposes
              to study the following problems. (1). Dynamics and  morphology   of phase
              separation involving polymers. The emphasis is on   understanding the interplay
              between isotropic molecular  interaction  which drives the phase separation,
              and the anisotropic molecular  interaction which gives rise to orientational
              order, as well as  phase separation driven by polymerization. (2). Geometric
              defects  of  smectic liquid crystals. (3). Efficient and accurate numerical 
              methods for   complex flows.This includes direct simulation of high Reynolds 
              number   turbulent flows, turbulence models and polymeric liquids such as 
              liquid  crystals. The emphasis will be on reliable, practical and 
              parallelizable   methods which can be used immediately to enhance progress on 
              other fronts.  %%%  Many areas of technology calls for the manufacturing of 
              microcellular  foams and composite materials out of polymer solutions. The most
               promising   candidate for the next generation of flat panel display devices 
              are made by  chemically driven phase separation processes in a liquid 
              crystal-prepolymer   solution. While a vast amount of experimental results have
              been  accumulated,  both for flexible and rigid polymers, the dynamics of these
               processes  and the implication to morphology is very poorly understood. 
              Theoretical   understanding is hindered by the extreme complexity of these 
              problems. The   current proposal is a coordinat ed effort between applied 
              mathematicians,   chemists and physists to tackle this problem. A key component
              of  this   proposal is the numerical simulation of these processes using  
              state-of-the-art numerical methods and computers. The fact that  polymers are
              often large and non-uniform in their sizes makes  this problem  fundamentally
              different from the phase separation of ordinary  binary  liquids.  ***
