Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Equilibria Instabilities and Waves in Fluids and Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9623033

Award Number: 9623033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57274              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Lipton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1303,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623033  Lipton    The Principal Investigator (PI) will continue to study
              equilibria,   instabilities and waves in fluids and plasmas with the emphasis
              on the  comparative aspect of the problem. The PI is particularly interested 
              in the following topics: (a) stationary states of magnetized plasmas  with flow
              and their group-theoretical properties; (b) the stability  and evolution of
              elliptical self-gravitating fluid masses (the Riemann   ellipsoids) with
              applications to astrophysics; (c) the linear and  nonlinear dynamics of
              fixed-boundary ellipsoids containing fluid. The  PI is going to use various
              analytical techniques including the  constrained minimization, `exact'
              Galerkin, group-theoretical, and  geometrical optics methods in conjunction
              with numerical techniques  such as the three-dimensional vortex method, large
              scale symbolic   manipulations, and visualization, in order to achieve these
              goals.    Further directions of attack include self-similar, time-dependent 
              vortex rings, short wavelength instabilities of unmagnetized  and magnetized
              accretion discs, global instabilities of collisionless   gravitating
              systems,and spectral problems of hydrodynamics and   magnetohydrodynamics. This
              research will advance current knowledge of  the behavior of both laboratory and
              astrophysical fluids and plasmas.  In particular, this research will contribute
              towards a better understanding  of the properties of nonlinear PDEs of mixed
              elliptic/hyperbolic type   describing symmetric stationary states of plasmas
              with flow; the  stability of Riemann ellipsoids and fluid- and plasma-filled
              bodies;  the evolution of nonaxisymmetric stars, and the validity of the 
              fission theory of binary stars.  %%%  The dynamics of fluids and plasmas is of
              great interest to  mathematicians and physicists alike. There are at least two
              reasons  for this interest. First, fluid and plasma motions  play a fundamental
              role in nature and technology with applications  stretching from astrophysics,
              to oceanography, to weather predicti on,  to controlled thermonuclear fusion.
              Second, a very rich and  sophisticated mathematical apparatus is required in
              order to  give   an adequate description of these motions.  The equilibrium
              theory  studies the structure and properties of steady solutions of the 
              nonlinear equations of fluid and plasma dynamics. These equilibrium  solutions
              represent special states which do not change in time  when left undisturbed.
              Usually it is rather difficult to describe equilibrium  solutions, however, it
              is still much easier then to describe the  general solutions. In addition,
              equilibrium solutions are the most  interesting ones from a practical point of
              view. The stability theory  studies the impact of initially small perturbations
              on a given steady   fluid or plasma equilibrium.  An equilibrium is called
              stable and can  occur in nature if perturbations do not have a profound effect
              on its   properties.  An equilibrium is called unstable if under the influence 
              of perturbations  it either evolves into a different equilibrium, or  loses its
              steady character altogether.  Over a period of years many   classical stability
              problems were solved, however, several important  stability problems are still
              open. The wave theory studies the  behavior of small perturbations in the
              vicinity of stable plasma  equilibria. The main issues include the analysis of
              the oscillation   frequencies, the structure of the corresponding
              eigenfunctions, and  the asymptotic behavior of perturbations in time. The
              present research  is aimed at advancing current understanding of equilibria, 
              instabilities and waves. It blends theoretical and symbolic methods with  
              high-performance computing and graphics. The outcome of this research  will
              have both theoretical and practical value. Among other things, it  will help to
              understand the dynamics of plasmas in the so-called  tokamaks (installations
              which are used for controlled   thermonuclear fusion), and the stability of
              stars.  ***
