Title       : CPMSA: "Partnerships for Access and Student Success (PASS)"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2001   
File        : a9623359

Award Number: 9623359
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Johns   (Principal Investigator current)
              Laval S. Wilson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Annette M. Saturnelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Newburgh City Sch Dist
	      124 Grand Street
	      Newburgh, NY  12550    845/563-7428

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goals and objectives of the Newburgh (NY) Enlarged City School  District's
              proposal are aligned with National Science Foundation's  goals and objectives
              for the Comprehensive Partnership for Minority  Student Achievement (CPMSA).  A
              systemic approach K-12 has been  designed by the school district and its
              partners to improve the  quality and quantity of science and mathematics
              education received  by minority students; to increase the number of minority
              students  enrolling in and successfully completing higher level precollege 
              science, engineering and math courses; and to increase the number  of students
              who go on to pursue undergraduate studies in science,  math, engineering, and
              technology (SMET), especially minority  students who are significantly
              underrepresented in these fields.   The Board of Education has unanimously
              adopted a resolution that  embraces the CPMSA mission, promotes the philosophy
              for science and  math as defined in the Goals 2000 Educate America Act, and
              commits  existing resources to achieve these goals within the next five  years
              and to sustain these efforts thereafter.  the framework for  the school
              district's model for systemic reform consists of four  essential
              characteristics: core elements, supporting mechanisms,  connecting activities,
              and transitional experiences for students,  teachers, and parents.  These will
              be delivered through three  coordinated and integrated systems which function
              year round: The  SMET Student Academy; The Teacher Institute; and The Parent 
              Community Center.  These entities will provide multiple pathways to  attain the
              goal orientation needed for success in school, at work,  and in life.  To
              excite, encourage, enlist and meet the needs of  student, a series of core math
              and science Readiness and  Preparedness Courses, as well as a variety of
              enrichment  opportunities will permeate the system.  Programs such as Dial-a- 
              Teacher, Homework Hotline, Face-to-Face Tutoring, project  Adventure, Young
              Saturdays, Study Skills courses, SAT/ACT Pre p  courses, College Saturdays and
              Weekends will offer students  continuous support.  Transitional experiences
              will be provided for  student s at three levels: SMET Summer Camps, modeled
              after our  1995 NSF-funded Summer Science Camp, will provide transitional 
              experiences at two levels, from elementary to middle and from  middle to high
              school; a College Bridge program will help extend  the pipeline from high
              school to college.  A critical component of  each transitional experience is
              the connection it will make to the  SMET industries through field trips,
              shadowing, mentoring, and  internship opportunities.  The primary goal of the
              Teacher  Institute is to develop and strengthen the capacity of teachers for 
              teaching SMET courses in a multicultural setting an to alter the  way that
              teaching, learning, and assessment take place through  staff development
              courses based upon the latest educational  research and taught under the
              leadership of the faculty at New York  University.  A unique aspect of the
              Teacher Institute will be the  SMET Fellows Program, a 4-6 week summer
              internship.  Parents will  be actively engaged in the Parent Community Center. 
              Satellite  locations, strategically located throughout the city, will welcome 
              parents.  The programs will empower parents to become more active  partners in
              the education of their children.  By putting  educational research and theory
              into practice, this proposed CPMSA  will reduce and ultimately resolve the
              problem of  underrepresentation in our district and has the potential to in 
              other districts that are also experiencing a high degree of 
              underrepresentation of minority students in higher level SMET  courses.  ***
