Title       : SBIR Phase II: Manufacture of Metal/Metal Oxide Powders by Spray Pyrolysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1998      
File        : a9623767

Award Number: 9623767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Caruso   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clive Chandler  (Principal Investigator former)
              Daniel J. Skamser  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nanochem Research, Inc.
	      1009 Bradbury Drive, SE
	      Albuquerque, NM  87106    505/272-7480

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9623767  Chandler  This Small Business Innovation Research, Phase II project
              builds on the successful results obtained in the synthesis of high-value
              precious metal/metal oxide composite powders (Ag, Pd. Au, Pt) by spray
              pyrolysis carried out in Phase I. Powders containing precious metals are used
              extensively in the electronics industry for manufacture of circuit boards and
              capacitors. Current methods of powder synthesis cannot adequately control the
              size distribution of the powders, nor give controlled phase and elemental
              composition and in the case of Palladium provide useful oxidation resistance.
              The Phase I feasibility study has demonstrated that Pd and Pd/metal oxide
              composite powders produced by spray pyrolysis have enhanced properties over
              commercially available powders made by existing techniques. Pd-containing
              powders have been prepared with better control over size, size distribution and
              crystallinity which also results in the added value of improved oxidation
              resistance. The Phase II effort is aimed at determining whether the added value
              imparted to these powders can be maintained at higher production scales. This
              will be achieved by the design, construction, testing and refinement of a works
              prototype spray pyrolysis reactor capable of producing sufficient (kg)
              quantities of these powders to be incorporated into pastes and tested in
              electronic components such as multi-layer ceramic capacitors, MLCCs. This
              requires the development of a novel aerosol generation and classification
              system and powder collection unit as part of Phase II research.  The powders
              produced by this research will have applications in the electronics industry as
              the base powder used in making screen printed circuit boards and as the
              metallization of MLCCs. Successful completion of Phase II research will result
              in a strong advantage over traditional metal powders in the MLCC market due to
              better oxidation resistance and a cost reduction from inert filler material.
