Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Existence and Blow-Up of Solutions to Systems of
               Nonlinear Wave Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1996      
File        : a9623207

Award Number: 9623207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63301              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Lindblad lindblad@math.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Lindblad   9623207    Lindblad's  research concerns systems of
              nonlinear wave equations. The basic mathematical questions are: (i) Does one
              have local existence and uniqueness of solutions in a certain class? (ii) Does
              one have blow-up of solutions?  (iii)  What is the long time behavior of
              solutions?  Some of the main techniques to be used are (iv) Pseudo-Riemannian
              or Lorentzian geometry, (v) Fourier transform methods (vi) Energy-methods.  
              Lindblad proposes to carry out two projects related to these general questions,
              combining the techniques mentioned: (I) To answer certain questions  concerning
              low regularity solutions and small data.  (II) To study regularity of a
              free-boundary problem, that occur in nature, for the relativistic Euler
              equation. Solution to these questions would contribute to our knowledge of
              fundamental equations from physics. On the one hand we are combining the
              different techniques (iv)-(vi), and it has usually been the case that
              interesting and useful mathematics originates from interaction between
              different fields of   mathematics as well as between mathematics and other
              sciences. On the other hand, the study of Einstein's equations have to a large
              extent been neglected by mathematicians. It is e.g. perceivable that one could
              use gravitational waves as a means of observing the universe. To solve problem
              (II) we are developing completely new techniques, and we believe that it will
              be useful for studying many other problems as well, e.g. an interface between
              two fluids. Such a problem would have industrial applications. Lindblad is also
              using computers and numerical calculations in his research, which makes it more
              accessible for applied scientists.     The practical motivation for this
              research is that several of the important equations in physics can be written
              as a system of nonlinear wave equations.  There are examples of this in
              classical field theory and continuum mechanics as well as in classical physics,
              e.g. Einstein's equations, the Yang-Mills equatio n and the equations of
              nonlinear elasticity. For some equations, for example Yang-Mills, we expect the
              solutions to remain regular for all times. On the other hand, for Einstein's
              equations and the equations of nonlinear elasticity, the solutions blow-up for
              certain data. For Einstein's equation the blow-up occurs in nature (black holes
              in general relativity) whereas for the equation of nonlinear elasticity the
              blow-up is due to the fact that the equations no longer describe what is
              happening in nature accurately. In either case it is important to understand
              the mechanism of existence versus blow-up.
