Title       : CAREER: Research and Education Career Development Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9623920

Award Number: 9623920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan P. James sjames@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623920  James  Dr. James' plans for integrating research and education are 
              presented.  The overall objective of her research is to  engineer a new
              polymeric material for the articulating  surfaces of total joint replacement
              implants which should  decrease the wear and thus increase the longevity of
              these  implants.    This award will support the experimental research and 
              development of novel gradient, interpenetrating polymer  network (IPN)
              materials with positively charged surfaces  which will have good bearing
              properties and will attract the  polyanionic lubricating molecules in synovial
              joint fluid.  Ultra high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) will be  made
              biomimetic by incorporating cationic groups, similar to  those in articular
              cartilage, into it.  Specifically, an IPN  will be formed at the surface of
              UHMWPE between crosslinked  polylysine (PL) and UHMWPE by swelling UHMWPE,
              diffusing PL  into it and subsequently crosslinking the PL.  The IPN will  have
              a gradient nature in which the surface regions have a  higher concentration of
              PL than the interior.  Variation of  swelling solvents, solvent temperature, PL
              oligomer size and  crosslinkers will result in IPNs with different gradient 
              thickness, characteristics and charge densities.    In order to characterize
              the mechanical and physical  properties of the novel materials, the following
              tests will  be performed:  conditioning, surface charge measurement, 
              measurement of the thickness and gradient characteristics,  dimensional changes
              from initial thickness, synovial fluid  adsorption and tribological
              characterization.  The results  of these tests will determine the most
              desirable  experimental methods to be used in the preparation of the  implant
              materials for the cell toxicity, mechanical testing  and hip simulator studies.
                 Dr. James tries to use cooperative learning in the classroom  and to
              integrate undergraduates in her research program  during the academic years and
              summers.  This proposal will  also help support the out reach activities of Dr.
              James and  her students, such as a snow sled design contest for girls 
              interested in math and science at regional public elementary  schools.  ***
