Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Second Order Elliptic and Parabolic Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1998      
File        : a9623287

Award Number: 9623287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111702             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail Safonov safonov@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    DMS-9623287  PI:  SAFONOV  UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA    The project
              relates to important topics in the theory of Second Order Elliptic and
              Parabolic Partial Differential Equations, such as properties of solutions of
              linear equations with measurable coefficients (the backward Harnack inequality,
              the estimates for fundamental solutions, etc.), the problem of uniqueness of
              blowup solutions to semilinear elliptic equations, and the problem of
              regularity of solutions to fully nonlinear equations.  Part 1 of the project
              deals with the estimates of solutions of linear equations which do not depend
              on the smoothness of coefficients.  Special attention is paid to the local
              boundedness of solutions and to the behavior of positive solutions which blowup
              at the boundary.  Uniqueness of such solutions is investigated under minimal
              assumptions on the smoothness of coefficients and on the structure of the
              boundary.  In Part 3, the results on the classical solutions of linear
              equations are extended to the fully nonlinear equations satisfying a Dini
              condition with respect to independent variables.    The estimates of solutions
              of linear equations with non-smooth coefficients are associated with certain
              properties of different processes in non-homogeneous environment, with many
              applications to heat-mass transfer, chemistry, porous media, traffic flow,
              biology, etc.  Such estimates also serve as a background for the theory of
              nonlinear equations.  The investigation of blowup solutions of semilinear
              equations is important in ecology, combustion theory, chemical and nuclear
              engineering.  Many phenomena in these and other areas can be treated in terms
              of a superdiffusion process which describes a cloud rising as the limit of a
              system of independent Brownian particles which die at random times, leaving a
              random number of offspring.  Fully nonlinear equations are closely related to
              the theory of optimal control of random processes where the optimal strategy
              can e found by solving of appropriate initial or bou ndary value problem for
              the corresponding nonlinear equation.  This theory has applications to many
              physical and economical problems.
