Title       : Dissertation Research: Mechanics of Speciation in the Rock Dwelling Cichlid
               Genus Melanochromis in Lake Malawi, Africa (Teleostei:Cichlidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9623881

Award Number: 9623881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Kocher Tom.Kocher@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623881  KOCHER  The fauna of cichlid fish (Pisces: Cichlidae) in Lake Malawi
              (eastern Africa) represent a level of species diversity unparalleled in other
              vertebrate lineages.  Lake Malawi contains an estimated 500 distinct species,
              most of which are found only in this lake.  It is thought that this high level
              of biodiversity has been generated during the relatively short time that Lake
              Malawi has been in existence.  Many researchers believe that the forces
              responsible for generating this species richness are still operating today. 
              One model, the Dominey hypothesis, suggests that extreme philopatry (greatly
              reduced migration between populations) and the development of distinct mate
              recognition systems within each population, have resulted in the emergence and
              maintenance of the many Lake Malawi cichlid species.  Until now, tests of this
              hypothesis have been difficult to design and implement.    In this study,
              Jeffrey Markert, under the direction of Thomas Kocher, will use detailed field
              sampling techniques, laboratory mate-choice experiments, and molecular markers
              to evaluate the geographic and behavioral components of the Dominey hypothesis.
               DNA fingerprinting, combined with a fine scale survey of cichlid populations
              along the eastern shore of Lake MalawiOs Nankumba Peninsula, will assess the
              extent of philopatry in these populations; the prediction is that these fish
              hardly ever Oleave homeO.  DNA fingerprinting will also be combined with
              laboratory experiments in which fish, raised in an enclosure that closely
              replicates natural conditions, are permitted to choose mates from multiple
              populations; the prediction is that the fish will prefer members of their own
              population.  The results of this study will test the ability of the Dominey
              hypothesis to model species diversity in Lake Malawi cichlid fish.  It will
              help assess whether the Dominey hypothesis applies only to species diversity in
              Lake Malawi cichlid fish or can be applied more generally.
