Title       : CAREER: Seismic Response and Cyclic Behavior of Sands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2001   
File        : a9623979

Award Number: 9623979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan Pestana-Nascimento pestana@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1045,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***  9623979  Pestana    The importance of a rational approach to understanding
              the dynamic behavior of sands has grown with an increased awareness of the
              relationship between local conditions and the dynamic loading resulting from
              earthquakes. In particular, the experience and data gathered from the 1989 Loma
              Prieta and 1995 Hyogoken-Nambu (Kobe) earthquakes clearly indicate that most of
              the ground failures appear to have been the result of liquefaction of
              cohesionless materials; predominantly loose, saturated hydraulically-placed
              fills. Overall, liquefaction played an important role in the extensive damage
              experienced by these port facilities. These events, including the October 1995
              Mexico earthquake, are ever present and thus the need to quantify potential
              damage and assess the risk associated with these natural hazards.    The
              objectives of this research program are: a) development of an advanced
              constitutive model able to describe the observed behavior of cohesionless soils
              during cyclic loading, and the evaluation of its performance through selected
              comparisons with reliable laboratory data; b) implementation of this advanced
              soil model into a finite element formulation with dynamic capabilities; and c)
              application to the assessment of the seismic response of cohesionless soils
              thorough fundamental parametric studies of soil-structure interaction, such as
              the performance of deep foundations.    The educational goals are: a) To foster
              the integration of research and education; b) increase involvement of
              undergraduate students in research; and c) maximize the exchange between
              education and engineering practice and design. These goals are approached from
              the perspective of the following important factors: a) Trends and innovative
              thinking in engineering research; b) innovative instructional techniques; and
              c) involvement in the engineering state-of-practice.    The research will
              contribute to the fundamental understanding and prediction of factors such as
              volume change, shear modulus, dampin g and time effects during cyclic loading,
              and may be applicable to all liquefiable soils. The incorporation of the
              constitutive model into a finite element code to predict soil-structure
              interaction, including earthquake induced permanent deformation, represents a
              significant contribution earthquake hazard mitigation.    The education program
              will foster the involvement of undergraduate students in engineering design
              projects, and will encourage graduate students to learn the fundamental
              concepts and make critical use of available tools and techniques to succeed in
              their professional practice.***
