Title       : CAREER: Theoretical and Practical Solutions for Geometric Path Planning and
               Related Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9623585

Award Number: 9623585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny Ziyi Chen chen@cse.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9623585  Chen  This project will study the design, analysis, and implementation 
              of algorithmic techniques for solving geometric shortest path  problems, their
              generalizations, and applications.  Of interest  are not only theoretically
              efficient algorithms, but also  practically efficient ones.  The research has
              three main  interests: (a) Develop efficient algorithmic solutions for  several
              fundamental geometric shortest path problems that are  still outstanding (e.g.,
              geometric shortest path queries), (b)  investigate new approaches to computing
              approximate geometric  shortest paths, and (c) design effective and practically
               efficient paradigms for planning robotic shortest paths in the  plane and in
              higher dimensional spaces.  Several general  frameworks for processing exact
              and approximate geometric  shortest path queries will be investigated.  These
              frameworks  offer the promise of achieving new efficient algorithmic 
              techniques and data structures for geometric shortest path  queries and for
              other related problems.  Also, a paradigm is  being studied for obtaining
              practical solutions to planning  shortest obstacle-avoiding paths for robot
              motion in planar and  higher dimensional environments.  This paradigm is based
              on new  data structures called framed-quadtrees and framed-octrees, and  has
              led to new practical robotic path planning algorithms.  In  addition,
              algorithmic solutions for shortest paths and their  generalizations are applied
              to practical applications such as  data compression, computer vision, image
              processing, and VLSI  design.  New approaches for solving application problems
              based on  algorithms for shortest path problems and their generalizations  are
              studied.  The possibility of finding new methods for  geometric shortest paths
              that yield efficient implementation  performance on existing Massively Parallel
              Processing (MPP)  systems is also explored.  The research also includes an 
              important experimental component.    The education plan is to develop a new
              environment for t eaching  and experimenting with Massively Parallel Processing
              (MPP)  systems by utilizing the new EXECUBE-based MPP architectures.  The goal
              is to develop an inexpensive, but very robust, MPP  system for upper level
              undergraduate and entry level graduate  students to study and gain "hands on"
              experience with  parallelism.  The curriculum materials to be developed include
               concise programming tutorials, lecture notes, sample programs,  and projects
              with sample solutions.  This work could provide an  integral part of not just
              electives in parallelism, but virtually  of all the upper level computer
              science and engineering  curriculum, and could even provide a basis to spill
              over into  other engineering and scientific disciplines.  ***
