Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonsmooth Analysis and Control Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1996      
File        : a9623406

Award Number: 9623406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38876              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Wolenski wolenski@math.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9623406  PI: Wolenski     The main emphasis of this
              proposal is aimed at studying a so-called differential inclusion by using ideas
              and recent results from nonsmooth analysis.  A differential inclusion is a
              generalization of an ordinary differential equation, and can be viewed as a
              multidirectional flow.  The practical uses of the formulation are motivated by
              issues in control theory, where it has been known for some time that a control
              system can be reformulated as a differential inclusion without losing
              information regarding its trajectories.  But as with any reformulated model,
              one must take care in analysing the precise transfer of assumptions from one to
              the other.  Part of the research in this proposal is aimed at bridging this gap
              between what is known in differential inclusions and control  systems under
              different sets of assumptions.  It is the contention of  the Wolenski that many
              issues in control theory will not be properly understood until the fundamental
              traits implying the desired behavior are brought out in the associated
              differential inclusion.  Specific topics Wolenski plans to address include a
              Hamilton-Jacobi type analysis in the minimal time problem, a detailed analysis
              of the boundary to a reachable set, an extension of the Hopf representation
              formula, a survey of the uses of semiconvexity in analysis and optimization,
              and a broadening of the theory of hereditary control systems.     Applications
              of control theory are prevalent in applied science, and its influence on our
              society will undoubtedly continue to expand.  From manufacturing to medicine to
              engineering to economics,   control systems are increasingly being introduced
              as models for describing complicated system behavior.  The many recent
              mathematical advances in control theory are finding their way into practice,
              and   this exposes the need for further mathematical understanding of control
              phenomena.  Nonsmooth analysis is a mathematical discipline that has developed
              rapidly in the last twen ty  years, mainly motivated   by its many applications
              to optimization and optimal control theory. It now contains a surprisingly
              complete body of results that both in method and substance extend most of the
              classical differential   calculus.  The present proposal is directed toward
              applying some of the more recent advances to topics in control  theory.  Since
              the influence of control theory in applied science can hardly be overestimated,
              and as more of the recent mathematical advances are finding applications
              throughout society, a need has  arisen for a greater understanding of the
              properties of control  systems.  The successful completion of this research
              will lead to a greater mathematical understanding of the evolution of control 
              systems, and could have significant consequences in the modelling  process by
              allowing the designer to focus on crucial elements of the design that would
              lead to an improved performance.
