Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Molecular Systematics of the Family Drosophilidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9623559

Award Number: 9623559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8632               (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret G. Kidwell kidwell@azstarnet.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623559  Kidwell  This award will provide funds for materials and supplies as
              well as travel funds to support both collecting in Costa Rica and study of
              specimens at the American Museum of Natural History in New York.  The support
              will enhance the dissertation of Patrick M. O'Grady II who is a graduate
              student with Dr. Margaret G. Kidwell at the University of Arizona.  The
              student's dissertation project involves phylogenetic analysis of molecular
              sequence data from two independent genes (Adh  and COII) to assess
              relationships among genera of flies in the family Drosophilidae (Insecta:
              Diptera).   The genus Drosophila has been and is such a classic model system
              that a  well-supported phylogeny of this group will have broad utility to other
              researchers addressing questions of reproductive biology, development, ecology,
              biogeography, genetic history, etc..   To date, hypothesized phylogenies for
              the family  Drosophilidae have suggested contradictory or incongruent patterns
              of relationships.  This project hopes to correct that situation and to use the
              two molecular data sets obtained to address analytical issues such as
              quantifying levels of congruence among competing hypotheses/phylogenies and
              whether combined evidence or separate analyses are of greater utility.   This
              award will provide support for a graduate student pursuing studies of
              relationships among genera in the family of flies to which the genus Drosophila
              belongs.  These flies are well known experimental animals for many areas of
              biology and understanding of their historical relationships will be of value in
              many kinds of research.  The project will also investigate means of analyzing
              complex and sometimes conflicting molecular  data.  Support for the training of
              graduate students in modern systematic and population biology methodologies is
              important for maintaining the workforce of scientists capable of addressing the
              questions and issues of biodiversity which are of increasing global concern.
