Title       : Electrodynamics of Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9623720

Award Number: 9623720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Sridhar srinivas@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9623720  Sridhar    This  project seeks to study the response to
              electromagnetic  waves  at microwave frequencies, of new superconducting 
              materials, such as  high temperature    superconductors  and   borocarbide   
              superconductors. Experiments  will  be  carried out using certain unique 
              facilities  to study  microwave response under a variety of conditions and 
              materials. This   response,   when  suitably  analyzed,  will yield important
              information about the paired state  of electrons and  the  motion  of
              superconducting  vortices  in these materials. In  addition  to  making
              fundamental  contributions to the understanding of high temperature and 
              borocarbide superconductors, this work will also have  important impact on  
              microwave   applications.  An  understanding  of  the intrinsic properties of
              the pure  systems, the the influence of purities, will provide  clues to
              improving the loss capabilities of microwave  devices. The  studies  of
              non-linear effects will be crucial  to  improving  the high  power  performance
               of microwave  devices,  currently  a  serious limitation  to  the  successful
              application of  the  high  temperature  superconducting materials in this
              arena.  %%%  The   electromagnetic   response   of   high   and   low 
              temperature superconductors  will  be  investigated using  a  unique 
              experimental capability,  covering  a  wide  range  of  frequencies  (dc  to 
              fifty gigahertz), temperature (2  to 350 Kelvin) and magnetic field (0  to  7
              Tesla).  The  program will address key current issues, such  as  order 
              parameter symmetry, quasiparticle density of states,  depairing effects of a
              magnetic field in the Meissner and  mixed states, c-axis transport including 
              coherent/incoherent quasiparticle tunneling and possibility  of  intrinsic 
              Josephson  junctions. A notable  feature  of  the  high temperature
              superconductors is their pronounced  non-linear response at moderate  microwave
              powers and field  amplitudes. An  understanding  of this  non-linearity in 
              terms of th e spatio-temporal dynamics  of  flux penetration  at high
              frequencies will be another theme of this project.  Experiments will be carried
              out on the non-linear impedance,  mixed acdc and harmonic/intermodulation
              response, in both  the frequency-domain and  time-domain,  and will be analyzed
               in the framework  of  critical state models which can have  recently emerged. 
              ***
