Title       : Noise Investigations of Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9623478

Award Number: 9623478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Weissman mbw@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9623478 
              Weissman    Non-Gaussian noise statistics will be used to probe  statics  and 
              dynamics  of  some  important problems  in  disordered  condensed  matter. Six
              central topics are identified. The first project will  address the pinning of
              magnetic flux by disorder in some  of  the  new  superconducting  materials.
              This includes  a  study  of  the  process    by   which   the   flux   breaks  
              loose,   destroying  superconductivity,  at  high  currents.The  second 
              project  will  investigate  the  role of inhomogeneous conductance  among 
              small  magnetic  regions  in  determining  the  mechanism  for  colossal 
              magnetoresistance. The third topic will study the effect  on  the  "solidity" 
              of  the glass phase of some hidden long-range  order,  such  as  large-scale
              collective rearrangements  well  below  the  temperature  at  which gross
              annealing sets in. The  forth  topic  consists  in  the  study  of the effect
              of  local  anisotropy  in  determining  the qualitatively different mesoscopic 
              behavior  of  different  metallic  spin-glasses. The fifth project  will  study
               which  of  the two mechanisms, simple pinning of magnetic  domain  walls  or 
              collective  domain-wall rearrangements,  is  the  most  important  in 
              determining the unevenness  of  the  magnetization  process  in  most  magnets.
              The nature of  relaxor  ferroelectric  behavior and comparison to
              spin-glass-like phenomenon will be the  last issue to be studied.  %%%  Almost 
              all  real  materials are not perfectly  crystalline,  but  rather  have  some
              disorder. In many cases (e.g.  glasses),  this  disorder  is  fundamental  to
              the structural  properties  of  the  material,  in  other cases (e.g.
              superconductors  in  a  magnetic  field)  it  is  crucial to understanding the
              dynamical  behavior.  Generally,  disorder  creates  situations  in  which 
              there   are  multiple  states  among which the system can  switch,  either  by 
              thermal  energy or under the influ ence of external driving.  Such  switches
              create noise in measurable properties. The goal of  this  project is to clarify
              how certain disordered structures form  and  respond  to external driving,
              mostly by using noise as  a  probe.  The  central issues to be addressed are:
              (1) In glasses, is  some  hidden  long-range  order responsible for the
              "solidity"  of  the  glass phase, despite the apparent randomness of the
              structure? At  what  temperature do large-scale collective rearrangements 
              occur  in  glasses?  (2)  In  the magnetic relative  of  glasses,  spin- 
              glasses,  what  parameters determine the range and  form  of  the  collective  
              behavior?   In   technological   important   relaxor  ferroelectrics, what
              determines the same properties? (3) How does  the underlying disorder in most
              magnets create the unevenness  of  the magnetization process? Is a simple
              pinning of magnetic domain  walls  involved,  or  are  collective domain-wall 
              rearrangements  important?   (4)  In  the  colossal  magnetoresistive 
              materials,  investigated  as  promising field sensors for magnetic  recording 
              and  other  applications,  what is  the  main  mechanism  of  the 
              magnetoresistive effect? Is inhomogeneous conductance among small  magnetic
              regions the key process?
