Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Adaptive Radiation and Interspecific Gene Flow in High
               Andean Espeletiinae: A Coalescent Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1996       
File        : a9623696

Award Number: 9623696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Schaal schaal@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623696  Schaal   Research funded by this award probes the workings of adaptive
              radiation, one of the fundamental evolutionary processes that foster
              biodiversity.  Adaptive radiation is manifest in groups of species which, from
              their origins in a single common ancestor, have experienced exceptional and
              often rapid diversification.  In plants, this phenomenon is most apparent
              within high elevation tropical habitats.  In the Andes mountains of northern
              South America, the subtribe Espeletiinae (Asteraceae) has diversified into over
              80 species and a spectacular array of morphological forms, making it a classic
              example of adaptive radiation and an important model system for studying
              evolution in plants.  One of the many interesting characteristics of this group
              is the high frequency with which several highly inter-fertile species of
              Espeletiinae co-occur  within the same habitats.  This raises the main
              questions addressed in this award: how often do such species hybridize, and
              what role has hybridization played in the adaptive radiation of this group? 
              The potential for hybridization to spread adaptive genes from one species to
              another and even result in the instant creation of new species makes these
              questions particularly fascinating.     With support from this award, genetic
              samples will be collected from many individuals of these co-occurring species. 
              Variation among these individuals and species, detected by DNA sequencing, will
              be analyzed using the statistically powerful framework provided by recent
              theoretical advances in coalescent theory, making it possible to test for
              evidence of genetic exchange among species.  Results will provide answers to
              basic questions about the role of hydridization, not just in the adaptive
              radiation of the Espeletiinae but it all plants where hydridization may play an
              important role in evolution.   Findings will enhance our knowledge of tropical
              biodiversity and aid in conservation strategies for endemic plant species.
