Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cooperative Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1996      
File        : a9623224

Award Number: 9623224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Emlen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                     Abstract    Proposal # 9623224  PI:  S.
              T. Emlen & P.M. Buston       In 1859, Charles Darwin put forward one of the
              most  profound ideas in the history of science; the idea of  evolution by
              natural selection.  Since Darwin, it has become  widely accepted that natural
              selection should favor  individuals that behave in ways that maximize their
              total  number of surviving offspring.  In this context cooperative  breeding is
              an evolutionary paradox because it refers to  social systems  where individuals
              forego their own reproduction and assist  others in the care of young.    The
              proposed research will test the robustness of current  theory concerning the
              evolution of cooperative breeding by  investigating its applicability to the
              marine environment  for the first time.    The research proposed will
              investigate the breeding system  of the Clown anemonefish Amphiprion percula in
              Madang  Lagoon, Papua New Guinea.  At this site, groups composed of  a breeding
              pair and 0 - 6 juveniles defend anemones as  reproductive territories.  Three
              questions will be  investigated:  1) do juveniles at the anemone increase the 
              number of offspring of the breeders?  Preliminary data, from  a 1995  pilot
              study, suggests that juveniles do indeed increase the  number of offspring of
              the breeding pair.  2) how do the  juveniles increase the number of offspring
              of  the breeders?  3) what are the evolutionary costs and  benefits of the
              breeding system to the juveniles?  The  project will combine year round field 
              observations, experimental manipulations, and molecular  analysis of kin
              relationships.    The anemonefishes offer a unique opportunity to expand our 
              knowledge of behavioral plasticity in animal societies.  Athorough
              understanding of the breeding system within the  studied population will
              facilitate comparisons with other  populations of A. percula which have
              different mating  systems, as well as with other anemonefishes which live 
              throughout the tropical and sub-tropical Ind opacific.  The  research will be
              of interest to behavioral and evolutionary  biologists, as well as tropical
              fish hobbyists because the  anemonefishes are some of the most popular salt
              water  aquarium fish.
