Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mass Transfer, Heat Flows with Constraints, Moving and
               Free Boundaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1998   
File        : a9623276

Award Number: 9623276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail Feldman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Feldman    The project is devoted to the study of variational problems
              with constraints, moving and free boundaries. The first area of the research is
              the study of evolution problems with pointwise gradient constraints, related to
              Monge-Kantorovich mass transfer problem. One such evolution problem arises as a
              model of collapsing sandpiles, and there are other examples, including models
              of compression molding and type II superconductivity. In   the joint work of
              the proposer with L.C.Evans and R.F.Gariepy, the collapsing sandpiles model was
              related to a geometric evolution problem where the velocity of a moving surface
              at each point is determined by both local and nonlocal geometry of the surface.
              This geometric problem possesses some "parabolicity" properties of nonlocal
              nature. The main idea of the proposed research is to construct  viscosity
              solutions of the geometric evolution problem, to study regularity and
              asymptotic properties of these solutions, and to study connections of the
              geometric evolution problem with the original variational evolution problem.
              The second area of the research is the study of another class of variational
              evolution problems with constraints - heat flows for harmonic maps. In the
              previous work the proposer has proved partial regularity for heat flows into
              spheres satisfying some stability condition - a variational condition of
              entropy type.  The next steps include the study of existence and uniqueness of
              such heat flows, and the study of heat flows into compact manifolds other then
              sphere. The third area of research is to try to extend some of celebrated
              results of L.Caffarelli on regularity of free boundaries in two-phase problems
              for linear equations to some classes of nonlinear elliptic equations. In
              previous work the proposer proved regularity for anisotropic two-phase problem
              with Lipschitz free boundary, i.e., in the case when the solutions satisfy two
              different linear elliptic equations in two subregions separated by free
              boundary.    Many problems  in science and engineering lead naturally to
              mathematical models that have the form of variational evolution problems with
              constraints. One class of such problems, the evolution problems with pointwise
              gradient constraints, includes models of collapsing sandpiles, of compression
              molding, of type II superconductivity. Qualitative properties of solutions of
              evolution problems are of interest by itself and with respect to possible  
              applications. Typical properties of variational evolution problems with
              pointwise gradient constraints include formation of moving free boundaries. The
              first area of the proposed research is the study of these moving boundaries by
              relating them to a geometric evolution problem for a moving surface and
              studying solutions of this geometric problem. Free   boundary problems arise
              also in the static case. In this case the free boundaries can be viewed as a
              model of the interface between two different substances. The second area of the
              research is the study of regularity (smoothness) properties of such boundaries
              for some nonlinear static problems. Another class of variational evolution
              problems with constraints is heat flows for harmonic maps. Such problems arise
              in geometry and their solutions have interesting properties. These heat flows
              represent one of the models of liquid crystals. The third area of the research
              is the study of existence and uniqueness of heat flows for   harmonic maps of
              certain classes.
