Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Boundaries of K-Types and Restriction of Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9623280

Award Number: 9623280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Sepanski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Sepanski    Let G be a real reductive Lie group with K a maximally
              compact subgroup. Write g and k for the complexified Lie algebras,
              respectively, and let X be a (g, K) module.  The objective of the
              investigator's research is to determine a non-combinatorial description for the
              set of K-types of X first in the case where X is a discrete series
              representation and second in the case where X is a cohomologically induced
              module.  This will be accomplished in three steps:  1) make precise the notion
              of an "edge" of the set of K-types; 2) identify the K-types that lie on an edge
              using cohomological methods; and 3) use the convex hull of the edge K-types to
              describe the entire set of K-types.  The investigator's methods are based on a
              conjecture of D. Vogan concerning a certain restriction map of cohomology. If
              q=l+u is a theta-stable parabolic with Levi component l,   Vogan's conjecture
              states that the image of the restriction map from u cohomology to u intersect k
              cohomology parameterizes the K-types lying on edges that are not contained in a
              Weyl chamber wall of K.  The ideas associated to this conjecture provide the
              main techniques for approaching the proposed objective.     From a global point
              of view, this project is motived by the existence of symmetry in the world. 
              This symmetry manifests itself in a variety of forms such as the lattice
              structure of certain crystals in chemistry, the behavior of subatomic particles
              in high energy physics, or the equations describing fluid flow in engineering. 
              In all these diverse applications, one of   the mathematical tools that is
              particularly powerful is known as representation theory.  In a broad sense,
              representation theory is the study of all possible symmetries of a given
              system.  The hope is to classify all symmetries and to provide detailed
              information about each one.  While great strides have been made towards this
              goal, many difficult problems   remain.  An important technique used to study
              these remaining problems is to examine somethin g known as the K-types of a
              representation.  In a broad sense, the set of K-types is a slight
              simplification of a complicated representation to something that is more
              manageable.  It turns out that the set of K-types is a very effective way to
              both construct representations and to deduce special properties of
              representations.  The investigator's research aims to provide a geometrical
              description of the set of K-types   that would make a more detailed analysis of
              representations possible.
