Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric & Probabilistic Aspects of Convexity and
               Functional Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2000   
File        : a9623984

Award Number: 9623984
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70498              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanislaw J. Szarek sjs13@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF PROPOSAL # 9623984    Dr. Stanislaw J. Szarek  Case Western Reserve
              University      ABSTRACT            The project involves continued research on
              the geometric,  probabilistic and combinatorial aspects of functional analysis
              and  convexity theory.  Many of the problems considered are expressed in the 
              language of the asymptotic theory of finite dimensional normed spaces  or, 
              what is essentially equivalent, as "isomorphic" statements about high 
              dimensional convex bodies. Some questions have motivation in the theory of 
              operator algebras, mathematical physics, operations research,  computer 
              science or probability and statistics. Typical research topics include: 
              entropy of linear operators, existence of nontrivial linear operators on 
              general Banach spaces,  norms of random matrices,  some problems in the 
              "local" operator theory,  Gaussian correlation of convex sets,  balancing 
              vectors in normed spaces and other questions on the border of probability, 
              combinatorics and convexity.            On an elementary level,  analysis is a
              study of  "functions",  or  relationships, between quantities and the
              parameters on which they depend.  As it happens,  very many naturally appearing
              relationships are linear or  at least convex.   Thus a good understanding of
              convex functions  (and  consequently of convex sets)  is a prerequisite for
              understanding those  relationships.  Depending on whether the set of parameters
              is finite or  infinite  (the latter may also be an  "idealization"  of  "very
              large";  real life problems usually do depend on very many parameters),  we are
               dealing with either finite dimensional convexity  or infinite  dimensional
              functional analysis.  The  "isomorphic" asymptotic theory was,  over the last
              twenty years  or so,  quite successful in identifying and  exploiting
              "approximate" symmetries of various problems (involving high  dimensional
              convex sets) that could not be analyzed with earlier more  "rigid" methods. 
              One example of a specific link to applications is a   recent  advance (in
              computer science) in the area of efficient computation  of volume of high
              dimensional convex sets,  which utilized results and  ideas from the asymptotic
              theory.
