Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Quantization Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9623083

Award Number: 9623083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73493              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Gotay gotay@math.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623083  Gotay            The process of constructing a quantum formulation of a
              system from  a knowledge of a classical approximation to it is called
              "quantization,"  and over the years many different quantization schemes have
              been developed.  Unfortunately, quantization is not a straightforward
              proposition, as  evidenced by the discovery, exactly fifty years ago, by
              Groenewold and Van  Hove of an ``obstruction'' to quantization. Their ``no-go
              theorem'' asserts  that in principle it is impossible to consistently quantize
              every classical  observable on a Euclidean phase space, regardless of which
              quantization  procedure is employed. Just this past year, the principal
              investigator  proved that a similar result holds for the sphere. But no-go
              theorems are  not  universally valid; the principal investigator has recently
              shown that  the torus admits a consistent full quantization. The goals of this
              proposal  are to delineate the circumstances under which such obstructions will
               appear, and to study the underlying mechanisms which produce them. Another 
              problem, when an obstruction does exist, is to determine the maximal 
              subalgebras of observables that can be consistently quantized. Solutions to 
              these problems might be used to refine extant quantization procedures, or 
              design new ones, which are adapted to the obstruction in that they will be 
              able to quantize these maximal subalgebras. From a mathematical standpoint, 
              this research will lead to structural insights into the Poisson algebras of 
              classical systems and their representations.  %%%            Although the
              universe is quantum mechanical in nature, our  perceptions of it are rooted in
              classical physics. Thus one is often  confronted with the problem of
              constructing a quantum formulation of a  system from a knowledge of a classical
              approximation to it. This process is  called "quantization,'' and over the
              years many different quantization  schemes have been developed. Unfortunately,
              quantization is not a  straightforward proposition, as ev idenced by the
              discovery, exactly fifty  years ago, of an "obstruction'' to quantization. This
              "no-go theorem''  asserts that in principle it is impossible to consistently
              quantize a  (nonrelativistic) particle, regardless of which quantization
              procedure is  employed. Just this past year, the principal investigator proved
              a similar  result for a spinning particle. But no-go theorems are not
              universally  valid; the principal investigator recently found a classical
              system which  admits a consistent quantization. The goals of this proposal are
              to  delineate the circumstances under which such obstructions will appear, and 
              to study the mechanisms which produce them. A solution to this problem  might
              be used to refine extant quantization procedures, or design new ones,  which
              are "optimal" in that they will be able to quantize systems to the  extent
              permitted by the obstruction.  ***
