Title       : Vibrational Spectroscopy of Adsorbed Molecules Using Self-Assembling Tunnel
               Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9623962

Award Number: 9623962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255235             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn Agnolet   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Weimer  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9623962  Agnolet    The goal of this project is to investigate the potential
              of a new  technique   for  studying  the  vibrational  modes  of  molecules 
              adsorbed  on  metal surfaces. The method uses inelastic  electron  tunneling 
              spectroscopy (E3TS) adapted to  a  new  geometry,  the  "self-assembling"
              tunnel junction (SATJ). In a  SATJ,  the  oxide  layer of the
              metal-insulator-metal tunnel junctions normally used  in  IETS  is  replaced by
              an atornically-thin rare-gas  film.  By  replacing the oxide layer with a more
              inert one, any chemical  or  structural  changes  in the adsorbed molecules 
              illduced  by  the  oxide  may be avoided. Moreover, this technique m~kes it
              possible  to  dilectly  study the adsorption and reaction of  molecules  on 
              bare metal surfaces. 'rhe systernatics of SATJ's will he explored  to 
              deter~I~ine the SATJ's ultimate sensitivity and applicability  to  surface
              science. The vibrational spectra of C2H2, CO and  NH3  on platinum and tungsten
              surfaces will be studied to evaluate the  sensitivity  and  resolution of these
              junctions.  This  technique  will be applied to studies of surface reactions on
              metals and its  applicability to studies of surface chernistry on planar
              surfaces  of semiconductors will be investigated.    %%%    The  study  of 
              molecules and their interactions on  surfaces  is  important  for the continued
              success of numerous fields  such  as  catalysis,  corrosion  and  semiconductor
               processing.   Although  scanning probe microscopes (SPM's) can provide
              real-space irnages  of  molecules at surfaces with atomic resolution, very o*en
              these  images  must  be supplemented by other measurements in  order  to 
              identify  the molecules. Vibrational spectroscopy is particularly  well  suited
              for chemical identification since the characteristic  molecular  vibrational 
              modes are  a  unique  fimgerpnnt  of  the  molecule.  In inelastic electron
              tunneling spectroscopy  (II~TS),  the  vibrational  modes are detected by their
               influence  on  the  tunneling  curr ent  between two metal surfaces  separated
               by  an  oxide  layer. The goal of this project is to adapt IETS to a  new 
              experimental geometry in which the oxide layer is replaced by  an  inert 
              rare-gas  film.  13y  eliminating  the  oxide  layer,  the  chemical  changes 
              or structural modifications  of  the  adsorbed  molecules  induced by the
              presence of the oxide can  be  avoided.  The  systematics of this tcchnique
              will be examined to  determine  its ultimate sensitivity and applicability to
              surface science.  ***
