Title       : Career Program: Co-Adsorption and its Ramifications in Mixtures of Surfactants
               and Water-Soluble Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9623849

Award Number: 9623849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297725             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Tilton tilton@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9179,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623849  Tilton    This Faculty Early Career Development grant is to establish
              innovative and industrially relevant educational and research programs.    The
              research plan is designed to help provide the molecular level understanding of
              adsorption phenomena that is necessary for rationale control of interfacial
              properties, which in turn control the macroscopic properties of many complex
              fluid formulations.  The research focuses on the poorly understood but crucial
              effects of competitive and synergistic interactions that occur during
              co-adsorption of polymers and small surface active molecules.  Adsorption
              phenomena are responsible for the success or failure of innumerable complex
              fluid formulations in technologies spanning the chemical, materials,
              pharmaceuticals, environmental, and  biomaterials  industries.  Currently, most
              fundamental adsorption studies consider single component solutions, while
              industrially relevant fluids commonly contain a variety of surface active
              materials with widely varying molecular weight, solubility, and surface
              affinity.  In these cases, competitive and synergistic effects between the
              various species control the composition and structure of the adsorbed layers
              that in turn control macroscopic properties of the fluid and its interactions
              with surfaces.  To select some examples, co-adsorption phenomena are critical
              for ink-jet printing and the appearance of automobile finishes.  In the
              personal care products business, medicinal lotions and skin and hair treatments
              depend heavily on co-adsorption of surfactants and polymers.  Stability of food
              products, separation processes in pharmaceutical production, and
              surfactant-enhanced remediation of toxic waste sites are other major
              applications.  This research is intended to elevate the understanding of
              polymer adsorption in industrially relevant multicomponent systems, and it
              spans the gap between fundamental studies of basic co-adsorption mechanisms and
              the practical consequences of co-adsorption.  Accordingly, one of the  proposed
              projects will be conducted in collaboration with industrial scientists. 
              Specific projects included investigation of the effect of co-adsorption on
              colloidal forces and colloidal stability in polymer/surfactant mixtures; and a
              model study of the role of co-adsorption in surfactant-enhanced remediation of
              hydrocarbon contaminated soils in the presence of naturally occurring
              macromolecules.    The educational program will produce novel learning tools
              and ways to help students improve their technical and learning skills,
              creativity, awareness of scientific advances in chemical engineering, and a
              sense of the global workplace.  The goals of the educational program will be
              met by three initiatives.  The principal investigator (P.I.) will develop
              creative, self-paced learning tools based on user friendly computer
              applications that allow even the most timid students to thoroughly explore
              nuances of engineering subjects.  The PI will develop a new course and several
              new educational lab experiments that incorporate modern research in colloid and
              interface science into the curriculum for both undergraduate and graduate
              students.  Finally, the PI will organize an international exchange program for
              advanced graduate students to spend time in leading colloid and interface
              science labs around the globe.  Visiting students will also be hosted in the
              PIOs laboratory.  ***
