Title       : Career: Silicon Etching: Gas-Surface Dynamics and Profile Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9623450

Award Number: 9623450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantinos P. Giapis giapis@macpost.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1045,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9623450    This project addresses the importance of inelastic and
              reactive scattering in the etching of semiconductors.  Experiments are proposed
              with a recently invented hypersonic neutral beam of fluorine atoms with
              translational energies in the 3-25 eV regime for fundamental studies of the
              gas-surface dynamics occurring during steady-state etching of silicon and
              etching studies of submicron features in silicon in order to understand how
              neutral beams etch.  The effort is based on recent results from profile
              evolution modeling and experiments with flourine atom beams with translational
              energies between 3 and 18 eV.  Anisotropic etching of silicon at room
              temperature with fluorine chemistry (no sidewall deposition) is demonstrated as
              a proof of the capabilities of such beams.  This has been possible because of
              direct reactions occurring at the high translational energies employed. 
              Collision-induced desorption (CID) has been implicated as the mechanism
              responsible for the increased desorption rate of fluorinated silicon moieties
              from the SiFx layer at the higher energies.   Rapid removal of the SiF3 product
              in the CID mode enables rapid fluorination of the exposed surface, which
              increases fluorine utilization and, in turn, results in a reduction of the
              thermally desorbing unreacted fluorine-atom flux. Reduction of scattered
              fluorine to the sidewalls dramatically improves anisotropy.    Fundamental
              measurements of the energy and flux of unreacted F atoms and reaction products
              (SixFy) leaving the SiFx layer during etching are made.  Moreover, similar
              measurements are performed on the silicon dioxide surface.  Silicon dioxide is
              ubiquitous on today's wafers (e.g., as a hard mask, gate oxide, etc.) and
              scattering on its surface will also affect profile evolution.  Besides
              improving fundamental understanding of gas-surface dynamics, these measurements
              provide for a description of the physics and chemistry of the interaction,
              which is incorporated into a Monte Carlo simulator of profile  evolution. 
              Preliminary calculations based on detailed scattering experiments on SiFx are
              shown to capture profile peculiarities such as the so-called "microtrenching",
              that is, the appearance of grooves at the bottom of etched features.  The model
              is improved to describe pattern-dependent etching, three-dimensional effects,
              and the roughness appearing on etched surfaces.  By including microstructure
              charging and ion deflection effects, the applicability of the profile simulator
              is enhanced, enabling its combination with plasma reactor models (developed by
              others) for designing the etch tools for the next generation of
              ultrahigh-density semiconductor devices.  Etching experiments are also
              performed to support the model and verify predictions of profile peculiarities.
               Understanding the origin of predicted and observed deviations from the ideal
              anisotropic profile is expected to enable control over the final profile.
              Electrical damage studies on gate oxides of MOS devices are done as a
              demonstration of the potential of the technique.  Finally, upon perfection of
              the technique, fabrication of quantum-confined and photonic bandgap structures
              is attempted.    In order to integrate research with education in chemical
              engineering, the relation between classical chemical engineering concepts and
              modern electronic material processing techniques is exposed.  As an example,
              special topics are offered in the undergraduate thermodynamics class, such as
              equilibrium in plasmas and surface thermodynamics, which are not traditionally
              covered.  An introductory plasma experiment is planned for the undergraduate
              laboratory with hands-on experience in diagnostics.  Extended research projects
              are also offered to undergraduates in the P.I.'s laboratory to enhance their
              appreciation of experimental science.  At the graduate level, in addition to a
              course on electronic materials processing, plans are made to offer a new course
              on beam modification of surfaces, which is based on results and understanding
              obtained from  this proposed research.  ***
