Title       : Simulation of Classical and Quantum Phenonmena in Condensed Molecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a9623017

Award Number: 9623017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $810000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Klein klein@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9216,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Professor Michael L. Klein is supported by a grant from the Theoretical   and
              Computational Chemistry Program to continue his research in the area   of
              computer simulation and modeling of structural and dynamical phenomena   in
              molecular solids and polar fluids.  Both classical molecular dynamics   and
              Car-Parrinello ab initio molecular dynamics will be used to   characterize the
              behavior of a variety of condensed molecular systems   including polymers,
              metal-ammonia solutions,  and organo-lithium   compounds.  A path integral
              version of Car-Parrinello molecular dynamics   will be used to study quantum
              phenomena such as proton motion in selected   solids and liquids.  Attempts
              will also be made to develop and implement   novel methodologies and algorithms
              for condensed phase simulations with   increasing emphasis on massively
              parallel computing.  Computer simulation of molecular systems is providing many
              rich insights   into chemical behavior at the molecular level.  As the computer
                algorithms and force field models continue to improve,  it becomes   possible
              to study larger systems, and to gain useful insights regarding   more and more
              physical and chemical properties.  Using a combination of   simulation
              techniques including molecular dynamics, quantum Monte Carlo,   and
              Car-Parinello theory, Klein is able to perform computer simulations   on
              systems consisting of large numbers of molecules such as crystalline  
              substances, and metal ammonia solutions.  He is able to study a number of  
              important chemical and physical properties of interest in the design of   new
              materials.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
