Title       : Collaborative Research: Muonium Dynamics in Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9623823

Award Number: 9623823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. Lichti xbrll@ttacs.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9623823  Lichti    This  project is an investigation of the dynamic  properties 
              of  muonium  defect centers in semiconductors.   Muonium  is  formed when an
              implanted positive muon captures an electron,  and  mimics  the  behavior of
              isolated  hydrogen  impurities  which  are difficult to study directly.  Data
              on muonium  in  Si  has  revealed   three charge states and  two  structural 
              configurations, along with numerous transitions among  these  states.   A 
              model of the muonium transition  dynamics   and  state stabilities in Si is
              being generalized, and parameters  obtained for Ge, GaAs, and other III-V
              materials.  Muon spin  resonance  and  level-crossing   resonance  spectra 
              provide  state identifications and give structural details, while the 
              magnetic-field and temperature dependences of depolarization  rates    yield 
              information  on  diffusion  and   transition  dynamics.  Very similar dynamic 
              properties of the analogous  hydrogen  centers are crucial to the efficiency of
               hydrogen  passivation of shallow dopants and its effect on the device- 
              related electrical and optical properties of a semiconductor  material.  %%% 
              This research exploits the similarities between hydrogen and  muonium  (an 
              atom  consisting of an  electron  bound  to  a  positive  muon,  an unstable
              particle) in  order  to  obtain  information about the behavior of hydrogen in
              semiconductors  which cannot be obtained from direct studies.  Of all of the 
              common  impurities  in semiconductors  such  as  silicon  or  gallium arsenide,
              hydrogen has the most  unusual properties.  Rather  than  forming  the donors
              or  acceptors  which  make  semiconductor-based electronics possible, hydrogen
              moves  to  existing   donors   or  acceptors  and   neutralizes   them. 
              Consequently  hydrogen  can  very  substantially   influence  device 
              characteristics.  Direct investigation  of  hydrogen  impurities has severe
              limitations; however, muonium  studies  supply  similar  information and have
              been most  informative  about those  questions which are hardest to  attack
              directly.  The  current project extends successful muonium  studies  to  obtain
               an  understanding  of processes  active  in  devices  containing hydrogen. 
              ***
