Title       : Mathematical Sciences: K Theory and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1998     
File        : a9623285

Award Number: 9623285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Fox jfox@euclid.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9623285 Jeffrey S. Fox University of Colorado  The project consists of three
              problems related to harmonic analysis and K-theory. The first problem is
              concerned with studying the structure of the representation ring defined by
              Kasparov for the general linear group over a local field. We are developing a
              method of "induction" from the representation ring of a maximal parabolic to
              the representation ring of the full group.  The main issue in this problem is
              an analytic one, involving the construction of an appropriate operator between
              G-representations that almost commutes , in the sense of Kasparov, with the
              G-action. The second problem concerns the explicit computation of
              multiplicity's of irreducible representations of compact groups in the kernel
              and cokernel of transversally elliptic differential operators. The third
              problem is to study the explicit decomposition of the quasi-regular
              representation for an algebraic solvable Lie group.  The main focus is to apply
              the fairly new results of Anoussis on orbital integrals for solvable Lie groups
              in conjunction with the Selberg trace formula.          The overall focus of
              this project is to use symmetry to study several complicated systems.  The
              notion of symmetry pervades the sciences and while it  is difficult to give a
              precise mathematical definition ( but such a definition does exist), we see
              symmetry every day. The "squareness" of a square or the "roundness" of a circle
              are two examples of symmetry. The reason symmetry is such an important idea is
              that it is systems that possess intrinsic symmetry that scientists  can
              analyze. The symmetry of a problem provides us with powerful tools for
              developing effective means of computation. As an example, one of the problems
              that this proposal is concerned with is finding effective means of calculating,
              very explicitly, the "G- indices" of certain differential operators: we are
              counting certain types of solutions of a problem where symmetry is present.
              This leads to the development of a type of Feynma n diagram  that incorporates
              both the differential operator as well as the underlying symmetries.  Feynman
              diagram techniques have proved to be very important both in academic science as
              well as applied science in industry. For example,  the General Motors Research
              lab outside of Detroit has mathematicians that specialize in Feynman diagram
              techniques, which are used to solve the mathematics behind very practical
              problems.
