Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Feedback Design For Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9623435

Award Number: 9623435
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96508              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher I. Byrnes chrisbyrnes@seas.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623435  Byrnes  This research program will develop a systematic methodology for
               the design of feedback  mechanisms for the robust control of nonlinear
              dynamical systems,  operating in a  nonequilibrium environment.  Nonlinear
              feedback laws offer the  potential to take advantage  of genuinely nonlinear
              effects, for example to track or to  attenuate the effects of, limit  cycles. 
              The research will involve developing criteria for the  existence of limit
              cycles in  nonlinear feedback systems, based on a synthesis of methods drawn 
              from algebraic and  differential topology and from dynamical systems theory, as
              well  as the development of  techniques for feedback stabilization about limit
              cycles and more  general attractors.  These  techniques will be based on an
              extension of  previous work on  zero dynamics for nonlinear  systems to the
              nonequilibrium case.  This work will also include  an extension of passive 
              system theory  to systems which are not necessarily affine in the  control
              variables.  %%%  Dynamical systems can exhibit complexity for a variety of 
              reasons; for example, complexity  arises in using microchip technologies to
              design devices for  sensing, or controlling, the  position and speed in an
              airplane, an automobile, or a high-speed  train.  Complexity can  also arise in
              mathematical models of physical and industrial  systems because of the  complex
              nature of the physical forces acting on a system. An  example of this
              phenomenon  is windshear, caused by a microburst of air, which can be 
              experienced during take-off and  landing of commercial aircraft.  The
              interaction of windshear  forces with the forces required  to achieve lift an
              aircraft is quite complex, often producing  nonintuitive reactions to pilot 
              induced forces.  The purpose of this research is to determine  ways to take
              advantage of  the potentially dramatic, though nonintuitive, effects caused by 
              the complex interactions of  physical forces with physical systems.   ***
