Title       : Processing Chemistry, Solid Solution Inhomogeneity and Relaxor Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1999      
File        : a9623890

Award Number: 9623890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angus P. Wilkinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1045,1762,1774,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract       9623890     Wilkinson    Many solid solution oxides have
              previously been prepared using sol-gel techniques. One of  the often stated
              advantages of this approach is the chemical homogeneity of the end product. 
              However, there is reason to believe that the products will not be random solid
              solutions  under all circumstances. The existence of compositional
              inhomogeneities in solid solution  systems can have important consequences for
              the properties of the material. In this research,  samples of the
              ferroelectrics materials will be prepared using published sol-gel procedures. 
              The products will be examined using a combination of analytical electron
              microscopy and  solid state NMR. Pair distribution functions (PDFs) will be
              calculated from X-ray and/or  neutron scattering data. This approach should
              provide enough evidence to assess the  compositional homogeneity of individual
              crystallites within a sample and, hence, the ability  of existing sol-gel
              chemistry to produce random solid solutions. As sol-gel chemistry is  widely
              used for preparing oxides any information gained regarding the techniques
              ability to  produce compositionally random products is relevant to a large
              field.  Sol-gel chemistry will  then be exploited to deliberately prepare
              non-random solid solutions of the ferroelectrics.  Compositional and/or
              structural fluctuations on ~ 5-10 nm lengths scale within ferroelectrics  are
              known to give rise to relaxor behavior in many systems. It is thought that by
              introducing  compositional fluctuations into solid solutions that do not
              normally display relaxor properties  such behavior can be induced. The
              compositional homogeneity of the products will be  assessed using analytical
              electron microscopy and PDFs calculated from X-ray and/or  neutron scattering
              data. These experiments will be supported by measurements of the  materials
              dielectric properties as a function of frequency and temperature. This work
              will aid  the understanding of exactly what is required to produce relaxor beh
              avior and has the  potential to produce useful new materials.  %%%  The
              synthesis of ceramics using solution processing has been practiced for many
              years.  Such  routes have been the subject of a vast research effort in the
              last 10 - 15 years due to the wide  spread realization of the benefits offered
              by this approach. These potentially include, i) low  processing temperatures,
              ii) thin film and fiber fabrication, iii) good control over impurity  levels in
              the ceramic and, iv) chemical homogeneity in the end product. Characteristics
              such  as compositional homogeneity are clearly important to the properties of
              some materials. This  research will examine the relationship between processing
              chemistry, solid solution  inhomogeneity and dielectric properties for some
              sol-gel produced ferroelectric solid  solutions. A simple strategy is suggested
              for introducing controllable amounts of  inhomogeneity into the solid solution.
              By controlling the level of inhomogeneity in a solid  solution ferroelectric it
              may be possible to tailor the dielectric properties of the material.
