Title       : Distribution of Eigenvalues of the Schrodinger Operator on Compact Manifolds.
               Matrix Model and Asymptotics of Orthogonal Polynomials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9623214

Award Number: 9623214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61386              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pavel M. Bleher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Bleher  9623214    The project is devoted to the semiclassical trace
              formulae for the   Schrodinger operator on compact manifolds, limiting
              probability   distributions of quantum energy levels, and related problems in  
              the theory of random matrices. Topics of investigation include:   (i)
              Asymptotics of the oscillatory part in the Weyl spectral   formula and periodic
              geodesics, statistics of eigenvalues  of the Schrodinger operator, and
              mathematical problems of the   theory of quantum chaos. (ii) The problem of the
              uniform semiclassical   quantization near unstable invariant manifolds. (iii)
              Universality   of the spacing distribution and double scaling limit in the
              matrix   model. The principal investigator has been working in this area   for
              several years in collaboration with Freeman Dyson and Jean   Bourgain
              (Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton), Joel Lebowitz   (Rutgers
              University), Yakov Sinai (Princeton University),  and others. Among his
              important contributions are the proof   of almost periodicity of the Weyl
              spectral error function for  integrable quantum systems, limit theorems for the
              distribution  of eigenvalues, the proof of the Berry saturation conjecture for
              the   eigenvalue statistics, and several other results.    In the project the
              principal investigator is going to study the   statistics of energy levels and
              eigenstates in quantum systems,  and the universality of the eigenvalue
              distribution and double scaling   limit in the matrix model. These problems are
              very important  for numerous applications in the theory of quantum chaos,
              bosonic   strings and quantum gravity, mesoscopic systems, and multivariate  
              statistical analysis, and the project is directed to  the applications. The
              tools include the methods of the theory of   integrable systems, semiclassical
              asymptotics, the matrix   Riemann-Hilbert problem, and other methods of modern
              mathematics.   The proposed study is heavily based on computer experiments.
