Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hankel Operators and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9623231

Award Number: 9623231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir V. Peller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623231  PELLER    V.V. Peller is going to continue to study superoptimal
              approximation by  analytic operator functions. Such approximations minimize not
              only the  supremum of the norms but also the suprema of all further singular
              values.  In particular V.V. Peller is going to study the dependence of the
              Mcmillan  degree of the superoptimal approximant on the Mcmillam degree of the
              initial   function. It is not known whether the Mcmillan degree can jump.
              Another  open problem is whether the operator of superoptimal approximation
              preserves  the Wiener algebra. V.V. Peller is also going to study the indices
              in  the so-called thematic factorizations in the Nehari-Takagi problem and 
              other problem on superoptimal approximation. V.V. Peller is also going to 
              continue his work in prediction theory. One of the most important  unsolved
              problems is to characterize in terms of the spectral densities  the completely
              regular vectorial stationary Gaussian processes.    V.V. Peller is going to
              apply Hankel operators in different domains of  analysis, prediction theory and
              control theory. It has become clear that  Hankel operators play a significant
              role in applications. In particular   they play a decisive role in H-infinity
              control theory. V.V. Peller  used Hankel operators to study superoptimal
              approximations by analytic  matrix functions. In his joint work with N.J. Young
              it was shown that under  very natural assumptions such an approximation is
              unique and can be found  constructively. Further development of the theory was
              given by V.V. Peller  and in joint papers of V.V. Peller with S.R. Treil.
              Superoptimal approximations  play a very important role in control theory. 
              There are still many open problems about superoptimal approximations  which are
              very important in applications. V.V. Peller is going to continue   to work on
              them. Another domain of applications of Hankel operators is   prediction
              theory.  V.V. Peller obtained many strong results (partly in a   joint work
              with Khrushchev) in this field. The re are still many open problems  in this
              field. V.V. Peller hopes to progress using vectorial Hankel  operators.
