Title       : Aspects of Subelliptic Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1998     
File        : a9623007

Award Number: 9623007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193629             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Michael Christ   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Christ    Research will be conducted on a variety of questions
              concerning subelliptic partial differential equations and related topics. Among
              these are (i) Local and global analytic hypoellipticity of sums of squares of
              vector fields satisfying the bracket condition, and in the d-bar Neumann
              problem. (ii) Global regularity in the d-bar Neumann problem and for  the
              Bergman projection in the infinitely differentiable (but not finite type)
              category. (iii) Characterization of optimal exponents of Gevrey regularity for
              sums of squares of vector fields.  (iv) Local solvability of partial
              differential operators with double characteristics and smooth coefficients. 
              All these topics are related to certain eigenvalue problems that arise from
              limits and/or reductions of partial differential operators; key issues are
              whether eigenvalues exist, and the extent to which the limiting problems
              control the original   operators. The emphasis will be on low-dimensional
              problems, and on those connected to complex analysis in several variables and
              to harmonic analysis on Lie groups.    Since Isaac Newton's insight that the
              fundamental laws of nature should relate the rates at which observed quantities
              change, rather than describe those quantities directly, most basic physical
              laws have been formulated as partial differential equations. To understand such
              equations and their solutions has thus become one of the fundamental goals of
              mathematical research. Partial differential equations are rarely solvable by
              explicit formulas, except in very symmetric situations. On the other hand, in
              physical applications it is often useful to understand certain qualitative
              features of solutions: whether any solution exists (which in practice may mean
              that some situation is or is not physically viable), and what kinds of
              singularities, if any, solutions can exhibit (shock waves, vortices, and wave
              fronts are typical physical manifestations of mathematical singularities).  
              These issues can often be understand in situations  where formulas for the
              solutions cannot be constructed. However, partial differential operators vary
              greatly in character, and each type must be investigated on its own terms.
