Title       : Dissertation Research: Neurophysiological Control of Avian Vocal Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9623171

Award Number: 9623171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9527               (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre Deviche   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  ABSTRACT    Deviche & Gulledge  IBN 96-23171    Neurophysiological Control
              of Avian Vocal Behavior         In songbirds, singing is a learned behavior
              controlled  by specific brain regions collectively called the vocal  control
              system.  Because the vocal control regions regulate  a single behavior, studies
              on this subject offer a unique  opportunity for elucidating the neural bases of
              behavior.  Steroidal hormones play essential roles in this system s  sexual
              differentiation and in vocal behavior learning and  expression.  However,
              extensive research on steroid effects  has not satisfactorily explained
              characteristics of the  vocal control system at all stages of song development
              and  expression.  The investigators have observed opioids and  their receptors
              in vocal control regions.  In other systems  opioids modulate neuron morphology
              and survival, sensory  processing, and learning and memory.  In order to
              ascertain  whether opioids regulate any of these features of vocal  control, it
              is necessary to determine if any correlation  exists between vocal control
              system opioid activity an d  particular aspects of singing behavior.  The
              proposed work  will use radioimmunoassays to measure opioid concentrations  in
              vocal control regions microdissected from dark-eyed junco  (Junco hyemalis)
              brains during four stages: song template  storage, song expression, song
              recognition, and post-  breeding cessation of singing behavior.  Additionally,
              a  parallel study that will directly asses the effects of  chronic opioid
              antagonist administration on singing behavior  in adult male juncos will be
              conducted.  This project will  help direct future research on the role(s) of
              opioids in  controlling behavior.
