Title       : CPMSA: "Paths Toward Significant Achievement (PTSA)"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2001    
File        : a9623617

Award Number: 9623617
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele Lawrence mlawrence@paramount.k12.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuki Mio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arie Korporaal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paramount Unified School D
	      14429 Downey Avenue
	      Paramount, CA  907233642    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Problem: The Paramount Unified School District is a microcosm  of the
              population of Los Angeles County, California, with a 90%  non-Asian minority
              population.  Fewer than 60 students out of a  graduating class of 400 go on to
              a four-year college and even fewer  major in mathematics or science.  The
              Solution:  Objectives. By  June 2001, at the end of the fifth year of
              implementation,  Paramount High School will have had 1,450 of its seniors
              complete  a college preparatory sequence (currently only 57 per year do so).  
              All of these graduates will have successfully progressed through  this project,
              Paths Toward Significant Achievement (PTSA) to  successfully complete
              precollege courses.  Subsequent years will  show even higher numbers of
              students who pass through the PTSA  pipeline.  Project Staff:  The Principal
              Investigator, the  Superintendent, and Project Co-Directors have a strong
              background  in successful educational project implementation and will be 
              responsible for the achievement of PTSA goals.   Participants/Activities:  The
              Advisory Committee will advise  participants in the design and implementation
              of the long-term,  systemic plan for K-12 to change the way science and math
              are  taught and learned in the District.  Five hundred teachers (90% of 
              District teachers) will participate in curriculum reform/enrichment  and
              teacher enhancement activities; they will learn how to motivate  students to
              enjoy and want to learn science and math through staff  development, peer
              coaching, and collaboration activities.  Teachers  will become more sensitive
              to the special problems of minorities,  Limited-English proficient students,
              and disabled students.  They  will help students set higher expectations using
              strategies adapted  from the successful program, Advancement Via Individual 
              Determination, AVID.  All 14,352 students will experience science  and math
              across the curriculum, participate in student enrichment  activities such as
              tutoring, summer school and intersession  courses, distance l earning, and
              keeping electronic portfolios.  The  quality and quantity of science and math
              instruction at the  elementary school (K-8) will "hook" children in the active
              pursuit  of mathematical and scientific knowledge.  At the ninth grade  school,
              students will link concrete learning acquired in elementary  school with the
              more abstract concepts and critical thinking  demands of high school science
              and math.  In high school (10-12),  students will attend rigorous science and
              math courses taught by  their high school teachers or college teachers within
              the context  of their career path through distance learning technology.  At all
               levels they will be grouped into smaller groups called "Families"  as a safety
              net.  Community resources such as businesses, museums,  colleges, and other
              community partners will provide many types of  hands-on experiences and
              programs, including distance learning, to  stimulate and enhance science and
              math education.  Parents will  support children's math and science learning by
              promoting science  and math activities at home and in the community, leading
              family  discussions, monitoring homework, setting aside time for reading  and
              study, limiting television viewing, and encouraging their  children to take
              advanced science and math courses.  Cost the total  costs of program
              implementation and dissemination will be  $1,750,000 for five years.  Most of
              the costs will relate to  participant collaboration time in program and staff
              development as  well as the development and implementation of a significant
              array  of hands-on student enrichment activities entailing some equipment  and
              supply expenditures.  ***
