Title       : Mathematical Sciences: An Improved Nonlinear Elastic Membrane Model:
               Regularizing Using Bending Stiffness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9623273

Award Number: 9623273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Hilgers hilgers@cs.umr.edu                      hilgers@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
                9623273  Hilgers        The continued exploration of an improved model for
              nonlinear  highly elastic membranes is being proposed. The point of departure
              of  this investigation from  traditional membrane mechanics is the observation
              that even highly flexible  membranes exhibit some resistance to a change of
              curvature. This is  known as bending stiffness and is introduced in the
              improved model by   including a second order derivative dependence in the
              strain energy  density. The foundational theory has been previously
              established.  In this proposal, it is sought to apply the theory to a variety
              of   problems of practical interest with the goal of understanding how bending 
               stiffness regularizes the behavior of membranes. The basic theme among  these
              problems is placing a membrane into a state in  which  some region is
              attempting to support a compressive stress. We anticipate   that the membrane
              will wrinkle. Standard nonlinear membrane theory fails  to describe this
              behavior. One objective is to find the qualitative   nature of the wrinkles.
              Another is to understand how the bending   stiffness stablizes wrinkling
              deformations. Also the comparison of   results between the zero and nonzero
              bending stiffness membrane responses  is of extreme interest as it has
              implications for both mathematics and   mechanics. Specific examples to be
              considered include inflatables which  are prone to wrinkle, diaphragms,
              inextensible approximations,  and  vibrations of tense and slack sheets.  %%%  
                   The comfort  technology has given us often requires engineers to  work
              with thin, flexible sheets, layers, laminates, and coatings of   material. It
              is problematic for design engineers that these materials will   fold, wrinkle,
              blister, buckle, and crease during manufacture or operation   thereby reducing
              their reliability and quality.  Unfortunately, most   mathematical models
              cannot predict this unwanted behavior,   which makes it difficult for engineers
              to prevent it. Fortunately, a material   model seeking to  address these
              shortcomings was developed in  recent years under funding from the National
              Science Foundation. It is   the purpose of this current proposal to continue
              this investigation by   using this model to provide examples detailing the
              formations  of folds and wrinkles in a wide variety of situations leading to a 
              qualitative and quantitative insight into these engineering   difficulties. 
              The generality of the model   permits application by  engineers and material  
              scientists alike to a spectrum of industrial problems ranging from   the
              blistering of thin coatings to the wrinkling of biomedical   surgical
              inflatables. Conceivably, the knowledge gained could impact  circuit board
              manufacture,  air bag safety technology, and even   biomechanical cellular
              membrane questions which arise in health care.  ***
