Title       : SBIR Phase II: The Mathematician's Sketchpad
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1996 
File        : a9623018

Award Number: 9623018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299754             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Finzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas R. Jackiw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Key Curriculum Press
	      1150 65th Street
	      Berkeley, CA  94702    800/338-7638

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9623018  Finzer         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project from Key Curriculum Press leverages recent understanding of dynamic
              geometry and new power of machines to a second generation of dynamic geometry
              software--The Mathematician's Sketchpad--with much greater ease of use,
              improved integration with other areas of mathematics and science, and new
              conceptual and visual metaphors for building dynamic mathematical models.  The
              starting point for the project is The Geometer's Sketchpad, one of the most
              highly regarded and commercially successful software systems presently
              available in the United States.  From dynamic geometry mixed with symbolic
              algebra and graphing comes dynamic algebra which will allow students, teachers,
              and authors to create Sketchbooks based on user-specified sets of tools.  This
              new technology combined with classroom materials will fundamentally change how
              teachers and students learn and do mathematics.       The commercial success of
              The Geometer's Sketchpad demonstrates the commercial potential of the
              Mathematician's Sketchpad.  The new program will have even more utility for the
              geometry classroom than the current generation of The Geometer's Sketchpad and,
              if our research is successful, will have ready application throughout the
              secondary and college mathematics curriculum.  The enthusiastic response of
              teachers to prototypes of both software and curriculum materials produced
              during Phase I indicates that there will be high level of teacher support.  The
              curriculum materials to be developed during the project provide another proven
              avenue of commercial sustainability for the eventual products of the proposed
              research.  ***
