Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1998     
File        : a9623098

Award Number: 9623098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Bell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9623098)  PI: Bell    The areas of Differential
              Equations and Complex Analysis have a long history of fruitful interaction. 
              Professor Bell's research has two goals. He will work on problems in complex
              analysis, such as geometric mapping problems, to which partial differential
              equations methods are applicable, and he will apply complex variable techniques
              to gain information about the partial differential equations problems  and
              constructions of classical analysis.     The mathematical objects of potential
              theory and conformal mapping are ubiquitous in Science, Mathematics, and
              Engineering.  They carry encoded within them a vast amount of information about
              geometric properties of regions in the plane.  Although these objects are
              familiar and well studied, they continue to be a source of interesting and
              useful new mathematics.  Applied scientists frequently need to compute them. 
              For example, to create an appropriate grid for numerical calculations of
              transonic flow past a wing, it is common to make two dimensional slices and to
              use conformal mappings on   the slices to generate the grid. Bell has recently
              completed a program to express the classical objects of potential theory in
              terms of the Szego projection and kernel.  He has discovered formulas that
              reveal that these objects are all elementary combinations of finitely many
              basic functions of one variable.  His results give rise to new and practical
              methods for numerically computing solutions to classical problems in  
              differential equations, conformal mapping, and potential theory which will be
              of interest to scientists and engineers.  Professor Bell will explore
              applications of his ideas to other problems of this kind and he will attempt to
              extend his results to more complicated constructions in the subject.  He and
              his students will test the efficacy of the numerical methods stemming from his
              work.  It is interesting to note that the practical results of Bell's research
              in the plane can trace their origins back to s ome of his "curiosity   driven"
              work in higher dimensions that would appear to be of theoretical, rather than
              of practical significance.  Bell will continue to work on related questions in
              higher dimensional complex analysis.
