Title       : Dissertation Research: Maintenance of Geographic Variation in Cooperative
               Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9623487

Award Number: 9623487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9938               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Rissing ATSWR@ASUACAD  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623487  Rissing   Though species are often thought of as groups of organisms
              with similar traits, adaptation to local habitats can cause populations to vary
               in a wide variety of traits.  Whether such variation can be maintained depends
              on the amount of migration between populations and the results of interactions
              between alternative forms in areas where populations contact one another, or
              hybrid zones. Research funded by this award addresses the maintenance of a
              behavioral hybrid zone for the desert seed-harvester ant, Messor pergandei.
              Seed harvester ants are keystone species, playing an important role in
              maintaining plant species diversity in desert systems.  Queens of M. pergandei 
              start colonies in two distinct ways.  In the eastern half of the species'
              range, queens form groups and cooperate in nest construction.  In the western
              half, queens are aggressive toward one another and dig solitary nests.  This
              behavior switches over a 14 kilometer hybrid zone, within which both behaviors
              occur. To determine how this zone is maintained, the effects of queen density,
              hybridization and dispersal on colony founding rates and queen survival will be
              tested in controlled laboratory experiments.  In addition, the importance of
              behavioral variation in determining rates of migration of genes between regions
              will be assessed in nature by documenting changes in frequencies of neutral
              genes across the hybrid zone.  These  two lines of evidence should give one of
              the first views of both the adaptive significance of behavioral diversity and
              its role in maintaining hybrid zones.   Hybrid zones are continually in flux as
              new ones are established and existing ones eliminated by processes by
              environmental change.  Rates of disappearance for hybrid zones however, have
              been exacerbated due to human disturbances.  To understand the effects of human
              activity on population diversity, it is crucial to investigate the forces that
              act to maintain diversity in naturally occurring hybrid zones.   The research
              funded in thi s award contributes to this goal.
