Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Problems of Solid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9623261

Award Number: 9623261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart S. Antman ssa@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9623261  Antman    The PI proposes to treat a variety of dynamical and 
              steady-state  nonlinear problems for rods, shells, and three-dimensional solid
              bodies.  The bodies are composed of nonlinearly elastic, viscoelastic, plastic,
                viscoplastic, or magnetoelastic materials.  He also intends to treat   
              fluid-solid interactions. In each case, properly invariant, geometrically  
              exact theories encompassing general nonlinear constitutive equations are to  
              be used.  The goals of these studies are to discover new nonlinear effects,  
              determine thresholds in constitutive equations separating qualitatively  
              different responses, examine important kinds of instabilities, contribute to  
              the theory of shocks and dissipative mechanisms in solids, and develop  new
              methods of nonlinear analysis and of effective computation for problems   of
              solid mechanics.    %%%    The investigator proposes to study the behavior of
              various solids  undergoing large dynamic deformations, including cases in which
              the  solid  is interacting with a fluid, as happens in airplanes and ships.   
              By applying  modern mathematical methods to theories of deformable solids  
              formulated with great generality and precision, he intends to treat problems  
              for large families of materials at one time.  One aim  of this work is to 
              determine unexpected instabilities, which can adversely alter the response  of
              structures used in technological applications.  He also  proposes to contribute
              to the theory of material behavior,  to the  development of methods for the
              control of material behavior (by using smart   materials involving
              electromagnetic effects, for example), and  to the   development of new
              mathematical and computational methods capable of handling   these difficult
              and important applications.    ***
