Title       : Fabrication and Electrical Characterization of Atomic-Scale Wires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9623355

Award Number: 9623355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter F. Smith wsmith@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9623355  Smith    The ultimate goals of this research are to fabricate atomic- 
              scale wires, perhaps even one atom in diameter, and to make  low- temperature
              electrical measurements on them.  The wires  will be created by a combination
              of natural growth and  patterning with the scanning tunneling microscope (STM).
               Early experiments will include imaging of a metal-chain-  forming system not
              previously studied by STM and studies of  chain stability.  Intermediate-scale
              contact probes to  bridge between the chains and macroscopic contacts will be 
              made using either step-edge evaporation or  STM chemical  vapor deposition. 
              Experiments in this phase will examine  any disruptive effects of these
              intermediate-scale pads on  the atomic chains, and also any problems with
              electrical  contact between the pads and the chains.  Once a sample is  made,
              it will be transferred to a low-temperature stage  within the same ultrahigh
              vacuum chamber, and its electrical  properties will be measured.  As a prelude
              to all the above  experiments, a study of the effects of stray capacitance on 
              single electron tunneling (SET) will be performed.  %%%  This basic research
              project will examine some of the  apparent challenges in creating atomic-scale
              electronic  circuits.  Our ultimate goals are to make the simplest of  all such
              circuits, an atomic-scale wire (perhaps even one  atom in diameter), and to
              perform low-temperature electrical  measurements on it to explore quantum
              mechanical effects.  We will make the wire using a combination of natural 
              ordering of metals on semiconductor substrates, patterning  with the scanning
              tunneling microscope, and "step-edge  evaporation", a technique which uses
              small steps in the  substrate to create nanometer-scale structures.  There are 
              several apparent challenges .  For most materials, it  appears that the
              electrons needed for electrical conduction  within the wire would be sucked
              away by the substrate on  which the wires are created.  The creation of
              electrical  connections betw een the wires and the macroscopic world may 
              disrupt the wires, or the wires might be disrupted by  thermal fluctuations. 
              Electrical contact between the wires  and the macroscopic contacts may prove
              difficult.  However,  we are confident that each of these challenges can be
              met,  and suggest several promising strategies.  ***
