Title       : Career: Catalyst-Directed Resource from Waste Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9623741

Award Number: 9623741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda J. Broadbelt broadbelt@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1045,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT   CTS-9623741    Catalyst-directed resource recovery is a promising
              technology for the conversion of  polymeric  waste materials into high-valued
              products such as fuels and petrochemicals.  However, the lack of    a
              comprehensive knowledge base has limited its application.  This research aims
              at developing a  rigorous, science-based methodology for the recovery of
              high-valued products from polymeric  waste using both experiment and theory. 
              The experimental program focuses on the development   of novel contacting
              patterns to enhance the polymer-catalyst interaction and on the  identification
                of optimal catalyst parameters that enhance the value of the products
              afforded.   The experimental  work is complemented by a theoretical study
              exploiting mechanistic modeling and computational  quantum chemistry to provide
              information about the controlling reaction fundamentals.  Promising strategies
              for improved recovery of valuable products from waste polymer have been 
              identified and are investigated through experiment.  The use of ultra-fine
              particle or homogeneous  catalysts and liquid superacids aims to overcome the
              inherent diffusional limitations encountered in a polymer melt penetrating a
              solid catalyst by exploiting the intrinsic void volume of the polymer. 
              However, traditional polymer-catalyst contacting patterns have the advantage of
              allowing the polymers to be processed in existing processing units.  Therefore,
              relevant design parameters of heterogeneous catalysts, i.e., acidity//basicity
              and structure, are examined. The experimental work is  complemented by a
              theoretical study aimed at a priori prediction of the degradation
              characteristics of a given polymer feedstock and catalyst formulation.  The
              database amassed from experimental studies provides general qualitative rules
              that serve as a starting point for formulating a predictive, quantitative
              mechanistic model.  In general, the tendency of a polymer toward particular
              degradation products has been attributed to three factors: ( 1) strength of 
              bonds in the polymer backbone, (2) presence of tertiary hydrogens, and(3)
              relative strength of substituent bonds.  Each of these qualitative rules is
              examined quantitatively using an approach combining mechanistic modeling and
              computational quantum chemistry.  Preliminary work has already been carried out
              to demonstrate the application of mechanistic modeling to quantify the tendency
              of different polymers to degrade thermally to monomer.    An education plan
              linking research and teaching has been formulated to teach chemical engineering
              students to deal with complex issues in a changing and increasingly
              entrepreneurial environment. The core components which comprise this plan are
              (1) development of generic manufacturing modules linking theoretical concepts
              to real world processes, (2) introduction of computational quantum chemistry
              into the undergraduate curriculum for property estimation, and (3) development
              of communication skills through individual and team oral and written
              presentations.  Each of these is a generic component that can be incorporated
              throughout the curriculum.
