Title       : The Physics of Epitaxial Crystal Growth: A Quantitative X-ray Scattering Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a9623827

Award Number: 9623827
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Miceli micelip@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9623827 
              Miceli    The physical behavior of epitaxial crystal growth will be studied 
              through  experiments  which critically test  current  theoretical  predictions 
              as  well  as  motivate  new  ideas  for  fundamental  inquiry.  Using x-ray
              scattering instrumentation located  at  the  University  of  Missouri  and at
              the National  Synchrotron  Light  Source  (NSLS)  at Brookhaven National
              Laboratory,  the  research  quantitatively  investigates height  f1uctuations 
              of  a  growing  crystal  surface  which  arise  intrinsically  from  the  
              growth  process,   as   well  as  induced  extrinsically  from   extended 
              crystalline  defects. The scientific program  includes:  (1)  New  experiments 
              which utilize the unique combination of surface  and  bulk  sensitivity  of 
              x-rays to address  the  origin  of  misfit  dislocation  induced  surface
              roughness, (2)  Extensive  in  situ  experiments on metals to test theories of
              kinetic roughening, and  (3)  Novel  experiments to investigate transient
              growth dynamics.  The  information from these experiments will provide  insight
               on  how atoms move and assemble on the surface, thereby leading to  a  better 
              understanding  of  the growth dynamics.  The  project  is  fundamental  in 
              nature, but the results will be  relevant  to  a  range technologically
              important disciplines.  %%%  The  object  of  this  research is the
              investigation,  at  atomic  scale, of fundamental physical processes that are
              involved in the  growth  of  thin films. This is important because thin films 
              are  used   in   a  myriad  of  technological  applications;   e.   g. 
              semiconductor devices, adhesives, catalysts and surface coatings.  All  of 
              these  applications rely on the ability to  control  the  surface  morphology 
              of the films. The project  will  use  unique  x-ray scattering facilities at
              the University of Missouri and  at  the  Brookhaven  National Laboratory
              National  Synchrotron  Light  Source  (NSLS). I n particular, the extremely
              intense  synchrotron  x-ray  radiation at the NSLS will allow the study of the
              temporal  evolution  of  a rough surface film. The information  from  these 
              experiments  will provide insight on how atoms move and  assemble  on  the
              surface, thereby leading to a better understanding of the  growth  dynamics.
              The project is fundamental in nature,  but  the  results  will  be  relevant to
              a range technologically  important  disciplines.  ***
