Title       : CAREER: Robust Control-Oriented Identification: Theoretical Development and
               Experimental Validation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9623228

Award Number: 9623228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jie Chen jchen@ucrengr.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623228  Chen  The overall technical approach to be adopted is to merge theory, 
              simulation, and experimentation, and it draws theoretical  concepts and
              techniques from the areas of mathematics, control  theory, numerical
              computation, structural dynamics, and control  system implementation.  A unique
              thread in our theoretical  approach is the use of classical analytic function
              interpolation  and convex optimization techniques which appear to be extremely 
              useful but are yet to be exploited for system identification.   The proposed
              research, with a unifying theme on model and  computational complexity, focuses
              on several most imminent issues  that are yet to be addressed but are critical
              to the advance and  application of robust control-oriented identification
              techniques,  and it aims at developing accurate, computationally efficient and 
              practically feasible identification algorithms not previously  available. 
              Numerical simulation and experimental validation  involving flexible
              structures, turbo-machines, and active  magnetic bearings will be performed in
              laboratory, and in  collaboration with government and industrial organizations.
                    Education and human resource development constitutes an  integrable part
              in this proposed research.  The principal  education objective in this research
              is to provide students  opportunities to participate in advanced research
              projects.   Through this rigorous, innovative, and closely guided research 
              program, the students will acquire and develop knowledge, skills,  and methods
              of scientific inquiry and technological discovery,  hence adequately preparing
              them for an engineering career in the  future.  A carefully coordinated,
              balanced,and systematic  educational approach through a combination of
              activities in  student advising, curriculum development, laboratory
              development,  and public services will be employed to achieve this goal. While 
              graduate students at the Doctoral and the Masters levels will  participate
              directly in this research, the project will  also  benefit Senior undergraduate
              students through summer research and  Senior design projects generated from
              this research.  ***
