Title       : NMR Studies of the Mechanism of Superconductivity and Spin Fluctuations in High
               Tc and Related Layered Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1998   
File        : a9623858

Award Number: 9623858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Takashi Imai imai@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9623858  Imai      The  mechanism of high temperature superconductivity in 
              doped  copper oxides is still highly controversial. The  fundamental difficulty
               lies in  the  fact that strong  carrier-carrier correlation effects  do  not
              allow  us to  describe the normal metallic state above Tc based on  the 
              conventional   wisdom.   Moreover,  the  magnetism   and  statistical
              properties of the undoped parent antiferro-  magnetic insulators are hard to 
              understand.  Recently,  a  new NMR  (Nuclear  Magnetic  Resonance) spectrometer
               has  been  designed and  developed  at  the  Center  for  Materials  Science 
              and  Engineering at  M.I.T.  The  spectrometer  is ideally  suited  to 
              investigate carrier-  carrier correlation  effects, metal-insulator 
              transitions,  magnetic and statistical  properties  of quasi  2d  quantum  spin
              systems, the symmetry of the  superconducting order  parameter,  and related
              phenomena. In the proposed  project,  a variety  of high Tc copper oxide
              superconductors and  related materials will be studied using the spectrometer 
              with particular emphasis on NMR experiments at elevated  temperatures.    %%%  
               The nuclear magnetic resonance technique is an ideal  microscopic,
              nondestructive probe into the physical and  chemical properties of solids.
              Recently, a new NMR  spectrometer has been developed at the Center  for
              Materials  Science  and Engineering at M.I.T. The spectrometer  allows  one  to
               conduct  unique experiments to investigate  high  temperature superconductors 
               and  related  materials.  Most  notably,   difficult experiments  at elevated
              temperatures  can be conducted  in  a  routine manner. In the proposed 
              project, the NMR spectrometer will be utilized to  understand the mechanism of
              high temperature  superconductivity and related phenomena in copper oxide 
              superconductors.  ***
