Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics in Quantum Wells at Terahertz Frequencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9623874

Award Number: 9623874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Sherwin Sherwin@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9623874 
              Sherwin    This   project  will  explore  non-equilibrium  and  non   linear 
              properties  of  quantum  wells  at  Terahertz  frequencies.   The  objective 
              is  to observe intrinsic optical bistability,  period-  doubling,  chaos  and 
              Rabi oscillations  in  wide  quantum  well  structures.  These  effects  have 
              recently  been  predicted   by  computer  simulations using the Hartree
              approximation which  have  modeled  quantum wells containing many electrons 
              and  which  are  subject  to intense Terahertz radiation. The experiments will 
              be  performed  using  the  UC  Santa  Barbara  Free-Electron   Laser. 
              Semiconductor  structures which are specially  tailored  for  the  quantum 
              chaos  experiments will be grown  and  characterized  in  collaboration with
              collaborators at UC Santa Barbara.  %%%  In  recent  years,  many investigators
              have  been  struggling  to  reconcile  quantum  mechanics with  the  existence 
              of  chaos  in  Newtonian  dynamics.  The field is called  'quantum  chaos'. 
              The  traditional  approach to 'quantum chaos' is to study the  quantum 
              mechanics  of systems whose classical dynamics are chaotic.  This  project 
              takes  a somewhat different approach and  focuses  on  a  search for a purely
              quantum mechanical version of chaotic motion.  That is, motion that is chaotic,
              but has no analogue in classical  mechanics.  The  system to be studied are
              electrons  confined  in  thin  layers of semiconductor quantum wells, and which
              are driven  by extremely strong fields which oscillate several trillion times 
              each second. Simulations indicate that such systems can exhibit a  chaotic
              motion with no classical analogue. The strong fields  are  generated  by UC
              Santa Barbara's unique Free-Electron Laser.  The  project  will  initially 
              seek to observe  precursors  of  chaos,  called bifurcations, in which a small
              change in a parameter  (for  example, the strength of the oscillating field)
              causes a dramatic  change   in  the character of motion. A bifurcation  of 
              immediate  interest  is  so-called "period-doubling", in which the  system's 
              oscillations  occur  at twice the period of oscillations  in  the  driving 
              field. Having found such bifurcations, the project  will  then seek chaotic
              motion in a quantum system.  ***
