Title       : AMP: Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2001   
File        : a9623615

Award Number: 9623615
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4775000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio A. Garcia tony.garcia@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623615  Garcia         The Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities
              (WAESO)  is a regional alliance building upon the highly effective Southern 
              Rocky Mountain AMP which is well on its way (and ahead of schedule)  to
              completing its goal of more than doubling the number of minority  SMET B.S.
              degrees in the region.   By adding three institutions in  Nevada, the WAESO
              alliance adds to the 35 colleges and  universities, 7 professional
              organizations, 2 government  laboratories, 4 educational organizations, 16
              corporations and 147  academic and support programs of the Southern Rocky
              Mountain AMP.   A key component to student success is SMET  faculty
              participation  which is also similarly extensive.  WAESO draws on over 500 
              resource individuals (349 of which are SMET faculty) at 75 campuses  and
              participating organizations.  Approximately 85% are university,  government
              laboratory or industry scientists and engineers, while  15% were
              administrators.  Just over 40% of these resource  participants are
              underrepresented minorities themselves.         WAESO will help undergraduate
              students in all of the eligible  SMET areas including biological/life sciences,
              chemistry, computer  and information science, engineering, geosciences,
              mathematics,  physics and astronomy, agricultural science, technology, and
              other  eligible NSF fields.  With NSF funds, 600 undergraduate students  per
              year will participate in: (1) Undergraduate Summer Transition  to Upperclass
              (for college sophomores and juniors; community  college students expecting to
              go on to a baccalaureate); (2)  Faculty-Directed Undergraduate Student Projects
              (for community  college or four-year college students); (3) On-Site Peer Study 
              Groups (for incoming freshman in their summer prior to  matriculation,
              community college, or four-year college students);  (4) The National Electronic
              Peer Group Study Network (NEPS); (5)  Hypermedia Financial Aid and Academic
              Program Locator (for incoming  students, community college, and four-year
              college stude nts); (6)  computerized Undergraduate Preparation program for
              Graduate Study:  Sophomores, Juniors, Seniors; (7) Curriculum Development and 
              Reform: Summer Bridges, Undergraduate Research; and (8) Internship  Programs
              (for community college and four-year college students).   Additionally the
              WAESO will disseminate information on academic  programs, internships, GRE test
              taking skills, and other important  skill building workshops to another 400
              undergraduate minority  students per year.  In all, for the 5-year period, the
              WAESO plans  to have 5,000 undergraduate minority SMET student participating in
               activities and utilizing the services and advanced interactive  databases
              produced by the alliance.  Non-NSF funds will be used to  serve 10,066 students
              at the pre-college level through Project  PRIME and the navajo Higher Education
              demonstration Model which  have shown substantive increases in the number of
              minority and  majority students who actually graduate from high school and
              enter  college with SMET programs.
