Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Approach to the Study of Inverse Methods in Electrical
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1996    
File        : a9623721

Award Number: 9623721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric L. Miller elmiller@ece.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this CAREER award is to develop a fully integrated career plan 
              designed to meet the educational needs of students in the Electrical and
              Computer  Engineering (ECE) Department of Northeastern University.  The
              underlying theme  behind all aspects of this work is the study of inverse
              problems, a topic which  is all but absent at the undergraduate level and not
              often considered even in the  graduate school despite the ubiquity of these
              problems in many fields of  engineering and the applied sciences.    In the
              area of educations activities, two projects are envisioned.  At the 
              undergraduate level, a capstone design course in the general area of signal 
              processing is being developed and implemented.  At the graduate level, a course
               devoted to the study of the theoretical and practical issues surrounding
              linear  inverse problems is being developed.    In the area of research, we are
              exploring the use of statistical and multiscale  signal processing methods for
              solving non-linear electromagnetic inverse  scattering problems.  These
              algorithms will incorporate scattering models based  upon a Green's function
              formulation of the vector Helholtz equation.  A  statistically-based,
              multi-grid-type algorithm for extracting image and target  information (number
              of targets, locations, and classifications) is being  developed.  The
              incorporation of detailed, physical models directly into the data  processing
              algorithms makes these techniques directly applicable to a wide range  of
              problems including radar signal processing for image formation and target 
              detection/classification, remote sensing, microwave medical imaging, and 
              geophysical exploration.
