Title       : RUI: Comprehensive Property Measurements and Structure Relationships in Various
               Glass Systems over Extreme Compositional Ranges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9623681

Award Number: 9623681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Feller sfeller@coe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mario Affatigato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coe College
	      1220 First Avenue NE
	      Cedar Rapids, IA  524025008    319/399-8000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1774,9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9623681  Feller    This  project will involve at least fifteen Coe College 
              undergraduates in  a number of projects in glass science.  The purpose of the
              research is  to  find  relationships  between  the  atomic-level  structure  of
              important  glasses, some never described before and some of commercial 
              interest, and the physical properties exhibited by these  glasses.  The
              short-range   atomic  structure  will  be  determined  using   various
              techniques,  including magnetic  resonance, optical  spectroscopy,  and neutron
               scattering.  The physical properties to  be  related  to  the atomic 
              arrangements include density, optical transmission,  softening temperature, 
              and glass-forming limits. An  important  aspect  of  this research, which will
              benefit and  provide additional research  training for  the undergraduate 
              students concerned, is the experience they will gain  in  working  as  part  of
               an ongoing  and  large  international  collaboration established to study
              these glasses.    %%%    This research will involve the determination of
              quantitative  structureproperty  relationships  in  a  wide  variety  of 
              basic,  novel,  and commercially  interesting  glass  systems. The  glass 
              families  to  be studied     include  alkali   borates,   alkali   silicates,  
               alkali  borosilicates, alkali germanates, heavy metal oxide glasses  based  on
              lead  and  bismuth  oxides, alkali vanadates,  phosphates,  chlorinated glasses
              and others. A number of  complementary spectroscopic techniques including 
              novel  nuclear magnetic resonance, dynamic angle  spinning, nuclear  quadrupole
              resonance, elastic and inelastic neutron  scattering at  the
              Rutherford-Appleton lab, infra-red, and  Raman scattering  will be  used.   The
               physical properties  to be examined include:  density, glass  transition 
              temperature, optical characterization,  and  glassformation  limits.  The  work
               is part of well-established  world-wide  collaborations.  Another crucial
              aspect of the project  is  the  heavy reliance on unde rgraduates; at least
              fifteen  students from Coe College will be active as full members of  this
              research effort.  ***
