Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Binary Linear Codes: Nonexistence and Classification
               Theorems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9623205

Award Number: 9623205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Jaffe jaffe@cpthree.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9139,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9623205 Jaffe  This award provides funding for a project involving the search 
              for and implementation of algorithms for classifying binary  linear codes. 
              These algorithms are codified in a language, under  development, which
              facilitates the mechanical verification of  proofs about binary linear codes.
              One method is to take a  generalized weight enumerator, and use it to generate
              a linear  programming problem, as Delsarte did with the ordinary weight  
              enumerator.  Thse linear programming problems tend to be large,  and thus are
              not generally amenable to hand calculation.  One  particularly promising weight
              enumerator is the split weight  enumerator arising from a partition of n, where
              n is the length  of the code.  Using this method and others, many new specific 
              results about binary linear codes will be proved.  In turn, these  may suggest
              new algorithms and closed-form general statements.  This research is about
              error-correcting codes, a fundamental  topic in mathematical combinatorics,
              computer science, and  electrical engineering.  Such codes are indispensable
              whenever  information must be transferred across noisy channels from one  place
              to another.  For example,they are used in compact disk  players to get
              digitized music from the surface of the CD to the  inside of the player, and in
              communications between the earth and   orbiting satellites.  Error-correcting
              codes work by creatively  incorporating redundancy into the transmitted
              message, to permit  the receiver to detect and correct those errors introduced
              in  transit, which were caused  by (for instance) dust on the surface  of the
              CD or cosmic rays. A code is  good if it allows the  detection and correction
              of many errors without incurring the  expense of excessive redundancy.  This
              award funds both a search  for good codes and an investigation into the
              mathematical  limitations of how good they can be.
