Title       : Low Temperature Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1998       
File        : a9623448

Award Number: 9623448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex L. de Lozanne lozanne@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9623448 
              DeLozanne    This  condensed matter physics project will continue  development 
              of   a  low-temperature,  ultra-high-vacuum,  scanning  tunneling  microscope
              (STM). The STM is used for in-situ cleavage of high-Tc  materials.  Preliminary
               STM study  of  the  clean  surfaces  has  revealed  novel  structural features
              and an reproducible  gap  in  YBCO  materials.  The  origin  of  the 
              structural  features   is  uncertain  and will be further investigated in this
              project.  The  instrument  capabilities will be improved to allow a  lower 
              base  operating  temperature, and lower noise.  This  will  expand  the  range 
              superconducting  materials that can  be  investigated.  Of  particular 
              interest  are  measurement of  vortex  structure  and  charge  density waves in
              superconductors. This is  a  fundamental  project.  The  results will be of
              significance  for  theories  of  superconductivity,   and  may  lead   to  
              development   of   new  superconducting materials.  %%%  This  project  will 
              continue development of a surface  structure  determination tool, a scanning
              tunneling microscope (STM),  which  has  unique capabilities. With this
              instrument it is possible  to  take a small single crystal of a high-Tc
              superconductor, cool  it  to  very  low temperatures (20 K), cleave the
              crystal, and  study  the  surface  structure  with the STM  at  the  low 
              temperature.  Preliminary  data  have revealed unusual structural  features  in
               high-Tc  materials whose origin is uncertain, but which certainly  relevant to
              mechanisms of high-Tc superconductivity. This project  will  clarify the nature
              of the structural properties of  several  high-Tc  materials, and will study
              the temperature dependence  of  the  phenomena. The instrument will be further
              developed to allow  a  lower  base  temperature, which will  increase  the 
              range  of  superconducting  materials that can be investigated.  This  is  a 
              fundamental project in condensed  matter physics. The results will  be  of 
              significance for theories of superconductivity,  and  may  lead to development
              of new superconducting materials.  ***
