Title       : Raman Scattering and Electronic States of Nanoscale Group 4 Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9623315

Award Number: 9623315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qi Li qli@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Lannin  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9623315  Lannin    The objectives  of this work are to obtain basic information
              on the  phonon states of ordered and disordered semiconducting nanoscale 
              systems prepared and studied in ultrahigh vacuum.  Basic studies of  the
              phonons of group IV materials will be performed by interference  enhanced Raman
              scattering (IERS) methods on ultrathin films of very  small, 1-2nm,
              nanocrystallites and on ultrathin films epitaxial layers  grown on selected
              crystalline oxides.  The results will provide new  information about the phonon
              states of very small crystallites,  without chemisorbed species, and ultrathin
              crystalline semiconductor  layers.  For epitaxial layers the distinct surface
              geometry, such as  the role of surface dimers and dangling bonds on Raman
              scattering are  of interest.  IERS will provide additional Information about 
              interfacial bonding in semiconductor/oxide interfaces.  The influence  of
              adsorbate atoms on the phonon states of nanoscale systems will be  studied. 
              Raman scattering will be expanded as a tool for the study of  surface and near
              surface atom dynamics and structure.  Complementary  specular, dipolar electron
              energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) research in  Si, Ge and C nanoscale systems
              will provide information about  interband electronic transitions with
              decreasing  size or film  thickness, about changes in the optical gap and
              subgap states, and the  effects of chemisorbed species.  Changes in the
              vibrational states of  near  surface atoms in amorphous diamond-like carbon
              materials  prepared by pulsed laser deposition will be studied by high
              resolution  EELS.  These in situ measurements of diamond-like films will allow
              a  means to increase 4-fold bonding in ultrathin and thin films.  %%%  As the
              size of condensed matter systems is reduced in one or more  dimensions to
              nanoscale levels, surface and near surface atoms play an  increasingly
              important role in determining physical and chemical  properties.  Thus
              electrons and phonon states, magnetic and optical  properties are su
              bstantially influenced when dimensions decrease to a  scale of 1-2nm.  In such
              systems finite size quantum effects and the  presence of new bonding geometries
              lead to very substantial changes in  physical properties.  Both basic
              scientific knowledge and potential  technological applications of such small
              scale systems are thus of  considerable current interest.  Different classes of
              nanoscale systems  will be studied to obtain information on the effects of
              finite size  and near surface atoms on both the vibrational states and
              electronic  interband transitions.  These studies will involve the use and 
              extension of new and developing experimental methods for studies of  both
              ordered and disordered nanoscale systems.  Improvements in  bilayer
              interference enhanced Raman scattering (IERS) methods for  ultrathin films in
              the form of nanocrystalline island particles and  epitaxial layers will enhance
              Raman scattering as a surface science  tool for ultrathin semiconductors and
              their interfaces.  In addition,  reflection electron energy loss spectroscopy
              (EELS) will be utilized  for new interband electronic state studies of
              nanocrystalline,  amorphous and epitaxial ultrathin  films.  These studies of
              ordered  and disordered nanoscale semiconductors will employ ultrathin films 
              deposited and studied in situ in a specialized uhv system.  ***
