Title       : Mathematical Sciences: On the Nonlinear Dynamics of Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9623006

Award Number: 9623006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55738              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Frankel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623006   Frankel.  The main objective of this research is to study a group of
              free   interface problems related to solid combustion and exothermic phase  
              transitions. The one-dimensional evolution exhibits remarkable   dynamical
              wealth, while there are indications of its essentially   finite-dimensional
              character. The existence of a finite-dimensional   attractor and nonlinear
              interaction of two free boundaries in a   degenerate Hopf bifurcation will be
              investigated analytically and   numerically. The Principal Investigator will
              also study two-dimensional   evolution generated by these free interface
              problems. A rigorous study   concerning well-posedness for problems with
              various boundary conditions      and interface kinetics shall be combined with 
              numerical simulation in   order to understand geometry and dynamics of the
              curved interfaces. An   alternative view of the interface dynamics is provided
              by   coordinate-free surface evolution equations modeling basic flame  
              instabilities which include the thermal-diffusive and the hydrodynamic  
              instabilities. Analytical and numerical study of the surface evolution  
              equations will be directed toward better understanding of their basic  
              mathematical nature, such as global well-posedness, uniformly bounded  
              curvature and smoothness of solutions, and some important dynamical   features
              including exponential growth of length, fingering and   self-fractalization
              that are exhibited by the solutions.    %%%    The proposed research is
              essentially devoted  to the study of    evolution of interfaces: the surfaces
              that separate the solid and the    melted matter as it solidifies, or those
              that separate the fuel and    the burned products in combustion of gaseous or
              solid mixtures of    reactants. The latter is also known as high temperature
              syntheses and    can be employed for manufacturing of new materials. The shape
              and the    velocity of the interfaces as they propagate through the substance
              may    greatly effect the structure and the physical prope rties of the   
              resulting products. It was also demonstrated recently that evolution    of
              flame fronts may be applied to the nuclear flames in the    "supernovae" type
              stars.       ***
