Title       : AMP: Puerto Rico Alliance for Minority Participation Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a9623943

Award Number: 9623943
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4650000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel Gomez m_gomez@upr1.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623943  Gomez-Rodriguez         The Puerto Rico Alliance for Minority
              Participation Phase II  joins 14 universities, National Laboratories and local
              industry to  increase the quality and number of Hispanic BS degrees in SMET 
              conferred by PR-AMP institutions each year by a total of 1,425,  growing from
              the current 2,646 to 4,071.  Up to 2/3 of these will  be low-income and/or
              first generation college students.  PR-AMP  universities conferred 1,896 BS
              degrees in 1993, which represents  23.7% of the 7,995 degrees conferred
              nationally to Hispanics,  making PR-AMP institutions a key resource for
              producing Hispanic  SMET graduates.  Through PR-AMP Phase II, about 32,000
              student  participants are expected to benefit from the PR-AMP program.  
              Institutional effectiveness and efficiency will be optimized to  increase the
              average graduation rates of PR-AMP institutions from  the current annual rate
              of 32% to 60%.  PhDs in SMET conferred to  BS graduates from PR-AMP will
              increase from the current annual  average of 48 to 83.         The thrust of
              PR-AMP Phase II activities will target the  undergraduate component of the SMET
              pipeline, as major systemic  strategies are already in place on the island to
              address the pre-  college (PR Systemic Statewide Initiative) and graduate 
              (Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research-EPSCoR)  levels.
              Building on those strategies piloted and found effective in  Phase I and
              creating new initiatives to address all key aspects of  the barriers to SMET
              education, Phase II will develop the   following core strategies:  changing the
              teaching/learning culture,  faculty attitudes and curriculum though the
              curricular revision of  SMET curricula to incorporate effective teaching
              strategies bases  on an inquiry approach to learning and effective classroom 
              assessment method, with emphasis on gatekeeper and bottleneck  courses;
              faculty, industry and peer mentoring program to provide  SMET students with a
              network of academic and social support;  strengthening undergraduat e research
              with emphasis on local  graduate research centers, National Laboratories and
              industry  internships; stipends for low-income SMET students to address 
              financial need and stimulate participation in the PR-AMP process; 
              incorporation of multimedia technology in the learning process;  special
              bridging component, with pre-college to college engineering  program and an
              undergraduate to graduate transition program; a  teacher preparation program to
              improve the competence of future  SMET teachers; and the development of an
              institutional research and  strategic planning capability to measure variables
              that indicate  the value-added in terms of student outcomes and institutional 
              effectiveness and efficiency.
