Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Investigations on Normal and Paracompact Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9623391

Award Number: 9623391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoltan T. Balogh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623391  Balogh       Although normal and paracompact spaces are classical and 
              frequently used classes of topological spaces, and have been  extensively
              investigated (indeed, major breakthroughs such as those   on normal Moore
              spaces and Dowker spaces took place exactly in this  area), they are also among
              those classes in which a number of old   and venerable problems remain open. 
              The aim of this project is to  make progress in settling some of these
              problems, mainly by creating  new constructions of topological spaces.  The
              principal technique to  be used has its origin in a paper of M.E.Rudin, where
              an example of a  normal but not collectionwise normal simplicial complex is
              constructed.  In that paper Rudin uses countable substructures of a structure
              of  size 2^c on a set of cardinality c (= the cardinality of the real  line) to
              code normality.  Refinements of and improvements on this  technique will be
              used to attack seven problems from the literature as  well as to obtain related
              results.  A typical such problem is whether  and which normal, screenable (=
              every open cover has a sigma-disjoint  open refinement) spaces are paracompact.
                    The following two important properties of the usual Euclidean  space are
              often used in mathematics.  (1) Every continuous function on  a closed set can
              be continuously extended over the entire space  (normality).  (2) Continuous
              local structures can be continuously  amalgamated into global ones
              (paracompactness).  Research during and  before the early fifties showed that
              many of the more general types of  spaces used in mathematical applications
              also have one or both of  these properties; those that do are called,
              respectively, normal and  paracompact spaces.  Major breakthroughs in the
              seventies and eighties  uncovered much of the structure of normal and
              paracompact spaces.  However, basic research questions remain unanswered.  Such
              questions  are typically concrete, explicit conjectures in the literature that 
              have to do with problems such as these: (a ) How does one recognize 
              paracompact spaces in the class of normal spaces?  (b) Does the  product of two
              or more normal spaces of a certain kind also have this  useful extension
              property?  During the course of this project,  refinements of a technique
              originated by M.E.Rudin will be used to  build general topological spaces, with
              the goal of settling some of the  conjectures mentioned above.  ***
