Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Properties of Solutions of Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1996      
File        : a9623161

Award Number: 9623161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61708              (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Kukavica   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract    This project concerns certain geometric properties of solutions of
                partial differential equations. Of particular interest are a study of   the
              size of level sets, the maximal order of vanishing, and growth   properties of
              solutions of various types of partial differential   equations. The proposed
              method is a use of elliptic regularity theory   to find simplifications and
              extensions of the results of H. Donnelly,   C. Fefferman, and F.-H. Lin
              concerning geometric properties of   solutions of second order partial
              differential equations. The PI's   method, based on the theorem on elliptic
              iterates of Lions and   Magenes, leads to extensions to a wide class of linear
              and nonlinear   equations of elliptic and parabolic type with analytic 
              coefficients. The PI proposes to address some questions which still   remain
              unresolved, including, in particular, sharp bounds on the size   of level sets
              and the maximal order of vanishing for nonlinear   evolution equations and
              equations with non-analytic coefficients.    Nonlinear evolution equations,
              such as the Navier-Stokes system,   arise in in connection with numerous
              problems of mathematical   physics. Numerical and experimental models support
              the theory that   such equations produce chaotic behavior of solutions, i.e.,
              solutions   which exhibit complex temporal and spatial oscillations. This
              project   addresses this issues and aims to obtain such intimate information of
                solutions as their oscillatory behavior and their growth  properties.
              Information on these issues, which is the main purpose of   this project, would
              lead to better understanding of oscillatory  phenomena arising in many problems
              of fluid mechanics and related fields.
