Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Interior Point Methods for Convex Programming--Theory and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1996       
File        : a9623135

Award Number: 9623135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Osman Guler guler@math.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1039,9146,CVIS,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9623135  Guler    The object of this project is to develop algorithms for large
              scale   programming problems and to analyze their performance.  The
              investigator   will continue his research in interior point methods in order to
              seek answers   to several theoretical and practical issues  concerning these
              methods.     Particular issues include:  (1) developing workable and near
              optimal barrier   functions for general convex problems, (2) using any special
              property a   problem might have in order to construct barrier functions with
              additional   desirable properties, (3) developing efficient long--step interior
              point   methods by taking advantage of the properties of the underlying problem
                and/or the barrier function, (4) computational testing of the developed  
              algorithms in order to gauge their performance and gain additional insight  
              into their behavior, and (5) developing new tools to analyze interior point  
              methods.    Many problems in industry can be formulated as large scale
              optimization   problems.  For example, many production, scheduling (such as
              airline crew   scheduling), planning problems, etc. can be formulated as linear
              programs.   The practical impact of interior point methods on such large scale
              linear   programs have been phenomenal.  This has been followed by similar  
              successes in linear complementarity problems, and more recently in semi-- 
              definite programming.  The latter problems also have practical applications  
              in industry, engineering, economics, and in many hard problems in discrete  
              optimization. (Some of these applications have been unexpected, and can be  
              attributed to the practical success of interior point methods.)  Many other  
              industrial problems can be posed as convex programs.  At present, interior  
              point methods provide the theoretical promise to solve such problems  
              efficiently.  The investigator will perform research towards advancing  
              interior point methods in order to make this promise a reality.  These 
              advances will have a direct effect on our a bility to solve important large  
              scale industrial problems in manufacturing, planning, transportation,  
              distribution, and engineering.
