Title       : Dissertation Research: Insect Selection on Tropane Alkaloids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9623387

Award Number: 9623387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7879               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joy M. Bergelson jbergels@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623387  Bergelson   Plants are known to produce a wide variety of chemical
              compounds, some of which are used in medicine today. Many theories explaining
              the diversity of these compounds propose that plants produce them as defenses
              against herbivorous insects, but there is little experimental work to
              demonstrate the validity of this idea.  This award will fund experiments to
              address the role of a particular class of plant chemicals, the tropane
              alkaloids, produced by members of the potato family (Solanaceae).  Three
              strategies will be adopted to determine the functional importance of the major
              tropane alkaloids using two closely related members of the Solanaceae, deadly
              nightshade and jimson weed.  The first approach is to add the alkaloids, both
              individually and in mixtures, to insect artificial diet in order to ascertain
              their effects on insect growth and survival.   The second strategy is to test
              whether combinations or amounts of the alkaloids showing greatest toxicity to
              insect herbivores in the laboratory have a defensive function in  natural
              populations. The final strategy is the most novel, and takes advantage of
              recent biotechnology to insert genes into plants.  A gene for one of the
              enzymes necessary to create  the alkaloids will be inserted into plants in the
              laboratory, qualitatively changing their alkaloid production.   Individuals
              having these 'mutant' alkaloid profiles will be planted out in the field with
              ordinary or wild type plants, and the amount of damage and total seed
              production for plants of both kinds will be measured.     This project has both
              implications for our understanding of the evolution of plant chemistry, and for
               the applied management of crmps.  In particular, findings will help guide
              genetic engineering of more resistant plants and, in so doing,  allow farmers
              to be less dependent on pesticide application.
