Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Phylogeny of the Endemic Rodents of Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9623426

Award Number: 9623426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla K. Tucker ptuck@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623426  TUCKER  The primary goal of studies in systematic biology is to
              understand the processes that give rise to the diversity of life. 
              Reconstructing the historical (OphylogeneticO) relationships among organisms is
              the first step in studying the patterns of diversity and elucidating the
              processes that give rise to this diversity.  This project investigates the
              phylogenetic relationships among an exceptionally diverse group of mammals, the
              native rodents of Madagascar (the nesomyine rodents; subfamily Nesomyinae), and
              explores the relationships among these rodents and rodents native to mainland
              Africa.      The seven genera and 14 species of Nesomyinae are exceedingly
              diverse morphologically and ecologically; the only "character" serving to unite
              the group is their common distribution on Madagascar.  There is some
              uncertainty whether the nesomyines are a result of a single adaptive radiation
              or of multiple migrations to the island.  If the nesomyine rodents are in fact
              the result of one migration event, it is certainly one of the most spectacular
              mammalian radiations on earth.      An organism's phylogenetic history is
              written in its DNA.  This study, by Sharon Jansa under the direction of
              Priscilla Tucker, therefore will use DNA sequence data to uncover the
              relationships among nesomyine rodents.  Data will be obtained from two genes:
              the maternally inherited cytochrome b gene and the biparentally inherited zona
              pellucida 3 gene.  The combination of maternally inherited and biparentally
              inherited gene sequence data is likely to accurately reflect the history of the
              organisms and not simply the history of the genes.    This study is significant
              in that it is the first to use a molecular data set to investigate the
              phylogeny of the nesomyine rodents.  The knowledge of relationships obtained
              from this study will provide a framework for examining the ecological and
              morphological specializations among this diverse group of mammals.  This may be
              the only opportunity to study this unique fauna, whi ch is rapidly disappearing
              due to continuing deforestation and encroachment of human-introduced species.
