Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Probabilistic Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9623067

Award Number: 9623067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel H. Spencer spencer@spencer.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Spencer    The Probabilistic Method has been developed intensively and become
              one of  the most powerful and widely used tools applied in Combinatorics. In
              this  methodology, as developed by Paul Erdos, one proves the existence of a 
              combinatorial object by showing that a suitably defined random object has  the
              desired properties with positive probability. Closely aligned is the   study of
              Random Graphs and other Random Structures. Also closely aligned is   the
              analysis of Randomized Algorithms in Computer Science. A particular set  of
              problems in this investigation involve radom greedy algorithms, which  combine
              all of these elements. Asymptotic packing is a problem of current  interest.
              Given a family of objects, one wants a disjoint subfamily, a   packing, taking
              up as much space as possible. Results over the past decade  have given general
              conditions such that almost all of the space can be  covered. This project
              considers bounds on the amount of space not covered.  Recent years have seen
              the use of more subtle probability methods in this  area. Martingales have long
              been a powerful tool for probabilists, but  now we are seeing how to use them
              to give strong bounds on discrete   problems. The Lovasz Local Lemma and
              probability inequalities of Jason and  Talagrand are used to good effect.
              Random algorithms are analyzed via   birth processes and differential
              equations. The percolation of the random  graph when average degree is near one
              is analagous to bond percolation in  the plane near critical probability. For
              random graphs, the appropriate  reparameterization is known. For bond
              percolation on the n by n grid, an  analogous result is in sight. The random
              graph percolation also corresponds  to a birth process with the expected family
              size near one. This gives new  insight into the random graph model and led to a
              surprising connection  between enumeration of graphs and a conditional form of
              Brownian motion.    This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One
              of the goals of  Combinat orics is to find efficient methods to study how
              discrete collections  of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete
              systems is extremely   important to modern communications. For example, the
              design of large   networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and
              the design of   algorithms in computer science deal with discrete sets of
              objects, and this  makes use of combinatorial research.
