Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Groups as Galois Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9623199

Award Number: 9623199
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helmut Voelklein helmut@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   9623199 Voelklein  This award is for an investigation on realizing groups
              as Galois groups over the rational field Q; i.e., the famous Inverse Galois
              Problem. Regular Galois realizations in one variable over Q have been studied
              extensively by Belyi, Malle, Matzat, Thompson, and others. The investigator's
              recent book gives an introduction to that theory, and the forthcoming book of
              Malle and Matzat gives a complete description of all known results. On the
              other hand, very little is known about such realizations in r variables when r
              is bigger than 1. This investigation will further explore the case of r greater
              than 1. Geometrically, this means studying fundamental groups of complements of
              hypersurfaces W in projective r-space. More specifically, it means looking at
              finite quotients of such fundamental groups and deciding when the complements
              of W are defined over the rational numbers. The main body of proposed work is
              in the case where W is a Coxeter arrangement (of hyperplanes in affine space)
              or its quotient by the corresponding Coxeter group. To show that a covering of
              the complement of such W is defined over the rationals, two methods are
              available. The first is to interpert such a covering as a moduli space for
              covers of the Riemann sphere, and the second involves using a 
              higher-dimensional rigidity criterion. Another part of this project is quite
              different from the rest. This is a joint project with M. Fried  about Galois
              realizations in non-zero characteristic p.   This research falls into the
              general mathematical field of Number Theory.  Number theory has its historical
              roots in the study of the whole numbers,  addressing such questions as those
              dealing with the divisibility of one  whole number by another. It is among the
              oldest branches of mathematics and  was pursued for many centuries for purely
              aesthetic reasons. However, within  the last half century it has become an
              indispensable tool in diverse  applications in areas such as data transmission
              and processing, and  communicat ion systems.
