Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analytical Problems for Models in Compressible Fluid
               Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9623037

Award Number: 9623037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene M. Gamba   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623037  Gamba       This proposal concerns problems that model potential 
              compressible    fluid flow and charged-particle transport systems. The 
              compressible fluid     flow models  under  consideration  include the standard 
               transonic  flow      problem  in  gas  dynamics, its  viscous  approximations
              and   boundary      value problem,  and the  Mach  reflection problem  when  a 
               weak shock     (pressure) wave  collides  with an oblique obstacle. Models of 
              charged-    particle transport systems are  studied  within the framework  of 
              submicron      electronic  devices. In  particular  these models  include  
              electro-    hydrodynamic  or  energy-transport models  for semiconductors, 
              related     models for  plasmas,  boundary  value  problems and their high 
              field     approximations.   %%%       Areas of applications of the proposed
              research include  models in     aerodynamics and aircraft  design.  In 
              particular,  wing    performance just below supersonic speeds and wing design
              for  flight     in the upper atmosphere. These are  models  that describe how a
               gas    moves around an object at high speeds (i.e. close to producing  sonic
              booms).     In addition models of ionized plasmas and electron transport  are
              considered.      In particular, the design and  performance simulation of 
              semiconductor     devices of extremely small size and even quantum level. The 
              models      under consideration  describe the flow of current in the  working
              of a     submicron or a quantum-scale electronic device. The core of the 
              proposal      focuses on issues related to  questions of validity and  
              stability of models      based on the available data. This information is of
              paramount  importance in      finding  the   best computational strategy for
              the computer  aided     simulation of experiments.   ***
