Title       : The Incorporation of Quantum Effects in the Simulation of Proton Transfer
               Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1999     
File        : a9623813

Award Number: 9623813
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon Hammes-Schiffer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting   Professor 
              Hammes-Schiffer at the University of Notre Dame as part of the CAREER   program
              for young scientists. The objective of this research is to   develop and apply
              new methods for simulating dynamical processes   involving multiple proton
              transfer reactions.   In order to simulate   proton transfer reactions, methods
              that incorporate the quantum   mechanical behavior of the hydrogen atoms being
              transferred must be   developed.   In surface-hopping methods such as molecular
              dynamics with   quantum transitions (MDQT), trajectories split into branches
              that are   each assigned to a particular proton quantum state, so branching  
              processes (i.e. processes involving multiple channels or pathways) are  
              described accurately.  The direct extension of MDQT to processes   involving
              multiple proton transfer steps, however, is not computationally   feasible. 
              The proposed new method, MC-MDQT, combines MDQT with a   multiconfigurational
              (MC)  self-consistent-field approach and will describe branching processes  
              properly as  well as allow the quantum mechanical treatment of multiple
              hydrogen   atoms.  This method will be applied to two classes of systems.   The
              first is   proton transport along linear chains of hydrogen-bonded water
              molecules.     This is an important process because the rapid transport of
              protons over   large distances in biologically important systems such as  
              bacteriorhodopsin and photosynthetic reaction centers is thought to occur  
              along such chains.   The second class of  systems that will be studied is  
              hydrogen transfer in enzymes such as alcohol dehydrogenase, which plays a  
              vital role in glycolysis.   Kinetic isotope effect experiments indicate   that
              hydrogen tunneling is significant in a variety of enzyme reactions.    The goal
              of these applications is to elucidate the underlying physical   principles of
              proton transfer reactions and to clarify the detailed   mechanisms of these
              biologically important reactions.  The educational   objectives of this Carreer
              grant are to promote the wider use of computer   simulations in the areas of
              organic chemistry and biochemistry.  A course   in computer simulations has
              already been designed.  An outgrowth of this   project is the creation of a
              computer lab workbook, as well as a textbook   which will facilitate the
              development of such courses at other   universities.   A general proton
              transfer reaction involves the passing of a hydrogen   atom nucleus from a
              donor to an acceptor.  Experiments have shown that   the hydrogen atom can
              tunnel through an energy barrier required for such   a reaction.  This research
              will focus on methods that incorporate quantum   mechanical behavior, such as
              tunneling in order to simulate proton   transfer reactions.  The educational
              objectives of this Carreer grant are   to promote the wider use of computer
              simulations in the areas of organic   chemistry and biochemistry.  A course in
              computer simulations has already   been designed.   The course consists of
              three parts: The lectures convey   the fundamental concepts for computer
              simulation;  Computer labs provide   hands on experience with molecular
              modeling, while independent research   motivates sutdents to pursue future
              projects.   An outgrowth of this   project is the creation of a computer lab
              workbook, as well as a textbook   which will facilitate the development of such
              courses at other   universities.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
