Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Spectral Problems and Meromorphic Solutions of
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9623121

Award Number: 9623121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41934              (Estimated)
Investigator: Friedrich Gesztesy fritz@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS- 9623121  PI: Gesztesy    Gesztesy proposes to study two
              related areas in differential equations pertaining to inverse spectral theory
              and meromorphic solutions of systems of ordinary differential equations related
              to integrable evolution   equations. The first area is connected to inverse
              spectral theory and the characterization of isospectral  sets of potential
              coefficients for the Schrodinger equation and representations of solutions of
              integrable systems such as the Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation. Building upon
              recently developed trace formulas for (multi-dimensional) Schrodinger operators
              in terms of appropriate Krein spectral shift functions and a general device for
              constructing isospectral potential coefficients, he intends to continue recent
              work on the inverse spectral problem for confining potentials and inverse
              spectral theory for short-range interactions. In connection with the second
              area, he proposes a strategy to solve the problem of characterizing all
              elliptic algebro-geometric finite-gap solutions of general matrix hierarchies
              of completely integrable evolution equations. In particular, Gesztesy proposes
              to continue work which recently led to a solution of this characterization
              problem for the KdV hierarchy on the basis of a newly developed approach
              centered around a theorem of Picard.    Inverse spectral theory has significant
              applications in atomic, molecular, and nuclear physics and in areas as
              wide-ranging as computer tomography, acoustics, electromagnetics, resolution of
              structural/material properties of media, and aviation technology. Similarly,
              completely integrable equations play a vital role in nonlinear optics and
              especially in soliton-based optical  communications systems. Gesztesy' work can
              be expected to have an impact on these areas.
