Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis on Waves in Stratified Fluids of Infinite Depth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9623060

Award Number: 9623060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54420              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shu-Ming Sun sun@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623060  Sun         The purpose of this project is to present a mathematical
              and   numerical study of solitary and periodic waves in stratified fluids   of
              infinite depth subject to the gravitational force. The proposal   consists of
              two parts. The first part intends to give a rigorous   answer to an open
              question whether there exist solitary internal   waves with algebraic decay at
              infinity in a continuously stratified   fluid that is bounded only by a rigid
              bottom and has a constant   density except for a layer with continuous density
              stratification.   The proposed research will give a rigorous justification of
              the   existence of solitary waves derived from a formal model equation,  
              called the Benjamin-Ono equation. The second part deals with the   existence of
              periodic waves of large amplitude in a two-layer fluid   without boundaries. A
              new formulation of the problem will be introduced,   which transforms the
              governing equations into a single integral equation.   Then the solutions of
              the integral equation will be studied numerically   and theoretically for any
              density ratio without restrictions on the   amplitude of solutions. In this
              project, the main thrust is to show   that the fully nonlinear governing
              equations for stratified fluids   have solutions of finite and large amplitude
              and give the various   properties of the solutions using numerical and
              theoretical approaches.   An interplay of theories in differential equations
              and functional analysis   will be essential to obtaining the rigorous
              justifications, while   numerical computation gives some crucial information on
              the solutions.  %%%         The gravity waves of large amplitude in a fluid of
              density variation,   also called a stratified fluid, with great depth are of
              considerable   geophysical interest. Large amplitude internal wave disturbances
              are   common features in the oceans as well as in the lower atmosphere. In  
              particular, a solitary wave, whose form is a localized single hump,   and a
              periodic wave, which always has  a same form after a certain   distance, are
              relevant to various oceanic and atmospherical phenomena.   The solitary waves
              of large amplitude have been associated with the   formation of tornados in the
              atmosphere and the enormous transport of   momentum and energy within the
              oceans. This work focuses on obtaining   the conditions under which the
              solitary or periodic waves can exist and   predicting how large the amplitude
              of the waves can be if they exist.   It will also try to capture the
              qualitative features of these waves   using numerical computations. The results
              obtained from this research   may provide some theoretical explanation of the
              formation of these waves   and give more understanding of certain wave motions
              in the oceans   and atmosphere so that these waves may be either utilized or
              avoided   in different physical applications.    ***
