Title       : Studies of In Flight Annihilation of High Energy Channeled Positrons in Single
               Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9623610

Award Number: 9623610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354546             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jene A. Golovchenko Golovchenko@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9623610  Golovchenko  This experimental condensed matter physics project will 
              explore experimentally the  basic interaction of positrons  with crystalline
              matter.  The main focus will be  on the  process of in-flight annihilation of
              channeled MeV positrons  with crystal valence electrons.  The annihilation
              yields  should be proportional to the electron density along the  positron
              path, and should also be very sensitive to the spin  polarization of the
              electrons.  The experiments are expected  to demonstrate that positron
              channeling can be developed  into a sensitive probe of the electronic and
              magnetic  structures of crystals on the atomic scale.  This is a  fundamental
              research project, but the results should lead to  new instrumentation having
              broad technological applications  in a range of materials research areas.  %%% 
              Positrons and electrons are antimatter-matter twins, with  the consequence that
              when brought very close together, they  annihilate - converting their energies,
              of mass and  momentum, into energetic photons called gamma rays.  It has 
              recently become possible to obtain accelerated beams of mono-  energetic
              positrons with sufficient intensities to develop  the annihilation interaction
              as a sensitive atomic scale  probe of the  electronic and  magnetic properties
              of  crystals.  In this research, energetic positrons will be  focused
              (channeled) by the atomic potential of a crystal.  The data will provide
              information about the density of the  electrons that determine the atomic scale
              electronic and  magnetic properties of the materials.  This is a fundamental 
              research project, but the results should lead to new  instrumentation having
              broad technological applications in a  range of materials research areas.  **
