Title       : Confinement Effects at the Superfluid Transition of 4He
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9623831

Award Number: 9623831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis M. Gasparini fmg@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9623831  Gasparini    Usually one deals with systems where the spatial dimension
               is not a relevant variable in the thermodynamic behavior.  That is, systems
              half as large or twice as large behave  identically when normalized by the
              mass. This is not the  case in situations where the spatial dimensions are made
              so  small that they become comparable to a relevant length of  the system. In
              the case of a second-order phase transition,  one has a length scale which
              diverges as the transition is  approached. In this case, if one limits this
              divergence by  an imposed spatial boundary, one affects the behavior in a 
              fundamental way. This situation will be studied in the case  of helium at the
              superfluid transition. To do this work one  must have a way of achieving
              uniform confinement. It has  been shown that two silicon wafers can be spaced
              in such a  way as to achieve uniform sub-micrometer confinement over  large
              lateral dimensions. These structures can be used for  the proposed studies and
              have, as well, technological  importance. The bonding process, for instance,
              can be used  to achieve large-scale silicon-on-insulator structures..  %%% 
              Present semiconductor technology has pushed the integration  of active
              electronics to very small dimensions. It is  technologically challenging and
              important to push these  limits further, and scientifically to ask the question
               whether the ever-smaller systems will behave simply as  smaller versions of
              the larger system. A similar question  can be asked in other circumstances
              where the influence of  the smaller dimensions can be effectively amplified. To
               perform such studies one has to make small structures in a  reliable way, and
              develop new measuring techniques. The  structures which will be made for this
              work will consist of  two wafers of silicon bonded to each other in such a way 
              that a very small gap remains. In this gap a liquid will be  introduced and its
              properties as it undergoes a phase  transformation will be studied. The overall
              results of these  s tudies will have technological  implications for the
              silicon-bonding process, and will lead  to a better understanding of the
              behavior of very small  systems.  ***
