Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research on Hyperbolic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9623175

Award Number: 9623175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75222              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio Sa Barreto   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodrigo Banuelos  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Sa Barreto  9623175        This project is divided in four main parts:
              Project I. Existence of Resonances For Perturbations of the Laplacian. Project
              II. Resonances of the Schwarzschild Metric.  Project III.  Inverse Hyperbolic
              Problems.Project IV. Singularities of Solutions to Semilinear Wave Equations. 
              Project I.  The PI will investigate the existence of resonances for  second
              order self-adjoint perturbations of the Laplacian. Two particular cases of this
                problem have been recently solved by the investigator in collaboration with
              M. Zworski. We also intend to investigate if the methods used in these two
              papers can be refined to obtain lower bounds for the number of resonances in a
              disk of radius r.   Project II. (Joint project with M. Zworski) The PI will
              study the resonances for the Regge-Wheeler equation. It models the perturbation
              of a gravitational field without mass and spins.  Our goal is to study whether
              one can refine the work of Bachelot and Bachelot to show that the resolvent of
              the Regge-Wheeler operator  has a meromorphic extension to the whole complex
              plane and to describe the location of the resonances. Project III. The PI will
              consider the problem of determining a potential, V, from the Dirichlet to
              Neumann map corresponding to the perturbation of the Laplacian by the potential
              V.  We propose a method that does not involve the construction of exponentially
              increasing solutions to the equation, which is the main difficultyin proving
              such results using the methods of Calderon, Sylvester-Uhlmann and others.
              Project IV. (Joint project with Mark Joshi)  The PI will construct examples of 
              solutions to  a Cauchy problem for semilinear wave equations, with initial data
              conormal to a smooth curve, that is singular on the surface of the forward
              light cone over the swallowtail point. We intend to use stationary phase
              methods to accomplish this.    The projects are aimed at determining the
              effects a perturbation has on a medium and reciprocally, knowing the effects a
              certain ty pe of perturbation causes in a medium, determine the nature of this
              perturbation. These problems have their origin in Physics.   In project I the
              PI wants to determine the effects a perturbation in the medium has on the
              propagation of sound waves through that medium.  Project III is related to the
              question of determining the material inside a given object from measurements
              made only on the surface of that object.  The question the PI will study is if
              two objects have the same   measurements, made only on their surfaces, then
              they must be formed by the same material.  Project II is in gravitation theory,
              one would like to better understand certain solutions of Einstein's field
              equations. Project IV is dedicated to the question of how a non-linear
              perturbation of a certain medium affects the propagation of light in that
              medium.
