Title       : Nanocomposites in Microstructures: Optical Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9623663

Award Number: 9623663
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Armstrong roarmstr@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir M. Shalaev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9623663 
              Armstrong    Dipolar  resonances in small-particle fractal aggregates  may  be 
              localized in sub-wavelength spatial regions, leading to  enhanced  local 
              fields. Local field enhancements, in turn, result  in  the  enhancement  of 
              both  linear  and nonlinear  optical  processes.  Doping   the   aggregates  
              into  microcavities   (e.g.,   liquid  microdroplets)  further  increases the
              local  fields  because  of  trapping  by  mirocavity resonant modes.
              Nanoparticle-microcavity  composites   are   expected  to  possess  unique 
              characteristics  including   extremely   large  linear   and   nonlinear  
              optical  susceptibilities and strong dependence of the fractal  eigenmodes  on 
              the  frequency and polarization of the exciting laser and  on  the  structure 
              of the microcavity resonances. Investigations  of  nanocomposite materials will
              provide insight into the  effect  of  morphology on spectral properties. The
              composites themselves have  potential  applications  to  photonics, 
              information  technology,  signal  processing,  aerosol science, and  remote 
              sensing.  This  project will carry out experimental and theoretical studies of 
              a  variety  of optical effects including linear and nonlinear  Raman 
              scattering,   fluorescence  and  lasing,  and  other  third-order  processes 
              including  degenerate four-wave  mixing;  other,  more  fundamental,  studies 
              will  include  Anderson  localization  and  cavity quantum electrodynamics. 
              %%%    Aggregates of small particles are widely found in nature and  may  also
              be fabricated in the laboratory. In the process of formation  many  of these
              aggregates form frothy structures that possess  so  called "scale invariance",
              that is, they have the same appearance  when  viewed  over  a  wide range of
              sizes. Such  aggregates  are  examples  of "fractals" and include commonly
              occurring, materials  such as smokes, foams, polymers, and DNA. A second
              constituent of  the  composite is exempli fied by the simple raindrop (that is,
               a  small,  spherical liquid droplet). The composite material itself, 
              consisting  of  liquid  droplets  containing  fractal   aggregate  inclusions,
              may form naturally or may be the result of a specific  laboratory  procedure. 
              A  number  of  recent  experimental   and  theoretical  studies  suggests  that
               these  composite  materials  possess unusual optical properties, resulting
              from the fact  that  each   constituent   (i.e.,  the  fractal   aggregate  
              and   the  microdroplet)   possess  so-called  electromagnetic   resonances. 
              Electromagnetic  resonances  are  responsible  for  many  unusual  optical
              phenomena and generally lead to an amplification  of  the  light   emitted  by 
              the  resonant  system.  General  theoretical  arguments  suggest  that the
              composite materials  should  exhibit  enhanced   resonance   behavior,   they  
              have   many   potential  applications  to  such diverse fields as information 
              technology,  signal  processing, and atmospheric monitoring. In this  project, 
              the   PIs  will  carry  out  both  experimental  and  theoretical 
              investigations of these novel composite materials.  ***
