Title       : Dissertation Research: Reduction in Pathogen Virulence and its Effect on Host
               Demography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1996       
File        : a9623416

Award Number: 9623416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7960               (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Jarosz amjarosz@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis W. Fulbright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9623416  Jarosz   Pathogen virulence refers to the negative effects of infection
              on host fitness.  This research investigates the relationship between pathogen
              virulence and host plant demography.  Theoretical models assume that reductions
              in pathogen virulence lead to increases in host population size and density. 
              Research funded by this award represents one of the first tests of these models
              for plant systems.  The project will determine whether changes in virulence
              actually cause commensurate changes in plant population growth for a system of
              economic and aesthetic importance,  the American chestnut,  Castanea dentata,
              and the chestnut blight pathogen, Cryphonectria parasitica.  Reductions in
              pathogen virulence in this system result from infection of the pathogen by
              double-stranded RNA hypoviruses.  When the pathogen is attacked by hypoviruses,
              its host tree produces wound callus tissue and can survive the infection.  At a
              population scale, such survival events result in a recovering population. 
              Seedling recruitment and population growth rates will be compared for 
              recovering, non-recovering, and disease-free chestnut populations.   This work
              will contribute to the development of cost effective management strategies for
              the American chestnut.  If, for example, chestnut population growth rates are
              most sensitive to loss of saplings and saplings are most affected by infection,
              efforts to protect the American chestnut should be directed at young
              individuals.  More generally, this study will provide insight into the effect
              of pathogens on individuals of different life history stages and on population
              level demographic processes.
