Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Subfactor Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9623009

Award Number: 9623009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56822              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrian Ocneanu adrian@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9623009  Adrian Ocneanu  Pennsylvania State University      The project
              "Operator Algebras and Applications" is concerned  with the study and
              classification of connections (commuting squares)  and subfactors. The main
              problem to be studied is the question of existence  of irreducible hyperfinite
              subfactors of arbitrary Jones index   larger than 4. Our previously developed
              techniques give   a reformulation of problem in terms of representations of an
              explicitly  described algebra, resulting in an easy construction of  
              nonhyperfinite irreducible subfactors associated to arbitrary graphs,   as well
              as the full classification of  all commuting squares with one of the indices
              less than or equal to 4,  natural constructions of all subfactors of index less
              than 4 and   a classification of all the intermediate subfactors in their Jones
              towers.  Unlike previous methods, the proofs are very conceptual,   use
              topological quantum field theory methods developed by us previously   and
              involve little computation. The problems can be reformulated in terms of 
              statistical mechanics and topological quantum field theory, and thus would 
              impact on these areas as well.     The project "Operator Algebras and
              Applications" is concerned with the   development of mathematical techniques
              for operator algebras and   quantum field theory. The quest for the unification
              of quantum mechanics   and gravity, which is fundamental to an understanding of
              the physical world,   appears to require a substantial amount of new
              mathematics. Our previous work  constructed among others the mathematics of a
              dictionary between operator  algebras (which are connected to quantum
              mechanics) and topology (which  studies the shape of space, and is important in
              the study of gravity).  The project involves further developments of these
              structures, together   with the study of their symmetries, which are important
              since physical laws   are naturally expressed as symmetries. The techniques
              proposed have  applications in statistical mechanical m odels, involved in  
              the study of the structure of materials as well as in the mathematics  of knot
              theory, which has found use in the study of complex  molecules such as DNA. The
              Japanese Ministry of Education  has designated the research area operator
              algebras and quantum field theory  one of the top 3 strategic research domains.
