Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Wave Motion in Single-Phase and Multi-Phase Reactive
               Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1999  
File        : a9623235

Award Number: 9623235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashwani K. Kapila kapila@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623235  Kapila    The proposed work is aimed at the modelling and analysis of
              wave motion that  is caused, aided, or provoked by the liberation of chemical
              energy in   exothermically reacting media.  The ultimate goal is a mathematical
              description of the manner in which waves of combustion originate, interact,
              respond to disturbances, and undergo transitions.  Work is proposed in four
              specific areas: two  in which the medium is a single-phase material, i.e., a
              gaseous mixture, and   two in which the medium is a two-phase material, i.e., a
              mixture of solid   particles and gas.  In the single-phase context the plan is
              to study (i) how  flames propagate through a stratified mixture in which the
              scale of  stratification is comparable to the natural length of the flame, and
              (ii) how  detonations evolve and propagate (or fail to do so) in regions of
              temperature,  velocity and concentration gradients, especially in nonplanar
              configurations.  In the two-phase portion of the study the objectives are (i)
              asymptotic   reduction of complex models by exploitation of certain natural and
              realistic  limits of rapid equilibration, and (ii) exploration of
              regularization issues  arising in the numerical implementation of reduced
              models.  In all cases the  effort will focus largely on unsteady processes.  It
              is anticipated that the   problems will be modelled, by and large, by systems
              of nonlinear partial  differential equations.  The aim is the construction of
              explicit solutions,  wherever feasible, with strong emphasis on the interplay
              between analytical  techniques (especially asymptotics and singular
              perturbations) and accurate,  well-resolved numerics.    %%%    Safe and
              efficient usage, and hazard-free storage and transportation, of   combustible
              and explosive materials demands that the fundamental processes of  combustion
              be precisely understood.  This proposal is aimed at achieving such   an
              understanding of certain specific combustion problems, via mathematical 
              modelling, analysis and computation.  One c lass of problems under study deals 
              with propagation of flames and detonations in stratified mixtures.  This is  an
              area of practical interest in several contexts, including fire safety   where
              stratification may have been caused by an accidental spill, and   internal
              combustion engines where a stratified charge may have been produced  
              intentionally.  The second class of problems is concerned with the occurence  
              of explosions in damaged explosives, which can be highly susceptible to 
              low-velocity impacts or relatively mild thermal insults.  ***
