Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of Mangrove Seed Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1996        
File        : a9623313

Award Number: 9623313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9659               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Kellogg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: 9623313  PI: Kellogg and Farnsworth    A  comprehensive understanding
              of mechanisms of seed  drying  and  dormancy is critical to developing
              appropriate storage,  planting,  and  germination protocols for  farms, 
              arboreta,  botanical   gardens,  and  seed  conservation  banks.    The 
              evolution  of desiccation-intolerance, and its developmental  manifestations,
              vivipary and recalcitrance, will be  studied  in  seeds  of  four 
              phylogenetically  independent  mangrove  lineages.  Embryos of dormant
              (orthodox) seeds normally lose  water  prior to entering metabolic quiescence;
              by  contrast,  "recalcitrant" seeds that are intolerant of desiccation show  no
               dormancy,  and some sprout viviparously  on  the  parent  plant.  While rare
              among upland angiosperms, this phenomenon  appears  frequently among coastal
              mangroves, rice, and  wet-  forest  trees,  with important implications for 
              agriculture  and  seed  conservation.  We hypothesize  that  desiccation- 
              intolerance   results   from  one   of   three   alternative  evolutionary
              modifications that are not mutually  exclusive:  (1)  decreased  levels of the
              plant hormone  abscisic  acid,  ABA,  during  embryogenesis  (which  controls 
              both  osmotic  adjustment  of the whole plant to flooding, and dormancy  in 
              orthodox   seeds);  (2)  differential  levels  of   dehydrin  proteins, 
              carbohydrate  reserves,  or  other  hormones   in  recalcitrant  seeds; (3)
              altered anatomy of the  seed  coat,  maternal  transfer tissues, or
              embryo/endosperm relationship  that  may  free  the embryo from influences of 
              physical  or  biochemical  germination inhibitors.  To  test  among  these 
              hypotheses, we will examine the hormonal, physiological, and  anatomical bases
              of desiccation-intolerance that are  shared  among four viviparous mangrove
              families, in a study of seeds  through  development and germination.  Seeds  of
               viviparous  species will be compared with seeds of closely related, non- 
              viviparous  taxa to determine whether similar,  functionall y  significant 
              changes in seed structure and  physiology  have  arisen  consistently in this
              pattern of parallel  evolution.  This  integrated approach will elucidate the
              nature of  this  evolutionary  convergence  at  several  biological   levels; 
              clarify  relationships between anatomy, hormonal physiology,  proteins   and  
              sugar  metabolism  during  development   of  viviparous and orthodox seeds; and
              provide some of the first  documentation  of the role of hormones in the 
              evolution  of  plant  life histories.  These comparative data on  multiple, 
              interacting   factors   controlling   seed   dormancy    and  recalcitrance 
              can  usefully  inform  strategies  for  plant  conservation, propagation, and
              agriculture.
