Title       : PPD: "CD-ROM ACCESS Project"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a9623958

Award Number: 9623958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence R. Goldberg Larry Goldberg@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore A. Sicker  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-96-23958  Applicant:  WGBH Educational Foundation  Principal
              Investigator:  Theodore A. Sicker  Title:  "CD-ROM Access Project"             
                                  ABSTRACT    CD-ROMs are the most widely used form of
              multimedia in schools  and their use is expected to grow especially in the area
              of  science education.  People with print-disabilities (those with  visual
              impairments or learning disabilities) currently are unable  to use most
              hardware and software (including CD-ROMs) that base  their information displays
              on a "graphical user interface" (GUI).   This application proposes to initiate
              a research project leading  to CD-ROM-based science instructional materials
              that are useable  by people with print-disabilities.  To reach this goal, it
              will  be necessary to establish standards for multimedia accessibility.   The
              project proposes development of design guidelines for  multimedia accessibility
              concentrating on science, engineering,  and mathematics instructional materials
              published on CD-ROMs--  currently the most common form of multimedia-based
              instructional  materials.  Specifically, the project will:    - Research CD-ROM
              accessibility by conducting a CD-ROM       Accessibility Survey  - Explore
              access solutions to technology barriers through the       creation of adapted
              iterations   - Demonstrate accessibility with a model accessible SEM CD-ROM   -
              Develop Design Guidelines that recommend standards for       multimedia
              accessibility  - Distribute project results through a dissemination of
              findings.    It is expected that this Project will significantly impact blind, 
              visually impaired and learning disabled students by allowing them  to approach
              academic equality of opportunity with their sighted  peers in SEM education
              leading to increased representation in SEM  careers.  ***
