Title       : Visual Design Steering as an Aid in Complex System Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0115444

Award Number: 0115444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kemper E. Lewis kelewis@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann Bisantz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eliot H. Winer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aidong Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christina L. Bloebaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop visualization-based decision
              support tools that can be used effectively in collaborative design environments
              to make multiobjective decisions under uncertainty and to enable rapid
              trade-off decisions in the context of rapid virtual prototyping.  Methods to
              model and visually represent the uncertainty involved with multidimensional and
              multiobjective design problems will be developed.  Because many collaborative
              design problems are driven by limited resources, tools for effective rapid
              virtual prototyping will be developed.  Quantitative and qualitative models of
              coupling relationships on component and system level objectives will be
              developed in order to better asses tradeoffs between resources such as time,
              money, and quality.  Data mining techniques will be used to efficiently
              condense and filter relevant decision making information.  Lastly, these
              techniques and tools will be implemented in web-based decision steering tools
              to allow collaborating designers to visualize design spaces, products, and
              tradeoff information simultaneously.

If successful, the benefits of this
              research will include a foundation for the use of scientific visualization to
              make tradeoff decisions in collaborative product design environments.  Further,
              the benefits will also include establishing the efficacy of using
              visualization-based tools to support various forms of decision making
              (multiattribute, with limited resources, collaborative, or under uncertainty). 
              This foundation and subsequent tools have the potential to impact not only the
              engineering sector, but any scientific field where decision making is of
              paramount importance. 
