Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Marine Genomics and Proteomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0115801

Award Number: 0115801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald S. Burton rburton@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian P. Palenik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margo G. Haygood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bianca Brahamsha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas H. Bartlett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              #0115801, "Acquisition of instrumentation for marine genomics and proteomics." 
              (NSF Major Research Instrumentation Program).  PI:  R.S. Burton
              

ABSTRACT:

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Burton at Scripps Institution
              of Oceanography (SIO) for the acquisition of instrumentation for analyses of
              genes and their expression in marine organisms.  The instrumentation will
              enable researchers to study genome-wide responses to environmental stress at
              both the nucleic acid and protein levels and will form a core facility for use
              in the research projects of ten different laboratories at SIO.  Although the
              specific research goals vary with the laboratory, the primary questions
              motivating the projects are similar: What are the molecular mechanisms by which
              organisms adapt to specific marine environments?  What impact do these
              organismal adaptations have on ecosystem function? 

Specific research
              projects will consist of analyses of microbial communities in the ocean,
              including both quantitative identification of community members and functional
              composition of the communities.  Both free-living microbes and those involved
              in symbiotic relationships with invertebrates will be analyzed with a focus on
              adaptations to temperature, pressure and nutrient regimes.  Other studies will
              address interactions between components of the nuclear and mitochondrial
              genomes of invertebrate species and signal transduction pathways across marine
              invertebrate cell membranes.
 
In addition to enabling multiple specific
              research projects, this grant will facilitate SIO's mission of training the
              next generation of ocean scientists.  SIO students already take a variety of
              genomics classes and seminars across the entire UCSD campus; yet without easy
              access and hands-on training using modern instrumentation, students have been
              unable to take full advantage of existing technologies in designing their own
              dissertation research programs.  This grant will enhance the research and
              training environment at SIO so that the institution will continue to attract
              top faculty, postdoctoral researchers and graduate students and provide a
              state-of-the-art research environment.


