Title       : A Novel Plasma Tool for Large-Area Materials Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0115570

Award Number: 0115570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248854             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis F. Chen ffchen@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Radio-frequency (RF) produced plasmas are widely used in industry for materials
              processing, ranging from the hardening of airplane wings to the machining of
              microscopic features within CPU semiconductor chips.  The proposed work
              addresses the difficult problem of uniform plasma processing of materials over
              an arbitrarily large surface area through the use of a distributed source: an
              array of smaller source elements, each covering a small portion of the surface.
               Proof of principle experiments have been successful; optimization studies will
              now be performed to determine the scaling design rules for plasma processing
              tools of ever increasing size. Feasibility studies of uniformity control of
              large-area plasma through control of the individual sources will be periDrmed
              by using feedback control of the RF power to each antenna.  Spacing between
              adjacent elements within the array will be varied to determine its optimum
              value.  Permanent magnets will be used to create the individual magnetic fields
              that can enhance the plasma density, and thus the plasma processing rate, from
              each tube in a controlled fashion.  Further optimization studies of the
              individual source elements themselves will also be performed in order to
              increase their overall effectiveness in a distributed array.

Successful
              results would be of tremendous benefit to chip manufacturers, and to other
              industries that use plasma processing as well.  A desirable outcome of the
              proposed work would be a set of design rules for the construction of
              arbitrarily large plasma tools that maintain sufficient process uniformity to
              be of use in the ever growing plasma processing industry.  Furthermore, the
              present use of highly toxic substances in wet chemical processing of large area
              material surfaces would be reduced, and perhaps eliminated, in favor of the
              relatively benign plasma processing tools developed as a result of this work.

