Title       : Selective Chemical Liquid Deposition Process for Mini-Structures and
               Microsystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0115288

Award Number: 0115288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87962              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gongyao (Jack) Zhou zhoug@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this one year project is to demonstrate the feasibility of a
              novel Selective Chemical Liquid Deposition process (SCLD) that creates 3-D
              structures with better properties and lower fabrication-induced residual
              stresses than other deposition and solid freeform fabrication processes. 
              Currently most of the technologies used in fabrication of microstructures and
              MEMS involve sophisticated and expensive processes, such as photo-lithography,
              silicon surface machining, and silicon bulk machining.  For example, chemical
              vapor deposition processing is a moderate to high temperature deposition
              process that introduces defects and residual stresses into the films produced. 
              To overcome CVD shortcomings and to explore new chemical deposition
              applications and new materials in the fabrication of mini-structures and
              microsystems, the SCLD Process will integrate chemical liquid deposition
              research, solid freeform fabrication, systems and control, and mini-structures
              and microsystems (MSMS) in one automated process.  The research plan for
              developing SCLDP-MSMS investigates the controlled deposition as a room
              temperature solution or liquid reactant is sprayed from a nozzle, making
              contact with a hot substrate, resulting in evaporation, decomposition, or
              reaction.  It is expected that the reacted solid products will deposit on the
              substrate and that by controlling the motion of the nozzle and the spray time,
              a desired 3-D microstructure can be formed through a layer-by-layer scanning
              technique.

Preliminary work has been done on the conceptual design of the
              SCLDP-MSMS system, materials selection, and testing.  The results are
              promising.  In order to turn this new concept into a reality, the following
              tasks will be carried out:  (1) conduct extensive materials research and
              testing on the chemical liquid deposition process to find more chemicals which
              can be used to deposit metals, ceramics, silicon, composite, and carbon
              structures; (2) design and build a prototype SCLDP-MSMS machine and use the
              prototype machine to make microstructures; and (3) perform additional
              experiments on the SCLDP to provide necessary data, boundary conditions and
              analysis information for process modeling and computer simulation.

