Title       : MRI: Acquisition of an Amplified Ultrashort-Pulse Laser System for Ultrafast and
               Spectroscopic Studies of Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0115981

Award Number: 0115981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Donnelly tom_donnelly@hmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter N. Saeta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow Harvey
              Mudd College to acquire laser system to support research on the ultrafast
              dynamics of electrons in metals and on the nonlinear optical behavior of
              ultrathin semiconductors and metals. The system will produce a femtosecond
              laser beam at a repetition rate of one kilohertz. This will greatly facilitate
              pump-probe measurements to monitor the non-equilibrium distribution of
              photoexcited electrons in metals. These measurements will provide information
              on both the energy- and momentum-scattering rates in metals and permit
              quantitative comparison to theories of electron dynamics in metals. Through
              continuum generation and frequency shifting, the laser system will allow
              spectral characterization of the nonlinear optical response of thin
              semiconductor films, providing valuable information on the strength of both
              bulk and surface sources of second-harmonic generation in centrosymmetric
              semiconductors. 
Undergraduate students will be trained in the operation of
              this state-of-the-art femtosecond laser facility. It will also be available as
              a resource to the members of the Claremont Consortium

This award from the
              Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow Harvey Mudd College to
              acquire laser system to support research on the ultrafast dynamics of electrons
              in metals and on the nonlinear optical behavior of ultrathin semiconductors and
              metals. The high density of mobile electrons inside a metal causes electrons to
              interact on extremely fast time scales. A detailed understanding of these
              interactions is important for understanding how metals catalyze chemical
              reactions and how atoms adsorb on metal surfaces. The new laser system will
              permit researchers at Harvey Mudd College to perform time-resolved measurements
              of the changes to the electronic system in a metal caused by an intense pulse
              of laser light lasting less than fifty femtoseconds (1 fs = 10-15 s). These
              measurements will provide information on both the energy- and
              momentum-scattering rates in metals and permit quantitative comparison to
              theories of electron dynamics in metals. The laser system can provide useful
              information on both the structures of the semiconductor crystal and on the
              quality of surfaces. Spectroscopic study of the harmonic response will provide
              useful information on the relative importance of surface and bulk phenomena and
              will permit detailed comparisons to calculations of the nonlinear response of
              materials.
Undergraduate research students will be trained in the operation of
              this state-of-the-art femtosecond laser facility. It will also be available as
              a resource to the members of the Claremont Consortium.  


