Title       : Enzymatic C-Methylation Reactions in Phytosterol Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0115401

Award Number: 0115401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. David Nes u0nes@ttacs.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1166,1168,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sterol C-methyl transfer reactions catalyzed by the (S)-adenosyl-L-methionine:
              .24 -sterol methyl transferase (SMT) control the production and processing of
              sitosterol biosynthesis in plants. SMTs differ in physical properties, reaction
              complexity and the complement of C1/C2-activities. This project tests the
              proposal that a family of three-dimensionally similar SMT isoforms exists in
              plants and catalyzes the successive C-methylations of a sterol acceptor
              molecule from a common active site according to a similar mechanistic plan (the
              steric-electric plug model). Minor differences in the active site topography
              are considered to determine the complement of C-methylation activities and
              product outcome. In this project, cloned SMTs from Arabidopsis thaliana and
              Glycine max will be produced at high levels. The specific goals of this project
              are:
(1) Characterization of the kinetic mechanism and product identities
              involved with the first and second C1-transfer reactions. For this purpose,
              substrate analogs and ATP will be used to probe catalytic action of the
              recombinant SMTs and GC-MS and NMR will be employed in product structure
              determination.
(2) Identification of the sterol- and AdoMet-binding sites and
              catalytic amino acids in the active center by chemical and photoaffinity
              labeling techniques. Information from the active site location, plus that
              gained by primary sequence comparisons with related SMTs, will be used to guide
              site-directed mutagenesis of select amino acid residues in the active center to
              generate unusual product diversity that can benefit the plant defense system.
              
Knowledge gained from this research is expected to be broadly applicable to
              the understanding of molecular biochemistry and biosynthetic investigations in
              general.

