Title       : Evolution and Development of the Trophotaenial Placenta in Embryos of Viviparous
               Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0115757

Award Number: 0115757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Wourms wjohn@Clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0115757
Wourms

Viviparity, i.e. giving birth to living young, has evolved
              from oviparity (egg laying) many times in different animal groups.  Among the
              vertebrates, it first evolved in fishes which now display an extraordinary
              diversity of specializations for viviparity.  The evolution of viviparity
              established new functional relationships, such as maternal-embryonic nutrient
              transfer.  Specialized tissues, such as the placenta, evolved for transfer. 
              Live bearing goodeid fishes, are being used as a model system to study nutrient
              transfer across a placenta and to investigate the development and evolution of
              the embryonic portion of the placenta.  Goodeid embryos undergo considerable
              growth (3500X) due to transfer of nutrients across a placenta composed of the
              lumenal ovarian epithelium and trophotaeniae, external processes emanating from
              the embryo's vent.  Trophotaeniae are derivatives of the embryonic hindgut. 
              Previous research established the structure and function of trophotaeniae and
              lead to the discovery of an evolutionary intermediate, A. toweri, a species of
              goodeid fishes whose embryos have vestigial trophotaeniae and rely on gut-based
              nutrition.  Comparative studies produced a robust developmental model for the
              evolution of trophotaeniae from the hindgut.  Its key feature is the precocious
              formation of a new posterior gut opening (vent) instead of the typical anus. 
              This event permits externalization of hindgut tissue.  Once externalized, the
              hindgut tissue could evolve into trophotaeniae by incremental modifications of
              a gut-based developmental program.  Research objectives are to: 1) extend the
              study of the trophotaenial placenta as part of long term studies of the
              evolutionary physiology of viviparity; and 2) test the model of trophotaenial
              evolution.  Standard methods of cell-developmental biology and physiology will
              be used to: 1) analyze vent formation, externalization of hindgut tissue, and
              the origin of trophotaenial precursors; 2) analyze the development of
              rudimentary trophotaeniae, an evolutionary intermediate, in the blue-tailed
              goodeid (A. toweri) and compare the selective advantages of gut and
              trophotaeniae-based nutrition; 3) analyze growth and morphogenesis of
              trophotaeniae; and 4) analyze the temporal and structural course of events and
              the physiological basis for the shedding of trophotaeniae at birth.  These
              studies will: 1) advance the general understanding of viviparity, a major form
              of reproduction; 2) provide a basic understanding of the function and
              development of the trophotaenial placenta; 3) test a developmental model of
              trophotaenial evolution; 4) establish the selective advantages of gut and
              trophotaenial-based embryonic nutrition; and 5) enhance knowledge of the
              reproductive biology of endangered species.

