Title       : Whole Genome Analysis of Pathogen-Host Recognition and Subsequent Responses in
               the Rice Blast Patho-System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0115642

Award Number: 0115642
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5860002            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph A. Dean ralph_dean@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rod A. Wing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Farman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Ebbole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guo-Liang Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              




Rice blast disease, caused by the fungus Magnaporthe grisea, is a
              leading constraint to rice production and is a serious threat to food security
              worldwide. The goal of this project is to elucidate the basis of plant
              resistance through a comprehensive analysis of the molecular events that occur
              during pathogen-host recognition and the subsequent defense responses. Our
              ultimate goal is to design durable disease resistance. Rice blast is a
              compelling experimental system for conducting such analyses. A complete
              understanding of the interaction requires knowledge of the genes in both
              pathogen and host. In this project, a set of crucial ESTs involved in rice
              defense will be identified. This information, along with other data, will be
              used for functional genomics studies, specifically microarray analysis and gene
              knockout, to uncover many of the early events in host-pathogen recognition from
              the perspectives of both the pathogen and host. As a result, major new
              resources for distribution and long term use by the plant, cell and pathogen
              biology research communities will be created. To facilitate access to resources
              and research data, a new database (MGOS) will be developed that will serve as a
              bridge between plant and pathogen research communities. An interactive
              educational component "Genomics and Food Security" will be designed and
              developed for high school students founded on the research. The project
              includes a major component to promote research experiences for undergraduates
              from underrepresented groups including the formation of a Genomics Club that
              will integrate other Plant Genome projects at North Carolina State
              University.

Deliverables:

1.      50,000 mutants with corresponding
              phenotype information, digital photographs, and genomic DNA 
2.     
              Identification and cloning of mutated genes shown to affect fungal penetration
              and pathogenesis
3.      Putatively secreted proteins, plant responses, and
              their deduced functions
4.      Micro-arrays and the results of
              transcriptional profiling experiments looking at gene regulation in the rice
              host and the fungal pathogen
5.      SAGE libraries from infected rice
              tissue
6.      35,000 ESTs from different rice tissues infected and
              non-infected
7.      Public database (MGOS) housing all data generated during
              the course of this project.
8.      Teaching module "Genomics and food
              security" for high school teachers and students
 
Contact Information for
              Deliverables:
 
1.      Project Leader, Thomas Mitchell, North Carolina State
              University, thomas_mitchell@ncsu.edu, 
2.      Project Director, Ralph Dean,
              North Carolina State University, ralph_dean@ncsu.edu, 
3.      Bioinformatics,
              Cari Soderlund, University of Arizona, cari@genome.arizona.edu
4.     
              Education and Outreach, Brenda Wojnowski, North Carolina State University,
              brenda_wojnowski@ncsu.edu
 
Internet Addresses (Web or Email) for Project
              Information:
 
1.      http://www.fungalgenomics.ncsu.edu
2.     
              http://www.riceblast.org
3.      thomas_mitchell@ncsu.edu
4.     
              ralph_dean@ncsu.edu
 

