Title       : Nonparametric Inference in Mixture Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0115619

Award Number: 0115619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hoben Thomas hxt@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Hettmansperger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People differ enormously in many physical and behavioral characteristics. 
              Height and weight are physical differences; lifestyle variables, such as
              occupational, hobby, or recreational activities are behavioral differences. 
              These differences are typically observed, but many differences are not directly
              observable, such as beliefs, attitudes, or the ways by which people perceive
              the world.  To understand these unobservable differences it is necessary to
              infer qualities of these differences through observations which we can make. 
              An often useful vehicle for doing so employs statistical theory called finite
              mixtures.  This approach is based on two central ideas.  One is that
              differences in unobservables can be viewed as relatively distinct classes in
              the same way one might view physical differences: righthanded or left, male or
              female.  The other central notion is to make these differences in unobservable
              classes equivalent to different probability distributions.  As an example,
              suppose the heights of 100 randomly selected adults were measured.  The goal is
              to estimate the heights of men and women.  Suppose however, there was a failure
              to code the measurements for sex.  It is still possible to estimate the mean
              heights of each sex, the proportions of males and females in the population,
              and the probability that an individual measurement is from a man or a women. 
              The reason this can be done is because the probability distributions for height
              are different:  Men and women differ in their average height, which means they
              have different probability distributions for height.

This research will use
              analytical, empirical, and computer methods to develop finite mixture models
              that make weaker assumptions than standard mixture theory.  Some of the
              approaches are nearly nonparametric in the sense that the unobserved
              probability distributions need not be fully specified.  In particular, three of
              the five projects will explore the binomial mixture approach.  The other two
              projects will examine other largely distribution free mixture strategies not
              tied to the binomial.  The models to be developed should make it easier to
              identify important unobserved features of individuals such as those "at risk"
              for certain personality disorders thereby anticipating, in the future, possible
              intervention strategies to facilitate development.

