Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Monitoring Large-Scale Water Storage Variability
               in Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0115250

Award Number: 0115250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24082              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Wahr wahr@lemond.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Isabella Velicogna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 1303,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0115250
Wahr

Description:  This project is to support a cooperative research
              project between Dr. John Wahr, Department of Physics, University of Colorado,
              Boulder, Colorado and Dr. Mosalam Shaltout, Solar and Space Research Department
              of the National Research Institute of Astronomy and Geophysics, Helwan, Cairo,
              Egypt.  The goal of the research is to develop a method of monitoring the
              large-scale distribution of ground water and soil moisture throughout Egypt, by
              using a combination of satellite gravity measurements and atmospheric pressure
              data.  The gravity measurements will come from GRACE, a satellite mission
              expected for launch in late 2001.  GRACE will map the earth's gravity field
              with high accuracy every30 days, and so will provide information on month-to
              month variations in the distribution of mass within the Earth and on or above
              the surface.  This will allow the monitoring of changes in the distribution of
              water stored on land, at a scale of few hundred kilometers, everywhere over the
              globe.  The accuracy of these water storage estimates is expected to depend
              primarily on the errors in the atmospheric pressure fields used to remove
              atmospheric mass contributions from the gravity measurements.    The work
              proposed will strengthen the existing atmospheric pressure network in Egypt so
              that the atmospheric mass contributions to gravity can be accurately modeled
              and removed from the GRACE data.

Scope: The research planned is exploratory
              intended to calibrate and increase the accuracy of the GRACE data for assessing
              the moisture in soils.  This effort can be of great importance to predicting
              availability of ground water and other forms of soil moisture and thus help
              with planning purposes for hydrologists, agriculture specialists and for social
              and political planners.  The two scientists have complementary experiences. 
              They have access to resources needed for the project.  A female US post
              doctorate at the University of Colorado will participate in this research.  The
              project is funded by the Division of International Programs and the Division of
              Earth Sciences.
