Title       : Acquisition of an HPLC System for Undergraduate Research in Insect Chemical
               Defense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0115600

Award Number: 0115600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25161              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Yezerski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : King's College
	      133 North River Street
	      Wilkes-Barre, PA  187110851    570/208-5900

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Yezerski at King's College to acquire an High
              Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system with which to study the
              chemical defense system of the flour beetle, Tribolium confusum . Two immediate
              projects have been designed to address the questions of function and effect of
              the production of these defenses.  One project will address the effect
              benzoquinone compounds have on conspecifics since these compounds are known to
              cause death to the beetles themselves.  This experiment will correlate levels
              of chemical production in a series of recombinant inbred lines of beetles with
              levels of survival using representatives from the same lines.  Using the HPLC
              equipment, a mean level of individual benzoquinone production within a line can
              be measured and these values compared to the results of standard LD50 tests for
              the lines when representatives are placed in an environment where no absorbent
              material  protects them from their own excretions 
	  Current and future
              experiments using the HPLC will address correlations of the chemical defense
              trait with other behavioral and physical factors including body weight, cuticle
              color, and fecundity.  Other planned research will measure the levels of
              benzoquinones in natural flour beetle populations in order to assess the
              evolutionary pressures conferred by natural environments.  Such resulting
              information can not only help elucidate how a complex defense system arises
              evolutionarily but also help enlighten us on how this stored grain product pest
              can be better controlled.  Additionally, the HPLC system has uses far beyond
              the measurement of beetle exudates.  With only one other antiquated HPLC
              available for the entire college, the acquisition of this additional modern
              system will allow for other undergraduate research projects in both biology and
              chemistry that utilizes this highly utilized piece of equipment.  By conducting
              meaningful research using modern equipment in which there is a demand for
              competent researchers, undergraduates at King's College can have the
              opportunity to be well prepared for whatever career goals they strive to reach
              whether these be in industry or further schooling.


