Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Field Mapping of Quaternary Glaciations in
               Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0115298

Award Number: 0115298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek G. Zreda marek@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,5940,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0115298
Zreda

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Marek Zreda, Department of Hydrology and Water Resources,
              University of Arizona, Tucson and 
Dr. Attila Ciner, Geological Engineering
              Department, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.  The investigators will
              conduct field research to map late quaternary glacial deposits and paleolake
              shorelines across Turkey in order to quantify equilibrium line altitude (ELA)
              depression during glacial advances and collect samples for cosmogenic dating. 
              A central motivation for this study is to explore the shorter time scale
              (Henrich and Dansgaard-Oeschger events) synchrony of climate variation between
              the North Atlantic and southwest Asian.  Because Turkey lies at an interesting
              climatic crossroads, it may provide valuable chronological data.  Little is
              known about the glacial history of Turkey and this research may lead to new
              findings on the climatic history of the Eurasian subtropics.  

Scope:  This
              collaboration involves two scientists with complementary expertise.  Zreda is a
              leader in the field of cosmogenic dating of glacial feature.  The Turkish
              researchers will organize fieldwork, provide access to scientific materials
              (including aerial photographs and maps that may not otherwise be accessible.),
              and provide the knowledge of the geology of Turkey.  The US investigators will
              design and conduct sample collections program and will provide the technical
              expertise in the future isotopic dating.  Together the two sides will conduct
              all field investigations and mapping.  The proposed activity has great
              potential to advance knowledge within the field and across disciplines and
              contribute to educational curriculum.  

