Title       : FOCUSED RESEARCH GROUP (FRG's) Neutron Scattering Studies of Surface and Bulk
               Disordered Quantum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0115663

Award Number: 0115663
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry R. Glyde glyde@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Larese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oscar E. Vilches  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,5918,5946,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Focused Research Group (FRG) will investigate the fundamental role of
              disorder as major factor underlying the structure and dynamics of molecules,
              films and bulk quantum systems.  The investigative technique is precision
              neutron scattering at the Institut Laue Langevin, Grenoble and at ISIS,
              Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK, currently the leading neutron facilities in
              the world.  The goal in education is training in neutron scattering for
              graduate students and post doctoral associates in preparation for the
              Spallation Neutron Source being built at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and to
              develop lasting collaborations in Europe for young scientists.  The scientific
              topics include the location, orientation, tunneling and diffusion of simple and
              polar molecules on smooth and chemically active surfaces (e.g. MgO), and on
              rough novel materials (e.g. nanotubes), investigating helium and hydrogen film
              growth, layer transitions, layer modes on surfaces and the characteristic three
              dimensional excitations of bulk quantum fluids in fully filled porous media. 
              An aim is to relate excitations to structure (e.g. gaps in modes to
              localization) in one dimensional (1D), 2D and 3D disordered quantum  systems
              and the existence of well-defined modes to Bose Einstein condensation and
              superfluidity.  The underlying physics has analogies in high Tc
              superconductivity and application in catalysis and porous media development. 
              The graduate students and post-docs participating in this project will benefit
              from the international collaborations and the use of cutting edge research
              tools.  They will be exceptionally well trained for careers in academe,
              industry and government.  This project is co-funded by the International
              Division of the Social, Behavioral and Economics Directorate and by the Office
              of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate.
%%%
This research is dedicated to revealing the impact of
              disorder on the structure and dynamics of molecules, films and bulk quantum
              systems.  The investigative technique is precision neutron scattering at the
              Institut Laue Langevin, Grenoble, France and at ISIS, Rutherford Appleton
              Laboratory, UK which are currently the best neutron facilities in the world. 
              The goal in education is to provide broad training in neutron scattering for
              graduate students and post doctoral associates so that they can capitalize on
              the outstanding new scientific opportunities that will be created by the
              Spallation Neutron Source now being built at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. It
              is also to develop lasting scientific collaborations in Europe for young
              scientists.  The scientific topics begin with the location, orientation,
              tunneling and diffusion of molecules on surfaces; surfaces of materials that
              are important as catalysts in chemical reactions (e.g. MgO) and structurally
              important materials (e.g. nanotubes).  They continue to the investigation of
              film growth, layer transitions, layer modes and the dynamics of three
              dimensional quantum fluids in porous media and their to relation Bose Einstein
              condensation.  The underlying science has analogies in high temperature
              superconductors and the motivations run from basic concepts in disordered
              systems to tailoring catalysts and developing new porous materials.  The
              graduate students and post-docs participating in this project will benefit from
              the international collaborations and the use of cutting edge research tools. 
              They will be exceptionally well trained for careers in academe, industry and
              government.  This project is co-funded by the International Division of the
              Social, Behavioral and Economics Directorate and by the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate.



