Title       : Objective Updating of Design Predictions for Supported Excavations Using
               Construction Monitoring Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0115213

Award Number: 0115213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Finno r-finno@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A major concern when performing deep excavations in urban environments is the
              impact of construction-related ground movements on adjacent buildings and
              utilities. Given the uncertainties associated with making movement predictions,
              it is usual to include a monitoring program to record the ground movements that
              develop during construction.  Ideally, these recorded movements can be used to
              control the construction process and update predictions of movements given the
              measured deformations at early stages of constructions.  However, it is quite
              difficult, if not impossible, to use the observed movements for these purposes
              in a timely enough fashion to be of use in a typical project where time is of
              the essence to a contractor.  To improve the state-of-the-art of predicting and
              controlling ground movements associated with supported excavations, this
              project develops methods to (1) objectively update design predictions of
              deformations for supported excavations in clay using monitoring data obtained
              during construction, and (2) to evaluate critical inputs to performance
              predictions in design.   Automated procedures, such as inverse modeling
              techniques, are adopted wherein a given model is calibrated by iteratively
              changing model input values until the simulated output values match the
              measured data.  These procedures will be coupled with a finite element program
              to automatically update predictions of ground movements.  Objective measures of
              the critical inputs to a finite element analysis of a supported excavation are
              developed to provide quantitative information concerning the relative
              importance of various input parameters.  The Infrastructure Technology
              Institute has provided funding to help support this effort.  
 
The
              methodology is developed and tested using detailed ground and building movement
              data from a 13 m deep excavation through soft clays for a subway renovation
              project in Chicago. With funding from Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates through
              the Chicago Department of Transportation, Northwestern University collected and
              analyzed ground deformations and adjacent building movements at the subway
              excavation.  An advisory committee comprised of an owner's representative and
              geotechnical and structural designers provides input to the project via
              periodic reviews of the progress of the work.  Members of the advisory
              committee also contribute detailed case studies from their project files that
              are used to check the methodology initially developed based on the data from
              the Chicago project.  
 


