Title       : Manufacturing and Reliability of Three-Dimensional Micro-Mechanical Actuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0115527

Award Number: 0115527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Bryant mbryant@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick F. Ling  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of micro-actuators, e.g.,
              micro-motor, dynamic micro-gas bearing micro-continuously-variable
              speed-reducers.  Inasmuch as magnetic fields, difficult to contain, have
              limited micro-scale use, two electrostatic motor drive concepts will be
              developed:  (1) Variable Capacitance Motor - Variable capacitance motor
              minimizes energy of electric field in an air gap field that can change
              geometry.  Rotor electrodes seek positions relative to stator electrodes of
              least potential energy stored in the electric field of an air gap between the
              rotor and stator.  (2)  Induced Charge Motor - Induced charge motor is based on
              a concept of induced polarization of charges of material in the motor creating
              a secondary electric field which aligns in a primary field.  This variant of
              drive is the electric field analogy to an induction motor.  To avoid stiction,
              contact between surfaces in relative motion must be avoided as in bearings. 
              Among other concepts, micro-gas-bearings will be developed.  Micro-grooves
              built into the shaft part of the motor will pump air or gas  and build-up films
              that keep the shaft from touching the bearing and housing.  In order to avoid
              stiction for start-stop, the bearing housing will be suitable coated with a
              thin film lubricant.  For the above, and other actuators, advanced
              science-based modeling methods will be developed for underpinning design.

If
              successful, the results of this research will lead to new methods in the
              relatively new arena of manufacturing in the micro-scale of three-dimensional
              mechanical components needed for various actuators.  In developing the methods,
              emphasis will be given to reliability in the use of components in actuators.
              Envisioned are applications of actuators in bio-medical, aerospace, as well as
              other consumer products for which  micro-size is paramount.  Of course the use
              of micro-size actuators has the additional advantage of being environmentally
              friendly.
