Title       : A Behavioral Approach to Dissipativity Analysis in Nonlinear Systems, with
               Applications to Human/Robot Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0115317

Award Number: 0115317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy A. Freeman freeman@ece.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will focus on the investigation of some of the basic unresolved
              issues in the study of the performance properties of nonlinear systems.  Once
              these issues have been addressed, the resulting theory will be applied to the
              stability analysis of various systems in which single or multiple human
              operators are in feedback loops with active nonlinear robotic devices and are
              thus subject to applied forces.  

The objectives of the proposed work are
              threefold.  First,the relationship between performance and robust stability for
              nonlinear systems will be established.  This relationship is an essential part
              of many modern linear robust control techniques, but extensions of the relevant
              results to nonlinear systems have not yet been fully developed.  Indeed,
              preliminary investigations have revealed that robust stability does not imply
              performance for time-invariant nonlinear systems when standard
              dissipativity-based criteria are used (such as L2-gain or passivity).  One goal
              of this project is to determine which weaker versions of dissipativity lead to
              the desired equivalences between performance and robust stability.  To this
              end,a new version of dissipativity called conditional dissipativity is
              proposed, and part of this project will be to identify its key
              properties.

To provide analysis tools sufficient for meeting the first
              project objective, a behavioral approach to nonlinear system models will be
              developed based on the work of Willems.  In particular, concepts especially
              important for the analysis of nonlinear system models (such as LaSalle 's
              invariance principle) will be worked out in a behavioral context.  An expected
              outcome of this part of the project will be the demonstration that the
              behavioral approach offers certain advantages to both analysis and design not
              available with standard
approaches to nonlinear system models.  Finally, the
              theory developed according to the first two project objectives will be applied
              to the stability analysis of human/machine interfaces such as haptic displays
              and
bilateral teleoperation systems.  In such systems, a human operator is in
              direct contact with an active robotic device and is subject to forces applied
              through a nonlinear feedback loop.The stability of such a feedback system is
              important not only for the safety of the human operator but also for the
              accurate tactile perception of the virtual or physical environment via the
              force feedback.This project will significantly extend the known
results on the
              stability of these systems and provide guidelines for system design.  In fact,
              it will be the first to address stability issues for multi-user systems, that
              is, systems in which multiple human operators interact simultaneously with each
              other and with virtual or physical environments by means of their own ocal
              robotic devices.

Any application of nonlinear system design techniques which
              relies on the relationship between performance and robust stability will
              directly benefit from the theory developed during the course of this project. 
              In particular, this project will provide designers of robotic systems such as
              haptic displays and bilateral teleoperation systems with useful guidelines for
              making their systems work in a stable manner.  This project thus has the
              potential for improving the quality of various implementations of these systems
              in such areas as computer-aided design, manufacturing and medicine.


