Title       : Aligning Physical and Functional Maps of a Genomic Region Spanning the Apomixis
               Locus by Exploiting Model Cereal Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0115911

Award Number: 0115911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1132318            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy J. Ozias-Akins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joann A. Conner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Apomixis, defined as asexual reproduction through seed, is widespread among
              angiosperm families although 75% of the apomictic species are found in three
              plant families, Poaceae, Rosaceae, and Asteraceae. The plant materials examined
              in this proposal are members of the Poaceae family, the most important crop
              plant family in the human food chain. All crop plants in this family reproduce
              sexually, although wild relatives of maize, wheat, and pearl millet may undergo
              asexual (apomictic) reproduction. Seeds formed on an apomictic plant contain
              genetically identical embryos, thus the trait has significant potential for
              preserving hybrid vigor from one generation to the next in highly productive
              crop plant genotypes. In Pennisetum squamulatum and Cenchrus ciliaris meiosis
              typically aborts and unreduced aposporous embryo sacs form from nucellar cells.
              Genetic mapping studies in Pennisetum have revealed that the locus for the
              formation of unreduced embryo sacs resides in a chromosomal region with a low
              recombination rate.  Based on genetic map information, positional cloning of
              gene(s) responsible for apomictic reproduction in Pennisetum is in progress.
              Transcriptional mapping will use the tools that have been developed for
              physical mapping of this region and will also use the well developed molecular
              tools from related diploid model species such as sorghum and rice. The
              exploration of colinearity in this region between two model diploids and two
              apomictic species will focus on highly conserved gene sequences. Candidate
              reproductive or novel genes in this region will be compared for their
              expression profiles among apomictic and sexual genotypes/species. This research
              will provide an example of the transfer of genomic information from
              small-genome grasses to non-recombining regions of large-genome species. 
