Title       : Acquisition of Molecular Biology Instrumentation for a Biotechnology Research
               Center Between Departments of Biology and Chemistry at Southern Oregon
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0115892

Award Number: 0115892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Stone stonek@sou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen A. Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Welden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Sollinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Oregon University
	      1250 Siskiyou Boulevard
	      Ashland, OR  975205001    503/482-3311

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Stone at Southern Oregon University to purchase
              major instrumentation for the establishment of an interdepartmental
              biotechnology center.  Equipment includes a genetic analyzer (automated DNA
              sequencer), superspeed centrifuge, autoclave, chromatography cabinet, water
              filtration system, vacufuge concentrator, incubated shaker, microfuge,
              circulating baths, incubator, fume hood, and safety hood.  Faculty in the
              biology and chemistry departments will develop a biotechnology center to create
              a supportive work environment without need for duplication of equipment.  This
              center will house equipment and supplies needed for diverse research activities
              using molecular methods, provide functional bench space, and serve as a forum
              for interaction between faculty and students working on diverse projects that
              share common methodology.

Research will be conducted on a range of organisms
              including bacteria, higher plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates.  Research
              training will be extended to faculty and students who may update or expand
              their skills in molecular techniques.  The areas that will be investigated span
              from biochemistry, developmental biology, and environmental microbiology to
              molecular systematics, conservation genetics, population biology, and molecular
              evolution.  Specific research projects include:
a. identifying and monitoring
              bacterial levels in local streams and determining possible pollution sources.
              
b. studying the evolution of American martens using DNA sequencing and the
              taxonomic status of a rare subspecies of martens found in California.
c.
              identifying bacteria associated with an exposed vein of pyrite and other
              bacteria involved in acid drainage from pyrite. 
d. developing an inexpensive,
              reliable method of producing high volumes of conotoxins, which are possible
              models for future pharmaceuticals due to their biochemical properties.
e.
              investigating the roles of specific genes in the development of garden
              peas.
f. investigating the evolutionary development of floral components.
g.
              studying the genetics of variants of noble firs and firs found on Mt. Shasta
              which may represent hybrids between California red firs and noble
              firs.
examining diversity of plant and microbial species on serpentine soils
              which have high concentrations of heavy metals such as nickel, cadmium, and
              chromium.
characterizing the structure and function of common mycorrhizal
              networks on white oak.
Southern Oregon University is a small, non-Ph.D.
              granting university whose faculty is primarily engaged in teaching.  As a small
              college focused on quality undergraduate education with a relatively high
              faculty to student ratio (1:18), their students have the opportunity to be
              mentored individually by faculty in a way that is usually only available to
              graduate students.  This represents a great advantage to those students who
              wish to explore laboratory research.  All students have the opportunity to do
              research, and much of this research is carried out as senior capstone projects.
               In addition, increasing numbers of students are attracted to the prospect of
              jobs in biotechnology fields and the new frontiers biotechnology makes
              available to medicine.  This biotechnology center will provide students with
              saleable skills needed to attain tech-level positions in industry or to further
              their education by attending graduate or medical school.  

