Title       : Acquisition of a 200KV FEG Electron Microscope for Molecular Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0115887

Award Number: 0115887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $838054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. Milligan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ron Milligan at The Scripps Research Institute
              to purchase an electron microscope. This is an advanced research instrument
              that can be used to record images of biological specimens at magnifications of
              up to 500,000X. The instrument will be used to visualize and image proteins and
              large assemblies composed of many different molecules that occurs inside cells
              and enable them to carry out various functions. 

The research of the user
              group focuses on three-dimensional (3D) molecular microscopy: determination of
              the near-atomic, secondary, tertiary and quaternary structure of molecules and
              macromolecular assemblies by cryo-electron microscopy and image analysis. The
              common goal of the user group is to calculate 3D structures of biological
              molecules and macromolecular complexes to determine how they work. Some of the
              work to be carried out on the instrument includes investigations of: proteins
              that bind to microtubules and stabilize them, motor proteins that move along
              microtubules, toxins from bacteria that punch holes in cells, proteins that
              facilitate fusion of membrane-bound compartments in cells, protein assemblies
              that read off (transcribe) the genome in the nucleus, membrane proteins that
              act as pumps, channels or signaling complexes, and plant and animal viruses.
              The superior performance of the new microscope is essential for getting the
              best possible results in these studies. 

The work to be undertaken is of
              fundamental biological importance. The results will provide insight in to many
              of the basic processes that occur inside cells and are essential for life. At
              The Scripps Research institute, the instrument will be used by 6 research
              groups. 12 postdoctoral associates and 6 graduate students will receive
              advanced training in structural biology using this instrument. 10-20 research
              professionals will use the instrument in the course of their work. Visiting
              researchers from elsewhere in the US and overseas are anticipated. The proposed
              new instrument will be integrated into existing EM management plan as well as
              training, education and outreach activities at The Scripps Research Institute.
              This will create a unique research and training facility, which will have a
              major impact on the regional, national and international research
              infrastructure.


