Title       : Acquisition of an Automated Sequencer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0115985

Award Number: 0115985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149800             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. La Duke john_laduke@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Siegfried Detke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher C. Austin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for NSF Proposal 0115985 to Dr. John La Duke

A grant has been
              awarded to Dr. John La Duke at the University of North Dakota to purchase a
              Genetic Analyzer.  The major function of this instrument is to gather DNA data
              and analyze these sequences or fragments.  This is a "state-of-the-art"
              instrument that will position researchers very positively for the future in the
              area of DNA methodology.

There are four primary researchers on this project.
              Their research can be divided into two main areas.  Two of these faculty,
              Austin and La Duke, are interested in phylogenetic/evolutionary questions.  La
              Duke is examining the relationships of the species in the plant family
              Malvaceae. This family includes cotton and Hibiscus. Austin is interested in
              the relationships and distribution patterns of Pacific Island lizards.  The
              other faculty, Detke and Young, are interested understanding the linkage of DNA
              sequences to biochemical pathways.  Detke is interested in a protein from the
              parasite Leishmania that that may have implications in diseases caused by the
              parasite.  Young is interested in proteins associated with bacterial cell walls
              and associated biosynthetic pathways.  Each of the scientists has a history of
              training students at all levels and is passionate about research.

The
              addition of this instrument will significantly enhance the research and
              training capabilities of the University of North Dakota.  The impact of this
              instrument on the research programs of the Principal Investigators is only a
              small part of the potential impact this will have on: 1) training of students,
              2) additional projects that can now be conceived, and  3) stimulating
              collaboration between researchers on the campus. .  As the use and
              understanding of DNA data has become almost as standard as the microscope in
              biology, we believe it is essential for undergraduates to have training and
              exposure to the current technology in DNA data-gathering and analysis.  It is
              expected that graduate students and faculty from both Biology and the Medical
              School will develop a closer interaction as a result of sharing this
              instrument.




