Title       : Using Spatial and Temporal Variations of Ice Deformation to Study Basal
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0115819

Award Number: 0115819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Echelmeyer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Truffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
Echelmeyer
OPP-01-15819
 
The Principal Investigators will study
              the distribution of basal shear stress and basal motion through detailed
              monitoring of surface velocities and internal ice deformation. The hypothesis
              is that the distribution of basal stress is related to the internal deformation
              field, and that temporal changes in basal conditions manifest themselves not
              only as changes in surface motion, but as changes in internal deformation. Such
              changes in internal deformation can be relatively large given the non-linear
              rheology of ice and the sensitivity of basal processes to variations in
              effective pressure. The Principal Investigators will investigate the mechanisms
              of basal motion using these ideas on Black Rapids Glacier, Alaska. They have
              previously documented the presence of a subglacial till layer and have some
              knowledge of its properties. Observational and modeling studies have shown that
              water pressure fluctuations cause changes in the strength of this till, and
              that these spatial and temporal changes in basal conditions then lead to
              measurable changes in the ice deformation field.  Six boreholes will be drilled
              along a cross section where the till exists, and a seventh will be drilled
              further downglacier. They will be instrumented with tilt sensors for continuous
              monitoring of borehole deformation and with pressure transducers for monitoring
              basal water pressure. They will also measure surface velocities across the
              transects, and their temporal fluctuations. The observational study will be
              initiated before the annual spring speed-up event and carried through the
              summer, when various motion events occur. Logging will then continue through
              the more steady conditions of the winter season. A finite element model of ice
              deformation will then be used to interpret these data in terms of the
              distribution of basal shear stress and the underlying mechanisms of basal
              motion throughout the annual cycle. The proposed project will take full
              advantage of synergetic collaboration with an existing, funded program to
              install tilt sensors deep in the underlying basal till at the same location as
              our central borehole. Taken together, the Principal Investigators will be able
              to obtain a more complete picture of basal processes and of the interdependence
              of basal  motion and ice deformation. Such interdependence is usually neglected
              in simple models of ice flow and the response of glaciers to climate
              variations.




