Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Genomics of Arabidopsis P450s
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0115068

Award Number: 0115068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3461517            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Schuler maryschu@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lei Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Band  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. Sligar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                



Award Abstract: 	This project is aimed at functionally defining the
              expression patterns and substrate reactivities of the Arabidopsis thaliana
              cytochrome P450 monooxygenase (P450) gene family that represents approximately
              0.6% of this plant's genome.  The proteins encoded by these genes mediate
              oxidative transformations in a wide array of biosynthetic and detoxicative
              pathways essential for plant growth.  Because of their roles in this wide
              diversity of metabolic processes and their relative lack of post-translational
              modification, they serve as downstream reporters for the direct activation of
              many different biochemical pathways responding to chemical, developmental and
              environmental cues.  Extensive divergence of catalytic site as well as
              noncatalytic site residues has resulted in a high degree of primary structure
              variation in this very diverse P450 gene superfamily that presents unsurpassed
              complexity in assigning function to individual genomic DNA sequences.  We will
              further the functional definition of Arabidopsis P450s by creating microarrays
              for analysis of the mRNA expression patterns in tissues at different
              developmental stages.  Imaging of the responses of individual P450 genes with
              respect to a variety of internal and external chemical cues as well as changing
              environmental conditions (UV damage, pathogen attack, insect attack, cold
              stress, etc.) and collations of these response patterns with respect to plant
              biochemical pathways will provide the basis for assigning prospective functions
              to these enzymes.  Overexpression of a subset of these P450s in yeast and
              baculovirus protein production systems and incorporation into
              membrane-scaffolding protein complexes suitable for high-throughput screening
              of substrate reactivities will provide the basis for assigning definitive
              function(s) to these enzymes.  These results serve to elucidate this model
              plant's biochemical responses to a variety of stress conditions and provide
              genomic technology tools needed for assessment of the diverse P450 gene family
              as well as other membrane protein families.  Data on the organization of the
              273 P450 genes, alignments of available ESTs, patterns of mRNA expression
              defined by microarray analysis and P450 substrate preferences defined by
              functional protein expression will be made available at
              http://arabidopsis-P450.biotec.uiuc.edu as collected.
 


