Title       : Time-Symmetric Counterfactual Propositions in Quantum Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0115185

Award Number: 0115185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth E. Kastner rkastner@wam.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R, Kastner
	      125 Hedgewood Drive
	      Greenbelt, MD  207701610    301/474-5605

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ruth Kastner
Time-Symmetric Counterfactual Propositions in Quantum
              Theory


Many interpretational problems in quantum theory involve
              counterfactual statements (statements of the form, \If it were that P, then it
              would be that Q"). In recent years, there has been controversy over the
              validity of counterfactual claims in explicitly time symmetric formulations of
              quantum theory such as that of
Yakir Aharonov and Lev Vaidman, and that of
              Ulrich Mohrhoff.  The goal of the proposed project is twofold: (a) to
              investigate precisely how such counterfactuals must differ from conventional
              counterfactuals and (b) whether a consistent and/or physically meaningful
              account of time-symmetric quantum counterfactual is possible. 

The research
              plan is to conduct a  thorough survey of the literature on counterfactuals, in
              order to take account of existing theories and to ascertain the domain of those
              theories (i.e., the kinds of counterfactual claims addressed by those
              theories).  Then an analysis follows of the salient features of traditional 
              counterfactual claims and of the novel counterfactual claims addressed by the
              current proposal (hereinafter \novel counterfactuals"), in order to uncover
              essential similarities and (primarily) differences.  Next the project turns to 
              a critical analysis of the predominant traditional counterfactual theories in
              light of differences uncovered between novel counterfactual claims and the
              traditional counterfactual claims. Such an analysis should provide at least a
              partial answer to the question of whether traditional theories can be applied
              to novel counterfactuals, possibly with some modifications.  If it is
              determined that traditional counterfactual theories are fundamentally
              incompatible with novel counterfactuals, then an attempt follows to lay out the
              essential features of an alternative counterfactual theory (addressing the
              first point), which will then be critically analyzed (addressing the second
              point) .  If the result of this second point is negative, alternatives to the
              use of counterfactual measurements are explored, to establish meaningful
              time-symmetric \objective" quantum mechanical probabilities such as that sought
              by Mohrhoff.

