Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics Study and Development of High Performance MEMS Gyroscopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0115828

Award Number: 0115828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244304             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zaichun Feng fengf@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract

We propose research in understanding the nonlinear dynamics
              of MEMS gyroscopes to achieve better gyro performance. The onset of instability
              in MEMS gyroscopes that is reported in the literature prevents the microgyros
              from operating at optimum conditions. Specifically, the mismatch between the
              resonance frequencies in the microgyro structure was not minimized in existing
              designs. Since the microgyros have very low damping, operating not at perfect
              resonance greatly limits the gyro performances. To remove this barrier,
              nonlinearity in the system must be considered since the system dynamics near
              resonances is well-known to be greatly affected by nonlinear effects even
              though these nonlinear effects are otherwise small. 

We also propose
              development effort to find better fabrication techniques to make thick
              structures for the microgyros. This is purely motivated by the simple fact that
              microgyros are inertia sensors and thicker structures will accentuate the
              Coriolis force and make the signal detection more immune to the noise
              associated with the signal amplification. 

Despite the tremendous amount of
              research and development effort on MEMS inertia sensors, the crucial research
              results are not available in the literature. Much of the know-how about
              microgyro designs remains proprietary. Through the proposed research, we hope
              to provide the research community our findings about the design considerations
              and innovative fabrication techniques for the microgyros. Moreover, by
              involving both graduate and undergraduate students in this research and
              incorporating MEMS in the engineering curriculum, we hope to better prepare
              students for the work force. Moreover, by taking advantage of the existing
              program called "Diversity in Engineering" at University of Missouri, we hope to
              interest more under-represented minority students in engineering.



