Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Development of High Optical Quality Tellurite
               Glasses of Potential Non-Linear Applications and Their Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0115000

Award Number: 0115000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paras N. Prasad pnprasad@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0115000
Prasad

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              between Dr. Paras N. Prasad, Department of Chemistry and Director of Photonics
              Research Laboratory, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York
              and Dr. Raouf El-Mallawany, Department of Physics, Menofia University, Shebin
              El-Kom, Egypt.  The objectives of the research are to develop and study new
              material based on tellurite glasses for their potential for non-linear
              applications. The study will include: Preparation of high optical quality of
              tellurite glasses (in the bulk & fiber form) by using new different rare earth
              and transition metal oxides in order to get a glass with high refractive index
              and low dispersion, optical measurements which include the measurements of the
              refractive index at different wavelengths and the wavelength of IR
              transmission, thermal & Elastic characterization measurements which include:
              glass transformation, crystallization temperatures, stability, longitudinal,
              shear, bulk, Young's moduli, Poisson's ratio and Debye temperature of the
              produced glasses, and structural determinations like  x-ray Diffraction (XRD),
              transmission electron microscope.

Scope: The project supports collaboration
              between two well-recognized scientists who have the expertise and resources for
              this research. The topic is important to the field of amorphous materials, and
              has applications in the expanding arena of photonics. Understanding of
              tellurite glasses will have an impact in the development of pressure sensors
              and optical materials.  The international team is quite suited for the project,
              as the Egyptian scientist has significant expertise in the synthesis of
              tellurite glasses of different compositions, and the US scientist has vast
              expertise in material characterization.  This project has the potential to
              greatly benefit both sides by developing new materials that can have wide
              applications. The project will promote training of Egyptian and US graduate
              students who will participate in this collaborative work.  This project meets
              the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual
              interest.

