Title       : GOALI: Going Beyond Design of Experiments (DOE) - Process Improvement by Joint
               Adjustment and Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0115007

Award Number: 0115007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harriet Black Nembhard hbnem@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Murn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The challenge for process control in many settings is that if a process is left
              alone it will tend to drift and wander away from target and as a result,
              quality will suffer. This is especially true in an industrial setting where
              both process inputs and outputs continuously change. Traditional process
              control has centered on detecting special causes that are suggested by
              significant patterns in the data which point to the existence of unexpected
              changes or signals. Many situations occur, however, where certain process
              signals are anticipated because they are characteristic of a system or
              operation. The approach to be used in this prjoect is to navigate to a good
              operating region using design of experiments (DOE) to evaluate a set of
              variables, then focus the control effort on the critical variables.  Process
              transfer functions will be used to optimize the control adjustment of these
              variables and use Cuscore statistics to efficiently monitor the process by
              capitalizing on the structure of the anticipated signal.  For process
              adjustment and monitoring, the following questions will be investigated:  (1)
              What are the appropriate controllers and Cuscore statistics for common process
              characterizations? (2) How well will the new monitoring algorithms work in
              detecting signals? (3) How robust are the controllers and monitors to
              approximations of (or deviations from) their key parameters?  

The
              contributions of this research will include both empirical and theoretical
              developments to deliver improved output through better process understanding,
              monitoring, and control. In particular, the research is expected to provide a
              methodology for connecting the knowledge on experimental design and process
              improvement, provide a full set of adjustment and Cuscore monitoring algorithms
              and statistical evaluation of their properties, generate tools and charting
              algorithms to improve daily process operation and control, and demonstrate the
              feasibility of joint adjustment and monitoring for real industry applications.
              This work includes a partnership with Springs Window Fashions Division, Inc.
              (Middleton, WI). Springs is a leading manufacturer of home window treatments
              and their processing operations will serve as a test bed for implementation of
              the results. It also includes an opportunity for a graduate research assistant
              to work on the project and with the company.

