Title       : Large-Domain Hybrid Moment Method-Physical Optics Techniques for Efficient and
               Accurate Electromagnetic Modeling of Cars and Aircraft over a Wide Range of
               Frequencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0115756

Award Number: 0115756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Branislav M. Notaros bnotaros@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115756
Notaros

The central goal of the proposed research is the development
              of the methodology and necessary knowledge for electromagnetic modeling of cars
              and aircraft over a very wide range of radio and microwave frequencies.
              Analysis of vehicles as electromagnetic structures (antennas and scatterers)
              and parts of wireless communication and radar systems is, by all means, one of
              the most challenging and practically important problems of applied
              electro-magnetics and one of the mainstream tasks with highest preference,
              today and in the future, of the computational electromagnetics (CEM) community.
              A new unified general, highly efficient and accurate, hybrid large-domain
              (higher-order expansion) current-based method will be developed for analysis of
              electrically small, medium, and very large 3D electromagnetic structures
              consisting of metallic and dielectric parts of arbitrary shapes. Theoretical
              foundation of the method is a system of coupled surface integral equations for
              equivalent surface electric and magnetic currents. The system will be solved by
              the method of moments (MoM) which will be hybridized with high-frequency
              asymptotic techniques based on the physical optics (PO). This hybridization
              will provide a smooth transition between low and high frequency applications.
              Within the new MoM-PO method, all the surfaces in the system (metallic and
              dielectric surfaces, in both the MoM- and PO-regions) will be approximated by
              electrically relatively large bilinear quadrilateral surface elements (large
              domains) with higher-order polynomial vector expansions for currents. Wires
              will also be incorporated, in the MoM-regions. Various corrections in the
              PO-regions will be introduced, including an iterative improvement of the
              interaction between the MoM- and PO-regions. Most importantly, the memory
              requirements and computation time associated with the unknowns in the
              PO-regions can be made extremely low, which results in an enormous overall
              efficiency of the hybrid solution. As compared with the existing CEM methods,
              the proposed method will have a unique feature of efficient, accurate, and
              reliable electromagnetic modeling of cars and aircraft in a wide range of
              frequencies on small computing platforms (such as desktop and laptop PC's). An
              extensive new knowledge will be developed and systematized on the methodology
              of electromagnetic modeling of cars and aircraft from practically dc to
              high-frequency applications. Experimental validation of the new MoM-PO
              technique will be performed by measurements in the new UMass Dartmouth ATMC
              (Advanced Technology and Manufacturing Center) Antenna and Wireless Laboratory.
              

