Title       : Dynamical Neural Networks for Modeling and Control of Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0115507

Award Number: 0115507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226736             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farzad Pourboghrat pour@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115507
Pourboghrat

Optimal controller design for nonlinear systems has been
              the topic of much research in the past years. Although optimal controller
              design has been completely developed for dynamic linear systems, its nonlinear
              extension is still a topic of research. A general framework for dynamic
              optimization is the calculus of variations and the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
              (HJB) equation.  Although these minimization algorithms over the years have
              found many important applications, the corresponding algorithm usually requires
              the solution of a two-point boundary value problem, which is not applicable for
              on-line implementation. Currently, there are several approximating techniques
              available that can be used for optimal regulator design. These can also be
              implemented on-line at the price of rendering the control sub-optimal. The
              problem of optimal tracking controller is even harder, since the approximating
              techniques, in general, cannot be implemented on-line.

This project will
              attempt to develop a universal optimal controller for a large class of
              controllable and observable nonlinear systems. The objective of this research
              is a new generic approach for the design of optimal controllers that can be
              implemented on-line. The key component for the proposed control architecture is
              the use of a generic dynamic neural network (DNN). DNNs are shown to be capable
              of approximating any nonlinear dynamic system with an arbitrary degree of
              accuracy, provided that they have enough number of neurons. This generic model
              of the nonlinear system can be utilized for the derivation of the proposed
              universal controller for optimal tracking problem. The problem of weight
              adjustment (adaptation) in the network can be viewed as a controller design for
              an equivalent system. This allows one to formulate the two problems of
              parameter adaptation and controller design for a system as single problem of
              controller design.



