Title       : Acquisition of Transmission Electron Microscopy Equipment for Invertebrate and
               Vertebrate Pigment Cell Studies, Undergraduate Laboratory Demonstrations, and
               Undergraduate Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0115822

Award Number: 0115822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99989              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Oetinger acantho@kwc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Wilt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kentucky Wesleyan College
	      3000 Frederica Street
	      Owensboro, KY  423016057    502/926-3111

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. David F. Oetinger and Steven D. Wilt at
              Kentucky Wesleyan College.  This grant will allow the investigators to purchase
              instrumentation to equip a transmission electron microscopy facility.  
              Specifically, the equipment will include a transmission electron microscope for
              study of cellular components--in the 1,000 to 300,000 magnification range; an
              ultramicrotome with diamond knife for cutting tissue sections in the range of
              60 to 80 nanometers in thickness; a second ultramicrotome for preparatory work
              and training purposes; a glass knife-maker, also for preparatory work and
              training; and appropriate darkroom equipment.  Dr. Oetinger will study the
              structure and development of ommochrome pigment granules in the cells of
              freshwater sowbugs (isopods).  Subsequently, he will seek a better
              understanding of how infection with larval worm parasites (acanthocephalans)
              interferes- structurally and biochemically with normal pigment granule
              formation.  Dr. Wilt is interested in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) of
              vertebrate eyes-specifically the junctions between cells that form a "fence,"
              restricting diffusion of lipids and proteins between adjacent cells.  He will
              use cell cultures and chick embryos to determine the role of tight junction
              molecules in the development and maintenance of tight junctions.
Pigmented
              epidermis from an age-series of aquatic isopods will be fixed, stained,
              embedded and sectioned.  Ultrastructural examination will assess location,
              size, shape and number of pigment granules within cells.  In certain insects,
              ommochrome pigments are known to be stored waste products from tryptophan
              metabolism: that hypothesis will be tested for freshwater isopods (crustaceans)
              using concurrent biochemical extraction techniques and ultrastructural
              examination of pigment granules.  So too, study of the relationship between
              developing acanthocephalan larvae and altered pigmentation will be studied at
              the ultrastructural level.  Dr. Wilt will use a Rous sarcoma retroviral
              expression system to overexpress subdomains of the tight junction molecule
              (ZO-2).  Then, using traditional electron microscopy and immunogold labelling
              methods, he will determine the role of ZO-2 in the development and regulation
              of RPE tight junctions ultrastructurally.
Cellular pigments and pigmented
              cells play of variety of biological roles in invertebrates and vertebrates:
              cryptic coloration, physiological color changes, ultraviolet light screening,
              and as important components of visual receptors.  In the isopod-acanthocephalan
              system, Oetinger is seeking an understanding of how a parasite can mediate
              changes in a host's morphology--of selective advantage to the parasite.  In
              Wilt's research, the integrity of the retinal pigment epithelium is critical
              for optimal vision.  A better understanding of the ultrastructural-molecular
              relationships that maintain that integrity is important to our understanding of
              the evolution of the vertebrate eye and subsequent defects in structure and
              function.

