Title       : Instrumentation for Materials Research (IMR): Acquisition of X-Ray
               Diffractometer for Materials Undergraduate Research and Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0115774

Award Number: 0115774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134756             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amer S. Lahamer lahamer@berea.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Berea College
	      Berea College
	      Berea, KY  404040002    606/986-9341

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the
              Major Research Instrumentation program, Berea College will acquire an X-ray
              Diffractometer (XRD) for materials research undergraduate research and
              education. The scientific research is focussed on the study of high temperature
              superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance and magnetic transitions in
              perovskites and ruthenites. The program includes materials synthesis and
              characterization using Mossbauer spectroscopy. The XRD will enhance the
              materials characterization capability at this undergraduate institution. The
              instrument will also be used for training undergraduate students, including
              students from underrepresented groups at this EPSCoR state. 

With this award
              from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major Research
              Instrumentation program, Berea College will acquire an X-ray Diffractometer
              (XRD) for materials research undergraduate research and education. The
              scientific research is focussed on the study of high temperature
              superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance and magnetic transitions in
              perovskites and ruthenites. The program includes materials synthesis and
              characterization using Mossbauer spectroscopy. The XRD will enhance the
              materials characterization capability at this undergraduate institution. The
              instrument will also be used for training undergraduate students, including
              students from underrepresented groups at this EPSCoR state

