Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: A Sequence-Indexed Library of Insertion Mutations in the
               Arabidopsis Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0115103

Award Number: 0115103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Ecker ecker@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Arabidopsis 2010: A Sequence-Indexed Library of Insertion Mutations in the
              Arabidopsis Genome.  With the availability of the entire Arabidopsis genome
              sequence, one of the next challenges is to uncover the functions of the more
              than 25,000 genes in this reference plant. Given the scope of the NSF 2010
              program, to identify the function of all Arabidopsis genes in the next decade,
              an efficient and cost effective approach is necessary to identify mutations in
              all genes. The goal of this program is to create a sequence-indexed library of
              mutations in the Arabidopsis genome. The Salk Institute Genome Analysis
              Laboratory (http://signal.salk.edu) will use high-throughput genome sequencing
              methods to identify the sites of insertion of Agrobacterium T-DNA in the
              Arabidopsis genome. T-DNA transformed plants from the Alonso/Crosby/Ecker
              collection  will be grown, genomic DNA will be prepared, T-DNA flanking plant
              DNA will be recovered and sequenced. Insertion site sequences will be aligned
              with the Arabidopsis genome sequence and gene annotation will be added. The
              data will be made available via a web accessible graphical
              interface-T-DNAExpress-(http://signal.salk.edu/cgi-bin/tdnaexpress) that will
              provide both text and DNA searches of the insertion sequence database. All DNA
              sequences will be deposited into GenBank (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and also
              provided to The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) (www.arabidopsis.org).
              Seeds from the T-DNA insertion lines will be deposited with the Arabidopsis
              Biological Resource Center (ABRC) at Ohio State
              University:http://www.biosci.ohiostate.edu/~plantbio/Facilities/abrc/ABRCHOME.HTM. The ABRC will propagate and distribute seeds to the community. The creation of a searchable database containing the insertion site information and the availability of the corresponding mutant lines in public stock centers will provide researchers with ready access to mutants in their genes of interest, allowing the testing of hypotheses about gene function at an unprecedented rate.
