Title       : Dissertation Research: Design for a Pluralistic City: Multimodal Transportation
               in Oakland, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0115302

Award Number: 0115302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7990               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim Fortun fortuk@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project proposes to study the design of urban
              multimodal transportation in the United States. It will examine interdependent
              technical, organizational, and cultural changes directed at diversifying
              existing transportation infrastructures. It includes formal design processes
              and people's everyday experiences to understand how "the street" and "safety"
              are negotiated in designing for pedestrian, bicycle, automobile, bus, and rail
              modes. The organizing concept of multimodal design focuses the research on the
              negotiation of diversity in designing for multiple and potentially conflicting
              needs. This project will examine how diverse perspectives on these five modes
              grapple with the technical, organizational, and cultural inertia of existing
              infrastructure  to design a shared infrastructure that meets the needs of
              pluralistic populations. In the United States, multimodal transportation is a
              timely topic because of the possibilities for change afforded by the Intermodal
              Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA, 1991) and the Transportation
              Equity Act for the 21st Century (TEA-21, 1998). Following on the completion of
              the Eisenhower Interstate Highway System, this legislation marks a shift in
              United States trans-portation policy away from road construction as the primary
              solution to transportation problems. In response to political concerns over
              previous highway policy, this legislation also increases the role of
              metropolitan- and state-level decision making. This research will examine how
              multimodal design addresses automobile dependence and its attendant problems of
              air pollution, urban sprawl, and oil dependency by providing viable
              transportation alternatives in people's everyday lives. It is socially
              significant for assessing the role of nongovernmental organizations in
              transportation change, opportunities for broader participation in design, and
              best practices in design processes, programs, and policies that foster
              political stability and environmental sustainability. The project uses the city
              of Oakland, California as a research site including pedestrian, bicycle,
              automobile, bus, and rail modes. Each mode will be examined through the
              transportation planners, elected officials, advocates, and residents who shape
              and are shaped by these modes. One year of field research will use the
              following data collection methods: 1) thirty-five focused interviews with
              transportation planners, elected officials, and advocates on the design of
              multimodal transportation; 2) fifteen informant photography and
              photo-elicitation interviews with residents on their everyday experiences of
              urban travel; and 3) participant/observation in public hearings, advocacy
              meetings, and educational outreach on transportation projects. These three data
              sets will be analyzed to identify social worlds that negotiate the design of
              the street and safety for the five transportation modes. The field research
              will be situated in the context of regional, state, and federal policy and the
              cultural significance of these transportation modes.
