Title       : The Role of the Cia5 Gene in the Carbon Concentrating Mechanism in Chlamydomonas
               Reinhardtii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0115626

Award Number: 0115626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald P. Weeks dweeks1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The carbon concentrating mechanism (CCM) plays a major role in the
              earth's
photosynthetic productivity and its capacity to cycle carbon.  The CCM
              is
essential for photosynthesis at atmospheric levels of CO2 in
              Chlamydomonas
and most other eukaryotic and prokaryotic algae.  Knowledge
              gained
regarding the CCM in C. reinhardtii through this three-year
              project,
coupled with information from other laboratories, should allow a
              more
complete understanding of how algal cells are able to survive and
              flourish
in their CO2-limited, aqueous environment.  The primary goal of
              this
research project is to elucidate components and mechanisms of regulation
              of
the CCM in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.  The focus of the project is
              the
complete characterization of the Cia5 gene and its role as a
              master
regulator of the cell's response to changes in environmental CO2 and
              HCO3
concentrations.  Based on the weight of present evidence, it appears
              the
Cia5 gene encodes a transcription factor that is part of one or more
              signal
transduction cascades that allow, or reverse, formation of a
              functional
CCM.  Experiments to fully characterize the Cia5 gene are outlined
              along
with studies of the CIA5 protein, its subcellular
              location,
post-translational modification(s), DNA binding specificities and
              other
features required for its function in controlling assembly of the CCM. 
              A
model is proposed in which the CIA5 protein could act either as an
              inducer
or repressor of transcription of genes whose expression is
              dramatically
increased during a shift of cells from high to low CO2 levels. 
              Experiments
are outlined that will resolve the uncertainty of whether CIA5
              acts as an
inducer or repressor of gene expression.  In the long term, an
              increased
understanding of the CCM has the potential for practical application
              in
agriculture.  For example, certain crop plants have been demonstrated
              to
produce higher yields under elevated levels of CO2.  If
              appropriate
portions of the CCM can be transferred to those crops, their
              resultant
ability to increase internal CO2 concentrations could lead to
              substantially
improved crop yields.


