Title       : DNA Profiling and Fingerprinting: Relations between Closure and Controversy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0115305

Award Number: 0115305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143881             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Lynch mel27@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Michael Lynch, Cornell University
DNA Profiling and Fingerprinting: Relations
              between Closure and Controversy

This one-year project examines the role of
              science and technology in criminal justice, specifically the relation of DNA
              profiling to traditional forms of legal evidence. In criminal investigations,
              DNA profiling is used to compare bodily traces collected at crime scenes
              (blood, semen, hair and hair follicles, skin, and cheek cells) with samples
              taken from suspects. State and national DNA databases are under construction
              worldwide. When DNA profiling was introduced in the mid-1980s it was called
              "DNA fingerprinting."  The nominal association with the established method of 
              latent fingerprint analysis suggested that the new method would enable
              investigators to identify unique individuals. However, practical, population
              genetic, and probabilistic aspects of DNA profiling became controversial in the
              late 1980s and early 90s. Court disputes and public debates among scientists
              were popularly dubbed "the DNA wars."   Due to a series of legal decisions,
              technical fixes, and science advisory recommendations, the controversy is now
              widely declared over, and a post-closure inversion of credibility has occurred.
              Where DNA "fingerprinting" once borrowed its name and credibility from the
              older method of fingerprinting, it is now so strongly trusted that it is held
              as a standard for judging all other forms of criminal evidence, including
              latent fingerprint evidence.  DNA profiling methods are being used to challenge
              convictions from years past, and this has led to renewed debate about the death
              penalty and widespread concern about the adequacy of the entire criminal
              justice process. 

The PI, Michael Lynch and the co-investigator Simon Cole
              have conducted extensive research on DNA profiling and latent fingerprint
              analysis.  Both investigators explore how the scientific credibility now
              ascribed to DNA profiling implicates older forms of criminal evidence,
              including "common sense" evidence and older forensic practices like
              fingerprinting.  The PIs intend to interview participants in The Innocence
              Project -- an ongoing effort using DNA profiling to re-open criminal
              convictions obtained in the pre-DNA era.  They draw upon court transcripts,
              case summaries and participant interviews from recent cases in which
              fingerprint evidence has been challenged, in order to assess the extent to
              which the now-established credibility of DNA profiling has led to questioning
              of traditional forms of evidence.  These data are interpreted in light of
              longer term, international trends in methods of criminal identification. The
              study contributes to a growing area of S&TS research on the intertwining of
              law, science, and public values. It also links up with related projects on DNA
              profiling and criminal databases in the US, Australia, and Europe.  

The
              project and its dissemination products have scholarly and educational value by
              enhancing professional and public insight into some important ethical, legal,
              and political concerns about the uses of scientific expertise. Some of these
              concerns are about the impact of DNA databases on civil liberties and privacy,
              the ability of lay persons to understand and "weigh" scientific and
              probabilistic evidence, and the possibility that "objective" evidence may
              obscure the continued importance of critical evaluation of evidence in relation
              to the overall circumstances of a case.

