Title       : A Comprehensive Methodology to Estimate the Current Safety and to Predict the
               Remaining Useful Life of Suspension Bridge Cables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0115901

Award Number: 0115901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274293             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raimondo Betti betti@civil.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              In the US, various transportation systems, including long-span cable suspension
              bridges,
have been allowed to deteriorate because of inadequate investment in
              maintenance and life extension technology, and particularly because of clearly
              insufficient support for research in the area of structural assessment and
              protection. In-depth inspections of the main cables in the suspension bridges
              in the New York metropolitan area have found a quite large number of broken
              wires inside the cables and at the anchorage, showing extensive deterioration
              and brittle fractures. These findings pose the difficult task of determining
              the actual strength of main suspension cables in existing bridges. The safety
              evaluation of suspension bridge cables has always been done considering as a
              safety factor the ratio between the estimated cable strength over the computed
              ultimate load. However, in view of the many uncertainties involved with the
              cable deterioration pattern and with wire corrosion mechanisms, and considering
              the relatively small proportion of wires that are inspected and/or tested, such
              a safety factor is useful only as a first approximation, but not in assessing
              the overall safety of the bridge. A better and more
appropriate measure of the
              overall safety of main suspension cables is the use of  probabilistic
              indicators such as the reliability or the safety index. Without a well-defined
              methodology for estimating the residual strength of an existing cable,
              suspension bridge owner agencies do not have a clear idea of what to search for
              in a cable inspection and so they base their maintenance program mainly on
              previous experiences and on trial and error attempts. This grant proposes to go
              beyond the objectives of the NCHRP Project 10-57 by developing a comprehensive
              methodology for a rigorous safety appraisal of the cable system in existing
              suspension bridges. The ultimate objectives of this study will focus on 1) the
              estimation of the actual residual strength and of the actual safety of main
              cables in suspension bridges based on results of inspections and laboratory
              testing of cable wires, and on 2) the prediction of the remaining useful life
              of suspension bridge cables using the same results.  In this way, the estimated
              overall safety of the cables of different bridges can be directly compared. A
              new cable model that accounts for limited and different ductility of the
              corroded bridge wires will also be developed, using a probabilistic framework
              to account for the random nature of the deterioration pattern. The
              determination of the statistical parameters to be used in the new prediction
              model will be done using a unique set of inspection and test data, collected
              over 30 years of bridge testing by the Carleton Laboratory at Columbia
              University, and on the results of current research projects on wire
              deterioration. This project will make a significant contribution to the bridge
              engineering community with the introduction of a more rigorous description of
              the overall safety and remaining useful life of main cables in existing
              suspension bridges.

