Title       : MRI: Procurement of a Shared Confocal Microscope Facility at the Institute of
               Neurobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0115825

Award Number: 0115825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Miller mmiller@rcm.upr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luis F. Santana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Earl Kicliter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Blagburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nidza Lugo(Garcia)  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Med Sci
	      G P O Box 5067
	      San Juan, PR  00901    809/753-5353

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               A grant has been awarded to Dr. Mark W. Miller at the University of Puerto Rico
              Medical Sciences Campus to establish a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope
              (LSCM) facility at the Institute of Neurobiology.  This facility will be shared
              by the investigators and students of the ten laboratories that comprise the
              Institute.  These laboratories utilize a variety of model systems, ranging from
              synapse development and specification in the cockroach to retinal aging in the
              human, to address some of the most challenging issues facing modern
              Neuroscience.  While diverse in scope, these research programs are unified by
              certain methodological considerations and limitations.  In particular, they
              share a need to localize specific proteins, messenger RNAs, or physiological
              events, within highly complex tissues.  The elaborate three-dimensional
              structures of neurons, their remarkable phenotypic heterogeneity, and their
              intricate sorting and trafficking capabilities present formidable obstacles to
              studies requiring the precise localization of fluorescent signals or markers. 
              In many cases, however, the limitations previously imposed by these factors
              have been overcome by the introduction of the confocal microscope, an
              instrument that enables investigators to detect and localize fluorescent
              signals with a resolution that greatly exceeds the capabilities of traditional
              microscopy.  
The research conducted at the Institute of Neurobiology is
              dedicated increasing our understanding of the structure and function of nervous
              systems.  Specific programs include: (1) Neuropeptide Y and GABA Expression in
              the Aging Ground Squirrel Circadian System (Dr. N. Lugo), (2) Dendritic
              Remodeling of Ganglion Cells after Optic Nerve Injury (Dr. R. Blanco), Survival
              and Regeneration of Human Spinal Cord Neurons (Dr. D. Kuffler), (4) Ultra-fast
              Imaging of Subcellular Calcium Signals in Vascular Smooth Muscle (Dr. L.
              Santana), (5) Role of Engrailed Paralogues in Specification of Neuronal Anatomy
              and Synaptic Connections (Dr. J.M. Blagburn), (6) Cotransmitters and the
              Regulation of Complex Behavior (Dr. M. W. Miller), (7) Retinal Aging in Human
              Populations in Puerto Rico (Dr. E. Kicliter), and (8) Functional Role of
              Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors in a Rhythm-generating Neuronal Network (Dr.
              W. Krenz).  
In addition to the direct enhancement of these research projects,
              the proposed facility will have a broad impact on the educational goals and
              capabilities of the Institute of Neurobiology.  Numerous graduate students
              affiliated with the University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine and the
              Department of Biology at the UPR Rio Piedras campus conduct their research at
              the Institute.  Moreover, many advanced undergraduate students receive research
              training by participating in an Independent Investigation course, for which
              they may receive both credit and funding.  Finally, the Institute hosts a
              summer program in Tropical Neuroethology that brings undergraduate students
              from around the country to Puerto Rico for an intensive 5-week research
              experience.  The creation of a shared Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope
              facility will clearly enrich these educational programs and enhance the
              training objectives of the Institute of Neurobiology.  

