Title       : Collaborative Research: Planar Magnetic Photonic Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0115315

Award Number: 0115315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miguel Levy mlevy@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative project between Michigan Technological University (MTU) and
              Southwest Texas State University (SWT) focuses on the fabrication and testing
              of waveguide photonic crystals in magnetic oxides for novel integrated photonic
              device prototyping.  The project responds to the growing interest in photonic
              crystals for device applications based on their unique optical band gap
              properties.  While various novel optical band gap structures have been
              fabricated in non-magnetic dielectric media for highly efficient waveguiding,
              filtering and resonator applications, very little work has been done on
              photonic crystals in magnetic systems and no work exists on monolithic planar
              magnetophotonic crystals.  This project will focus on the electron-beam
              patterning of magnetic photonic crystals on ferrite waveguides for a new
              generation of integrated optical isolator devices.
 The non-reciprocal
              properties of magnetic oxides, such as yttrium iron garnet (YIG), make these
              materials a unique choice for optical isolator and circulator fabrication. 
              Optical fiber telecommunications have developed to the point where the
              monolithic integration of different optical components is a serious issue to
              reduce costs in local area networks and long-distance data transmittal. 
              However, conventional systems utilizing non-planar geometries are both bulky
              and expensive.  Photonic crystal structures provide a novel alternative to
              address this problem since they can significantly enhance the Faraday response,
              making it possible to build smaller and cheaper isolators and circulators, a
              generation beyond the types of integrated isolators being explored at present.
              
The proposed program will concentrate on the fabrication of patterned ridge
              waveguides on rf-sputtered bismuth-substituted YIG films, with special emphasis
              on achieving superior optical isolation by minimizing birefringence. It will
              also explore the fabrication of flat top transmission devices.  By establishing
              the practical implementation of magnetic photonic crystals on chip, the project
              will also contribute to the development of optical filters, highly efficient
              Kerr reflectors for magneto-optic recording and mode converters.


