Title       : Acquisition of an Extrusion System for Innovative Polymer Processing and New
               Materials Research Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0115741

Award Number: 0115741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saad A. Khan khan@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Spontak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program provides
              funds to North Carolina State University for the acquisition of a unique,
              three-component extrusion system that would provide critically needed
              capability in new materials and polymer processing research at North Carolina
              State University. The extrusion system would become the cornerstone of several
              research projects including (1) Supercritical Fluid Assisted Step Growth
              Polymerization, (2) CO2-Asisted Depolymerization, Purification and Recycling of
              Step-Growth Polymers, (3) Reactive Blending, and (4) Nano-composite Foams.
              Specifically, this extrusion system will allow the principal investigators to
              develop novel polymer processing techniques, investigate CO2-assisted polymeric
              processing, and improve existing industrial processes. The equipment
              acquisition will strengthen the polymer research already established within the
              University. It will lead to many new initiatives in polymerization and polymer
              processing and support a number of projects in the NSF Science and Technology
              Center for Environmentally Responsible Solvents & Processes. The extrusion
              system will also serve to expand the institutional capability to educate both
              graduate and undergraduate students. The equipment will be used to directly
              benefit undergraduate students enrolled in the Polymer Science Option. An
              experiment based on the extrusion system will be introduced into, a required
              undergraduate laboratory course. The equipment also will be used for
              demonstration and project purposes in at least two graduate courses, polymer
              rheology and polymer blends and alloys. Finally, the equipment also will be
              available for graduate students and post-doctoral personnel (more than 50
              campus wide) that are involved in polymer research.

This award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials Research program provides funds to North Carolina
              State University for the acquisition of a unique, three-component extrusion
              system that would provide critically needed capability in new materials and
              polymer processing research at North Carolina State University. The extrusion
              system would become the cornerstone of several research projects. Specifically,
              this extrusion system will allow the principal investigators to develop novel
              polymer processing techniques, investigate new polymeric processing, and
              improve existing industrial processes. The equipment acquisition will
              strengthen the polymer research already established within the University. It
              will lead to many new initiatives in polymerization and polymer processing and
              support a number of projects in the NSF Science and Technology Center for
              Environmentally Responsible Solvents & Processes. The extrusion system will
              also serve to expand the institutional capability to educate both graduate and
              undergraduate students. The equipment will be used to directly benefit
              undergraduate students enrolled in the Polymer Science Option. An experiment
              based on the extrusion system will be introduced into, a required undergraduate
              laboratory course. The equipment also will be used for demonstration and
              project purposes in at least two graduate courses, polymer rheology and polymer
              blends and alloys. Finally, the equipment also will be available for graduate
              students and post-doctoral personnel (more than 50 campus wide) that are
              involved in polymer research.

