Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0115961

Award Number: 0115961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Biernacki jbiernacki@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry W. Knox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jiahong Zhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon G. Berk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher D. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, Tennessee
              Technological University will acquire acquire a variable pressure scanning
              electron microscope with an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) attachment and
              ancillary sample preparation equipment for multidisciplinary, integrated
              research and education.  The instrument will provide a core facility for all
              departments in the College of Engineering, the College of Arts and Sciences and
              Tennessee Technological University's three State funded Centers of Excellence. 
              Specific ongoing research or proposed research in the following areas will
              benefit: (1) hydration kinetics of waste materials in portland cement, (2)
              controlled deposition of boron on silicon from solid dopant sources, (3)
              fracture toughness determination by fractographic observation, (4) fatigue
              crack front evolution tracking, (5) in situ mechanical testing of
              microelectromechanical (MEMS) devices, (6) point defect and fracture mechanics
              of Laves phases, (7) environmental embrittlement of intermetalic alloys, (8)
              novel coatings for interconnect materials in solid oxide fuel cells, (9)
              trophic interactions between Legionella and protozoa, (10) interactions of
              protozoa and mycobacteria species, (11) community structure of protozoa, and
              (12) identification and characterization of microfossils.  The new facility
              will also be used to enhance existing laboratory opportunities for
              undergraduate and graduate students, further develop ongoing NSF funded Course
              Curriculum and Laboratory Improvement projects and promote greater interaction
              with local area elementary and high schools.

With this award from the Major
              Research Instrumentation program, Tennessee Technological University (TTU) will
              acquire acquire a variable pressure scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an
              energy dispersive spectroscopy attachment and ancillary sample preparation
              equipment for multidisciplinary, integrated research and education.  TTU serves
              Tennessee and the surrounding states by providing a highly ranked regional
              university environment.  As such, the TTU faculty is primarily involved in
              applied research serving the regional industrial community.  The acquisition of
              instruments, such as the proposed scanning electron microscope, enables TTU to
              achieve its mission and obligation to this community by providing
              state-of-the-art facilities to train students, to conduct applied research for
              industrial constituents and to attract and conduct basic research.  The new SEM
              is to be a core facility in support of a wide range of ongoing and future
              interdisciplinary research and educational activities at TTU.   Current
              research programs include utilization of waste in portland cement, development
              of materials for advanced fuel cell applications, fundamental studies regarding
              the mechanical behavior of metals and ceramics, microbiology of pathogen-cell
              interactions and single cell animal behavior and investigation of microfossils.
                The new facility will also be used to enhance existing laboratory
              opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, further develop ongoing
              NSF funded Course Curriculum and Laboratory Improvement projects and promote
              greater interaction with local area elementary and high schools.

