Title       : Integrated Material-Shape Modeling Using Approximate Distance Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0115133

Award Number: 0115133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269899             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vadim Shapiro vshapiro@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research objective of this project is to develop sound theoretical
              foundations, design computer representations and algorithms, and to implement
              an experimental system for integrated material-shape modeling of components
              with continuously varying heterogeneous and anisotropic materials.  The key
              technical challenge is to create physically meaningful models and
              computationally effective representations of the material density functions
              defined over the boundary and the interior of the solid, given their
              description and/or variation on the known portions of the solid model.  The
              proposed approach is based on  the method for transfinite interpolation that
              parameterizes the interior of any solid in terms of the approximate distance
              fields to the specified material features.  A comprehensive approach to the
              problem of material modeling will explore three distinct, but related, topic
              areas:  (1) representational issues,  (2) algorithms and systems, and (3)
              applications in design and manufacturing of parts with heterogeneous material
              properties. The results of the research will be tested  in a prototype system
              based on a commercial solid modeler.

Successful completion of the project
              should lead to substantial progress in enabling and integrating modeling,
              design, and manufacturing of heterogeneous and anisotropic parts. Such
              components are becoming increasingly important due to emerging techniques in
              design of functionally graded materials and solid free-form fabrication
              techniques (such as layered manufacturing) that allow local material
              composition control. The anticipated advantages of the new technology include
              exactness of representation, independence from interior discretizations, 
              complete automation, guaranteed analytical properties, and compatibility with
              existing standards for geometric modeling  and data exchange. 

