Title       : Acquisition of a Genetic Analyzer for Analysis of Phylogenetic Relationships and
               Populations Genetics.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0115932

Award Number: 0115932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard J. Allan allang@camelot.beaver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail W. Hearn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lauretta M. Bushar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arcadia University
	      Church & Easton Roads
	      Glenside, PA  19038    215/572-2900

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Allan, Bushar and Hearn at Arcadia University
              (formerly Beaver College) to conduct DNA sequence analyses of select organisms
              belonging to the Plant and Animal kingdoms.  Dr. Allan will analyze
              evolutionary relationships among plant species in the Pea Family to better
              understand their origin and diversification in specific mediterranean
              environments.  The study will entail analysis of DNA sequences generated by an
              automated DNA sequencer, and will result in the construction of a molecular
              phylogeny (DNA-based family tree) for approximately 150 species, some of which
              are agriculturally important.  Dr. Bushar will conduct DNA sequence and
              microsatellite (tandemly repeated DNA sequences) studies to understand factors
              that impact the structure, variation and long-term viability of North American
              rattlesnakes.  Dr. Hearn will use DNA sequence information to augment her work
              on the conservation management and evolutionary relationships of large forest
              mammals and nesting marine turtles on Bioko Island, Equatorial Guinea, West
              Africa.

Methods used in this research include: the isolation of genomic DNA
              from different study organisms (plants, snakes, mammals); identification of
              target gene regions in nuclear, chloroplast and mitochondrial DNA; and the
              generation of DNA sequence information using a Genetic Analyzer (DNA
              sequencer).  In the plant study, DNA sequence information will be used to
              generate molecular-based phylogenies, in conjunction with computer-based
              algorithms.  These data will address questions relating to the origin and
              diversification of plants endemic to different mediterranean regions including
              western North America, Chile, the Mediterranean, western Australia and South
              Africa.  In rattlesnakes, both DNA sequence information and microsatellite loci
              will be applied to genetic comparisons of spatially isolated North American
              species.  These data will provide valuable information on the genetic structure
              both within and between snake populations.  Relationships among large forest
              mammals will be analyzed using DNA sequence data in conjunction with
              computer-based phylogenetic analyses.  These data will contribute to the
              conservation management of large forest mammals and nesting marine turtles on
              Bioko Island.

The primary purpose of these DNA sequence studies is to
              enhance undergraduate education in biology at Arcadia University.  DNA sequence
              technology is rapidly becoming the method of choice for a broad spectrum of
              biological-based questions.  The development of new pharmaceutical drugs, the
              identification of virulent flu viruses, research on the AIDS virus, the human
              genome project and conservation management of biodiversity are just a few
              examples of studies that use DNA sequence technology.  By incorporating DNA
              sequence methods into plant biology, advanced genetics and molecular biology
              courses, students will gain an understanding of the wide application DNA
              technology has to diverse biological questions.  Students will be trained both
              in theoretical and applied analyses of DNA sequence data.  An additional goal
              is to offer courses in advanced laboratory techniques to faculty from other
              small liberal arts colleges and to high school teachers.  Ultimately, this
              research program constitutes a powerful heuristic tool for educating and
              training the next generation of young scientists and teachers.  This program
              has a direct benefit to the public by training students who will teach and
              conduct research on problems that directly impact human society.


