Title       : A Novel Temperature Adaptive Nano-crystalline Dry Lubricant plus Hard Phase
               Composite Coating for Cutting Tools and Advanced Machining Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0115532

Award Number: 0115532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287999             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Brown wdb@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ajay P. Malshe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharad N. Yedave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1468,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is to design, develop and test a novel temperature adaptive and
              nano-crystalline dry lubricant (MoS2+ZnO) plus hard phase (TiN) composite
              coating for cutting tools and advanced machining applications. The
              nano-crystalline dry lubricant (MoS2+ZnO) particulate coating will be deposited
              using an innovative electrostatic spray coating (ESC) process.  In this
              project, nano-crystalline ZnO particles, coated with MoS2 via a ball milling
              process, will be sprayed onto appropriate substrates using ESC.  Sequentially,
              a hard TiN phase will be infiltrated into the nano-crystalline particulate ZnO
              matrix using a chemical vapor infiltration (CVI) process.  The combination of
              ZnO + MoS2 was selected for investigation because it forms oxythiomolybdates
              and molybdates, which have exhibited an excellent potential for high
              temperature applications.

The project is a collaboration between the
              Materials and Manufacturing Research Laboratories (MRL) at the University of
              Arkansas and Materials Research and Development (MRD) at  Valenite-Widia.  As a
              part of the project, students and university faculty will perform part of the
              research at Valenite.  The experience gained in this manner will be of great
              benefit to the project and will generate an outstanding workforce knowledgeable
              in the emerging area of nano-technology and advanced manufacturing.  This
              program will truly add scientific and engineering innovations to the
              state-of-the-art, and thus, will allow the investigators to competitively
              address the emerging needs of the multi-billion dollar cutting tool industry
              for low cost, temperature adaptive lubrication, even on complex surfaces.  The
              establishment of this technology and resulting products can be a major step in
              the realization of dry machining for environmentally conscious "green"
              manufacturing.

