Title       : FRG: Novel Approaches to the Search for Advanced Thermoelectric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0115732

Award Number: 0115732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis J. DiSalvo director@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this collaborative Focused Research Group (FRG) project is to
              invent a new class of thermoelectric (TE) materials that will significantly
              enhance the efficiency of cooling and power applications. Based on the theory
              of electronic and heat transport in solids, a theoretical model of
              semiconducting TE  materials has been available for several decades. However,
              no known material has all the needed electronic and thermal characteristics.
              The purpose of this collaboration is to design, synthesize and characterize new
              classes of semiconducting thermoelectric materials that exhibit high efficiency
              as device materials. Electronic structure theory will provide general
              guidelines in the search for such materials. The main impediment is the
              inability of scientists to predict the composition or structure of new
              compounds, unless they are chemically similar to known compounds. However, once
              a new material is found and its crystal structure determined, its electronic
              band structure as well as transport properties can be calculated. Thus this
              research has both strong theoretical and experimental components. A close
              interaction between the chemists, physicists and theorists and their students
              through quarterly meetings, exchange visits, and internet communication, will
              provide rapid feedback and planning of the next experiments and calculations.
              The education and research components of this interdisciplinary project are
              well integrated, and overall success in this complex project will be realized
              through exceptional synergy.
%%%

Thermoelectric (TE) materials allow the
              construction of small, purely electronic devices that provide thermal cooling
              on passing a current, or that produce electricity directly from heat. TE
              coolers eliminate the need for compressors and gasses, such as freons. However,
              current TE coolers have low efficiency (only 10 % of the maximum allowed, while
              home refrigerators operate at about 30 % of Carnot efficiency.). Yet these
              devices are used in applications where efficiency is less important than small
              size or reliability. Their use would greatly expand if the efficiency could be
              raised to 30 % or more, resulting in environmental improvements and economic
              benefits. This is an ideal training ground for students. This experimental and
              theoretical project is highly interactive and interdisciplinary with strong
              synergy exhibited among the participating chemists and physicists and their
              graduate and postdoctoral students. 


