Title       : US-Morocco Cooperative Research: Cenomanian-Turonian Paleoenvironment of Morocco
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0115357

Award Number: 0115357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerta Keller gkeller@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1304,5928,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0115357
Keller

Description:  This project is to support a cooperative
              research project by Dr. Gerta Keller, Department of Geosciences, Princeton,
              Princeton, New Jersey and Dr. El Hassane Chellai, Department of Geology,
              University of Cadi Ayyad, Marrakech, Morocco.  They plan to conduct a
              high-resolution study of the organic carbon rich pelagic carbonates of the
              Cenomanaian-Turonian transition exposed along NW Atlantic margin of Morocco. 
              The primary target will be the Cenomanaian-Turonian transition interval
              represented by planktic foraminiferal zones R. cushmani, W. archaeocretacea and
              H. helvetica, an interval that is represented by up to 160m of sediments along
              the Atlantic margin.  This study will provide the most detailed record of these
              global anoxic event and greenhouse conditions and serve as analogue for a
              potential future greenhouse event.  

Scope:  The PI plans to carry out a
              multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary study that documents the
              Cenomanian-Turonian anoxic event and greenhouse conditions in terms of climate,
              sea level and productivity fluctuations and their effect on marine plankton
              (e.g. planktic foraminifera and calcareous nannoplankton).  This study will
              bring together experts in sedimentology and stratigraphy, mineralogy stable
              isotopes, geochemistry, calcareous nannofossils and planktic foraminifera.  The
              project will involve graduate and undergraduate students in the field work and
              laboratory analyses thus exposing them to working in a foreign country.  An
              Egyptian scientist, Dr. A. A. Tantawy from South Valley University, Aswan,
              Egypt will also participate in the research based on his expertise in
              high-resolution age and biostratigraphy. This project meets INT criteria for
              supporting meritorious collaborative research of mutual benefit to the US and
              the foreign country.  This project is funded by the Division of International
              Programs and the Division of Earth Sciences. 
