Title       : SDEST: The Military Roots of Basic Science: American Oceanography in the Cold
               War and Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a0115260

Award Number: 0115260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140429             (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi Oreskes noreskes@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
The Military Roots of Basic Science:
American Oceanography in the
              Cold War and Beyond
Naomi Oreskes

American oceanography was built on the
              twin pillars of military funding and logistical support.  Before the 1930s
              there was no `blue water' oceanography in the United States, and the leaders of
              the field were to be found in England, Germany, and Scandinavia. By the late
              1960s, American scientists were at the forefront of the field, and their work
              was instrumental in transforming human knowledge of the deep seas. This project
              is a historical study of how this transformation occurred: how oceanographers,
              working with military patrons motivated by national security concerns, produced
              the modern scientific understanding of the oceans, the sea-floor, and the
              processes that shape the surface of the earth. The outcome is a book of
              interest to historians, philosophers, and sociologists of science, to U.S.
              historians, and to scientists and science policy analysts.  

This project
              challenges the standard model of a causal arrow from basic to applied science.
              In Cold War oceanography, `application' drove science, not the other way
              around. Yet science was not impeded: these were years of multiple, profound
              discoveries. This challenges the deeply held conviction of most scientists that
              science must be unfettered to advance. It also challenges the Mertonian
              assumption that the free and open exchange of information is critical to
              scientific advance. The evidence from oceanography is against these
              convictions.

However, while military patronage was good for oceanographic
              science, it was not always good  for scientists. Costs were paid in human,
              intellectual, and political terms. Individual scientists had their careers
              derailed by security investigations, and women were excluded or marginalized in
              the Navy- science fraternity. Intellectually, the military agenda produced
              knowledge in many areas but left persistent ignorance in others. On the
              socio-political front, fifty years of military-scientific collaboration, in
              which scientists did not have to explain their work to a larger public, has
              left a legacy of distrust among the public, and a perception that scientists
              are now more self-interested than disinterested. A major contribution of the
              study will be an analysis of the lasting legacies of military patronage, in
              oceanography, and in American science. The insights offered by the project have
              significant implications, not only for our understanding of the history of
              science, but for future science policy and funding. 

