Title       : Bioreactor Based Bone Tissue Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0115404

Award Number: 0115404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cato T. Laurencin laurencin@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed A. Attawia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A multidisciplinary project is to develop novel polymer and polymer-ceramic
              based matrices for bone tissue engineering. Using principles from chemical,
              mechanical, and materials engineering as well as cell and molecular biology,
              the goal is to create and study structural replacements that provide an
              environment appropriate for new bone formation. The development of a matrix of
              this sort combined with novel tissue culture technology provides opportunities
              for studying polymer-cell interactions, polymer matrix effects on cellular
              response, and effects of transport on cellular response in matrix based
              systems. Moreover these matrices may find clinical applications in grafting of
              non-unions, surgical arthrodeses, cranio-facial defects, and prosthetic
              implants and/or implant coatings. The researchers recently described the
              development of novel degradable microsphere-based matrices for bone tissue
              engineering. In preliminary studies these three-dimensional matrices have been
              shown to support the growth and maturation of osteoblast cells in vitro, and
              support the formation of bone in vivo. In the panned project these systems
              would be developed further and optimized these systems by performing innovative
              experiments aimed at understanding and enhancing bone formation using three
              dimensional matrices. The matrix would be exposed to fluid and nutrient flux
              via placement in a dynamic cell culturing environment. 

The researchers have
               hypothesized that in conditions where transport is enhanced, the quality of
              bone formation will ultimately be enhanced in such matrix systems.
              Additionally, a more fundamental understanding of the manner in which cells
              interact with these degradable polymeric matrices is to be sought. Therefore
              studies are proposed to evaluate cell surface receptor expression of
              osteoblasts seeded onto these biomimetic devices. Finally, in vivo studies will
              be performed, examining the ability of these tissue engineered bioreactor
              cultured matrices to heal non-union bone defects. Careful attention will be
              given to the mechanical strength of the healing defect and the short- and
              long-term histology and histomorphometry at the defect site. 

The studies to
              be performed in a four year time-frame should yield important new fundamental
              information broadly applicable in tissue engineering.The planned investigation
              builds on the foundation of 3-D polymer scaffolds from polymer microspheres
              developed by the PI in previously funded NSF studies.The major direct benefit
              from a successful project would be the nearly 1 million patients each year who
              have surgeries that require some form of bone grafting. Presently there is no
              consensus on the optimized scaffold design parameters, e.g. mechanical
              strength, pore volume, pore size, and degradation rate. All of these issues are
              to be addressed in the project.  

