Title       : IERI/REC: Planning an Infrastructure to Support Ambitious Science for Urban
               School Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0115716

Award Number: 0115716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis M. Gomez l-gomez@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Marx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony S. Bryk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Reiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Shrader  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This planning grant proposal will examine the professional development
              experiences that are most likely to help children in urban settings to be more
              successful learners of "ambitious" science. To do so, the PIs will create a
              data system that allows for detailed articulation of the ways that teachers'
              opportunities for growth translate into learning outcomes for children.  The
              model for the work begins with actual classroom practices, then examines
              student growth (defined by achievement test scores) and the kinds of
              development experiences that result in successful student learning. 
              Specifically, the planning grant with refine and develop new measures of
              student learning; develop a coding scheme for professional development
              experiences; refine and codify the PIs existing scheme for analyzing classroom
              practice; and use test cases to explore the feasibility of the
              methodology.

Panel Summary: The panel was enthusiastic about the importance
              and scope of the study and viewed the ideas about enactment and the
              conceptualization of change in the proposal particularly favorably.  The
              concerns raised by the panel included: the project is very ambitious given the
              eighteen-month timeframe; and the proposal is short on detail in both
              methodology and theory. However, panelists understood that some of the
              conceptualizations would necessarily be somewhat vague in a planning grant.
An
              additional concern included the commitment of the PIs in other research
              projects. 

Analysis: The panelists felt that this was a planning grant with
              potential to yield important new measures and understandings regarding links
              between teacher professional development and student learning.  The PIs are
              highly qualified.  In spite of concerns about the ambition of the project and
              the vagueness of some aspects of the underlying theory and methodology, the
              Program Officer agrees with the panel that this planning grant holds great
              promise for producing information that will be helpful to schools and those
              interested in science reform.  However, the PIs should take care to address the
              concerns raised in the review in the submission of a full proposal.

Program
              Director Recommendation: Based on the ratings received in the panel review, the
              comments contained in the written reviews, the panel discussion, and the
              analysis described above, I recommend that this proposal be funded for 18
              months as a standard grant at the level of $278,504.

