Title       : Organizational Innovation and Interactive Technology among NGOs in Postsocialist
               Eastern Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0115378

Award Number: 0115378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316592             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Stark dcs36@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This ambitious proposal by a researcher experienced at Eastern Bloc
              investigation seeks to examine organizational innovation and interactive
              technology use among Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in Postsocialist
              Eastern Europe, with the collaborative assistance of local on-site associates
              and foreign counterpart investigators and hosts. Drawing upon recent
              developments in organization theory, especially work at the Santa Fe institute
              on self-organizing, non-hierarchical systems as organizational forms that have
              the requisite flexibility for continuing adaptability in rapidly changing
              environments, the researchers propose to study the coevolution of
              organizational forms and interactive technologies by focusing on NGOs in four
              East Central European Societies, gathering data from 100 NGOs in Poland, the
              Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary. Data collection will include field
              surveys augmented by in-depth, ethnographic studies of 20 of these
              organizations to provide more nuanced accounts of the lines of causation among
              critical variables in the study.
NGOs are particularly appropriate for study
              because they are increasingly being pushed to move beyond their existing roles
              to facilitate economic and social dynamism, assisting their societies in
              developing sources of innovation and the capacity to generate it. Such capacity
              depends on both a rich associational life (badly atrophied under communism) and
              a requisite variety of organizational forms (which did not exist under
              communism). Information technology can play an important role in facilitating
              both aspects of generative capability.
By examining variation across types of
              organizations among countries in the region, the researchers will chart how
              innovation in the adoption and use of interactive technologies is shaped by
              organizational form and, in turn, how new technologies facilitate
              organizational innovation. This study's robust and contemporary theoretical
              grounding and its multidisciplinary, multicultural setting promise especially
              interesting insights, especially as so much of prior organizational theory has
              been colored by a North American bias and the assumption of universality in
              findings.

