Title       : Integrated Electromagnetic/Thermal/Mechanical Analysis for MEMS Reliability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0115222

Award Number: 0115222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kazuhiro Saitou kazu@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Volakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katsuo Kurabayashi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal will identify and overcome the difficulty associated with the
              reliable operation of MEMS devices, RF-MEMS in particular. This objective is
              addressed through the integrated modeling of 
              electromagnetic/thermal/mechanical couplings in MEMS devices, experimental
              validation of the model, and quantification of the coupling effects for device
              reliability.

To meet the need of simulating RF MEMS, the proposal research
              aims at the development of an integrated multi-physics model and its
              experimental verification. Research issues are 1) what is the coupling among
              electromagnetic, thermal, and mechanical effects in MEMS, 2) what numerical
              solution algorithms are suitable for an integrated multi-domain model, 3) what
              types of experiments can effectively verify the multi-domain coupling models.
              Each research issue is approached as follows (in numerical order):

1. The
              model will be developed for 1) Joule heating caused by RF excitation, 2)
              thermal strain caused by temperature change, 3) electrostatic pressure caused
              by the electric field, and 4) electric charge redistribution caused by
              mechanical deformation.

2. Considering the size and possible ill-condition
              of the FE matrix resulting from the proposed multi-physics model, the
              incomplete LU (ILU) preconditioner developed by a PI, will be used with robust
              solvers based on GMRES.

3. The direct observation of temperature
              distribution of a RF-MEMS switch during its operation will be done using a high
              resolution infrared imaging system and a high-speed digital signal analyzer, to
              verify the developed coupling model.

This project combines our modeling and
              experimental expertise in electromagnetic, thermal, and mechanical science and
              engineering to address the highly multidisciplinary reliability problems
              associated with RF MEMS applications.  Our theoretical and experimental tasks
              are very complementary to each other and will serve well to achieve our
              research goals. The aimed simulation tool, combined with our experimental
              capabilities, will help us develop RF MEMS with high performance and
              reliability, and will significantly contribute to technologies related to
              wireless telecommunications.

