Title       : Collaborative Research: Understanding and Cultivating the Transition from
               Arithmetic to Algebraic Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0115635

Award Number: 0115635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $783126             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Koedinger Ken.Koedinger@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative research project between three universities. The project
              is a comprehensive, systemic research and development program addressing three
              inter-related tiers of study: student learning and development; teacher
              beliefs, knowledge, and practice; and professional development.  The project is
              grounded in both sound theory of how students develop algebraic reasoning and
              acquire domain knowledge and skills and in the beliefs and existing practices
              of teachers.  In the student tier a detailed developmental model of students'
              evolving algebraic reasoning and skill acquisition will be constructed
              concentrating on the transition from arithmetic to algebraic reasoning. In the
              teaching tier a promising pedagogical approach, Bridging Instruction, will be
              tested. In the professional development tier a teacher professional development
              prototype will be implemented. The prototypeT extends an existing technology
              based approach. It enables the evaluation of a scalable model of teacher
              professional development. Technology is a central aspect of this project.  The
              findings of this research will be implemented into a coherent educational
              program for students and teachers using Algebra Cognitive Tutors and the STEP
              web teacher professional development environments.


