Title       : SDEST: Relational Artifacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0115668

Award Number: 0115668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherry Turkle sturkle@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In the past decade, there has been a movement in the design of computational
              objects toward "relational artifacts," computational objects designed to
              present themselves as having affective states that are influenced by the
              objects' interactions with human beings. They include digital dolls for
              children and for the homebound elderly, for whom they can double as
              health-monitoring systems. The designers of such systems incorporate models of
              human and animal cognition and build machines that learn from experience and
              adapt over time. In turn, experiences with such machines provide users and
              designers with powerful "objects to think with" about how their own minds work,
              and about what is special about being a person. This award funds data
              collection to examine a range of psychological, cultural, and ethical questions
              raised by relational artifacts. The investigator will explore and document the
              experiences of the groups having "first contact" with relational artifacts:
              designers, children, `early adopters', and the elderly. The methodology
              includes ethnographic fieldwork, observations, and interviews; sites include
              academic and corporate laboratories, children's after-school programs, elder
              housing, and individual subjects' homes. Interviews and observations will be
              taped and transcribed; results will be disseminated in published papers,
              presentations at conferences, and in a monograph. The investigator for this
              project has already launched preliminary pilot studies on this topic. She
              proposes that this new kind of computational object provokes striking changes
              in the ways people categorize and assign value to qualities such as "emotion,"
              "relationship," and "aliveness." The dynamic between a person and an
              interactive, evolving, "caring" machine is not the same as the relationship one
              might have with another person, a pet, or a cherished inanimate object. This
              research project will explore the nature and implications of this new sort of
              relationship. Its goal is to better understand how experiences with relational
              artifacts affect people's sense of who they are and their place in the world.
