Title       : Dissertation Research: A wonderful world of reason and imagination': The
               Production and Representation of Automata in Late Enlightenment and Early
               Romantic Germany 1750-1820
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0115023

Award Number: 0115023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5832               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Dear prd3@cornell.edu  (Project Director current)
              Adelheid Voskuhl  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research proposal requests support to improve a dissertation
              on the construction and representation of automata in Late Enlightenment and
              Early Romantic Germany (1750-1820). The dissertation will investigate the ways
              in which "artificial humans", their philosophical accounts, their
              epistemological use, and their literary representation intersected with each
              other in this particular time period. The project will analyze this complex on
              three different levels. On the level of epistemology and natural philosophy, it
              will explore how automata were constructed both as models of the embodied
              individual and as models of the human inquirer into nature. On the level of
              literary and symbolic representation, it will look at the ways in which
              automata were productive in provoking accounts or ideas of the extent to which
              humans are machines, and the extent to which machines are human. Exemplary
              sources for this level of analysis are literary accounts. German-speaking
              writers in this period are well-known for their explorations of
              "Maschinenmenschen". On the level of the actual material artifacts, finally, it
              will investigate closely the nature and the functioning of various automata,
              taking them seriously as historical "sources". The project presupposes that
              artifacts in general inevitably suggest, and often require, specific kinds of
              reactions and interactions on the part of a user or on the part of a spectator,
              and it thus aims to develop an acute sense of their limits and capabilities
              both as highly sophisticated exemplars of craftsmanship as well as devices that
              provoked thought and wonder. Very important exemplars of automata are to be
              found in museums all over continental Europe, in particular in Munich, Vienna,
              Paris and Neuchatel (Switzerland). .  Funds will support research expenses to
              museums and archives in Munich, Neuchatel, Switzerland, Cambridge, UK, and
              Paris, as well as the Jena area. Textual resources that relate directly to the
              automata are available in the respective archives of the museums. Funds also
              support visual recording equipment. 


