Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Determining Early Elite Strategies
               through Household Excavations in the northern Lake Titicaca Basin of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0115233

Award Number: 0115233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Aldenderfer m.aldenderfer@ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Mark S. Aldenderfer, Elizabeth Klarich will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation during the summer and fall of 2001. She will
              direct excavations at Pucara (200 BC- AD 400), a site located in the
              northwestern Lake Titicaca Basin of Peru at an elevation of 3950 masl. During
              the Upper Formative Period, Pucara was one of two major population centers in
              the Titicaca region. The site has been characterized as an early urban center,
              a ceremonial center, the center of a complex chiefdom, and more generally as
              the center of a ceramic style region. Previous archaeological research at
              Pucara has clarified the layout of the monumental public architecture and
              surrounding mound complexes, defined Classic Pukara decorated ceramics and
              monoliths, and located two areas of distinct residential architecture within
              the 1 km2 site. 

Within early complex societies such as Pucara, elites gain
              and maintain power using a number of economic, political, and social
              strategies. There are three major models for Pukara polity organization, each
              emphasizing different strategies used by elites during the Upper Formative
              Period. While the models have the potential to provide significant insights,
              each is based on only limited excavation data from the site. Consequently, it
              is impossible to evaluate these models without collecting additional data. The
              proposed excavations will be conducted in a central area of residential
              architecture in order to understand the organization of elite domestic economy
              in this early regional center. Broad, horizontal areas will be excavated in
              order to locate contemporaneous activity areas and determine general household
              organization within elite compounds. These compounds, originally located in
              1939 by Alfred Kidder II, are not visible on the modern ground surface.
              Excavation blocks have been selected based on geophysical survey data (ground
              penetrating radar and cesium magnetometer) collected during the fall of 2000.
              Excavation data from households-- the predominant location of production,
              consumption, and distribution activities within preindustrial societies-- will
              be used to determine what type of economic, political, and ritual strategies
              were involved in the development and maintenance of Pukara elites. 

The rise
              of complex societies occurred independently in many parts of the world Although
              historical contingency played a role in shaping individual trajectories,
              through cross region comparison archaeologists gain insight into common
              underlying processes. MS Klarich's research will provide additional information
              on one such case. It will yield data of interest to many archaeologists and
              assist in training a promising young scientist.

