Title       : Collaborative Research: Designing Responsive Product and Service Fulfillment
               Networks using Dynamic Adaptive Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0115304

Award Number: 0115304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anantaram Balakrishnan anantb@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rita Vachani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative research project addresses a new large-scale optimization
              model, called Network Design with Service Guarantees (NDSG), that
              simultaneously incorporates revenue, cost, and service (end-to-end delay)
              considerations.  Though of immense practical significance, the NDSG model is
              very difficult to solve both from theoretical and computational perspectives. 
              The goal is to develop and test effective solution procedures using
              state-of-the-art optimization techniques that can exploit the NDSG problem's
              special mathematical structure.  Accordingly, the project entails both
              theoretical and empirical investigations, including developing and
              characterizing alternative problem formulations, analyzing their structural
              properties, designing specialized solution algorithms, and testing these
              methods using realistic data.  To solve the problem, a new family of
              optimization algorithms that dynamically reformulates the problem, and
              correspondingly adapts the solution approach by combining decomposition and
              model strengthening techniques will be investigated.  It is  expected that the
              core research contributions-a new modeling paradigm, a novel solution approach,
              and algorithmic implementation-will also extend to other large-scale
              optimization models.  Communication and physical distribution capabilities have
              become critical in the new networked economy.  Organizations have come to rely
              on these capabilities to establish tightly integrated partnerships that can
              effectively serve diverse market needs for products and services.  Delays or
              failures in the movement of information or goods can have debilitating
              consequences not only for supply chains but also for services such as emergency
              operations, air traffic control, and financial systems.  Decisions regarding
              the configuration of communication and distribution networks needed to support
              coordination and collaboration have strategic importance both because they
              entail massive investments of billions of dollars and because a network's
              topological design largely determines the level of service it can provide. 
              Consequently, optimization tools are widely used in practice to design product
              and service fulfillment networks, and network design continues to be a very
              active research area.  

Designing optimal network configurations entails
              complex tradeoffs between conflicting objectives such as maximizing
              profitability, ensuring adequate resource utilization, improving service
              levels, and so on.  Classical optimization models, which focus primarily on
              cost minimization, tend to design sparse networks that exploit economies of
              scale but are not robust in terms of service and reliability. The project will
              provide opportunities for graduate students to conduct thesis research, and
              enrich graduate courses in optimization and operations modeling.


