Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a CCD Single Crystal X-ray Diffraction System for a
               Partnership of Maine Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0115832

Award Number: 0115832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca R. Conry rrconry@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice E. Bruce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry J. Tracy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel N. Austin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Broene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
              Department of Chemistry at Colby College will acquire a X-ray diffractometer
              with CCD detector for small molecule diffractometry. This equipment will be
              used by five educational institutions in Maine:  Colby College, Bates College,
              Bowdoin College, the University of Southern Maine and the University of Maine. 
              The X-ray CCD diffractometer will enhance research in a number of areas
              including  1) studies of copper-arene chemistry; 2) development of new
              synthetic methods of selected natural products; 3) synthesis of polycyclic cage
              compounds with unusual architecture; 4) structure-function relationships in
              metalloenzymes and metalloenzymes mimics; and 5) production of C-2 symmetric
              lanthanocene catalyst systems and their utility in the construction of chiral
              molecules.  

The X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
              measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule, including
              bond distances and angles, and it provides accurate information about the
              spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to the neighboring molecules. 
              These studies will have an impact in a number of areas, including organic and
              natural products synthesis plus biological, organometallic and materials areas
              of inorganic chemistry.  The instrument will play a major supporting role in
              the research efforts of all of the participating institutions, which range from
              bachelor's level to Ph.D.-granting schools.  In addition, the diffraction
              system will be used for the formal education of students in advanced chemistry
              courses utilizing the capability of the diffractometer to be run off site.  
