Title       : Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMO): LSAMP-California
               Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Phase III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0115115

Award Number: 0115115
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph J. Cicerone rjcicero@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra J. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicolaos G. Alexopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One of 28 national alliances, CAMP is entering the ninth year of a ten-year
              cooperative
agreement between the National Science Foundation and UC Irvine,
              the lead campus and
administrative center. The primary numerical goal is to
              double the number of B.S. degrees
granted to underrepresented students in SMET
              (science, mathematics, engineering, technology)
majors at the University of
              California. Offered at the eight general UC campuses, CAMP has
created a
              systemwide network of faculty, program staff and students working toward a
              common
set of measured outcomes. Goals include completion of the B.S. degree,
              preparation for and
transition to graduate school or the professional
              workplace. The program serves undergraduates
through enrichment opportunities
              and faculty mentored research supported by stipends. This
effort has
              contributed to a 78% increase in B.S. degrees granted by UC from the baseline
              year
(1990-91). Activities center on faculty mentored research experiences,
              collaborative learning,
presenting at scientific conferences, science writing
              and co-authorship, technology literacy, and
preparation for graduate school.
              Student achievement is disseminated through the Quarterly and
on-line,
              www.camp.uci.edu. A permanent allocation through the UC Regents
              Diversity
Initiative supports program infrastructure, administration, and
              expansion. Using a synergistic
approach, the California Alliance collaborates
              with affiliated initiatives such as UC LEADS and
AGEP (Alliance for Graduate
              Education and the Professoriate) that enhance baccalaureate degree
completion
              and continuation to advanced study. Responding to the paucity of minorities
              in
faculty positions in the university and nationwide, special emphasis is
              being placed on
encouraging students to prepare for a career in academia, and
              entering the professoriate. The
CAMP mission: Scientists and engineers are
              best prepared by other scientists and engineers who
exhibit and expect
              scholarly excellence.
