Title       : Development of an Ultrabroad Bandwidth Source for Ultrafast Observation and
               Control of Physical, Chemical, and Biological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0115797

Award Number: 0115797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Reitze reitze@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Tanner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Hagen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valeria D. Kleiman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Angerhofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation will support instrument
              development at the University of Florida. A group of physicists and chemists
              with a common need for broadband spectroscopic probing of materials with
              ultrafast time resolution have teamed together to develop a high brightness,
              high repetition rate femtosecond laser chirped pulse amplifier system capable
              of providing high intensity pulses over a range of wavelengths spanning 3
              decades from 200 nm to 20 microns.  Pulses with temporal duration approaching
              10 femtoseconds and intensities nearing 100 Petawatts per square centimeter
              will be delivered at a repetition rate of 10 Kilohertz.  In addition, the
              instrument will have the capability to 'sculpt' temporal pulse shapes to
              produce 'pulse shapes on demand'. Applications will include investigations of
              ultrafast chemical reactions in dendrimers, studies of nonlinear optical
              properties of carbon nanotubes, investigations of protein folding, and coherent
              control of solid state phase transitions and molecular motion. The instrument
              will be operated by a campus wide shared facility serving cross disciplinary
              training ground for future scientists with programs in the application of
              ultrafast optical techniques to problems in physics, chemistry, biology and
              materials. It will allso be part of a teaching activity for undergraduate
              studenbts in science  and engineering through established NSF-funded summer REU
              programs.


This award from the Major Research Instrumentation will support
              instrument development at the University of Florida. A group of physicists and
              chemists with a common need for broadband spectroscopic capability to probe
              materials with ultrafast time resolution will develop a high brightness, high
              repetition rate femtosecond laser chirped pulse amplifier system capable of
              providing high intensity pulses over a range of wavelengths. The instrument
              will have the capability to 'sculpt' temporal pulse shapes to produce 'pulse
              shapes on demand'. Applications will include investigations of ultrafast
              chemical reactions in dendrimers, studies of nonlinear optical properties of
              carbon nanotubes, investigations of protein folding, and coherent control of
              solid state phase transitions and molecular motion. The instrument will be
              operated by a campus wide shared facility serving cross disciplinary training
              ground for future scientists with programs in the application of ultrafast
              optical techniques to problems in physics, chemistry, biology and materials. It
              will also be part of a teaching activity for undergraduate students in science
              and engineering through established NSF-funded summer REU programs.  

