Title       : Tunable Laser for Characterizing Ultra Dense Wavelength Selective Devices and
               Integrated Optic Systems for Fiber Telecom Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a0115672

Award Number: 0115672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19333              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond K. Kostuk kostuk@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph H. Simmons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Ziolkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the goals of optical fiber communication system design and development is
              the realization of the full 25 THz bandwidth capability of this transmission
              medium. One approach currently being pursued is to transmit a large number of
              spectral channels at high modulation rates within the gain profile of doped
              optical fiber amplifiers. Therefore in order for new device technologies to be
              acceptable they must be characterized with high spectral resolution probes
              (0.10-0.20 nm; 10-25 GHz at 1550 nm) over relatively large spectral bandwidths
              (C-Band: 1528-1561 nm; L-Band: 1561-1620 nm). One approach to accomplishing
              this task is to use a tunable laser source to probe the device to measure its
              spectral properties over a range of wavelengths. The polarization of the
              incident beam can also be changed to examine the sensitivity to polarization
              variations that may occur in a length of fiber. The source output can also
              serve as a continuous wave optical source that can then be modulated with an
              external modulator to examine the performance of a modulator at different
              wavelengths. In this regard a tunable laser source is an extremely versatile
              tool for investigating many different aspects of high performance fiber optic
              devices and systems.
In addition to using a tunable laser source for research
              purposes it also is a very useful instrument for education purposes. It can be
              used in laboratory experiments that evaluate devices found in modern fiber
              optic communications systems such as fiber Bragg gratings, spectral gain
              variation of optical amplifiers, and amplifier gain equalization techniques. In
              addition it can be used to train both undergraduate and graduate students in
              DWDM device characterization techniques.
The purpose of this proposal is a
              request for a tunable laser diode with a spectral resolution of 0.02 rim and a
              tuning range from 1510-1580 nm. This source will provide our lab with the
              capability to investigate the performance of devices and materials for
              wavelength selective operations in fiber optic communications systems. it will
              also allow us to significantly improve the quality and relevance of laboratory
              experiments that we can offer in our classes on fiber optics and undergraduate
              and graduate research projects. A source of this type is currently not
              available for our research and educational facilities and is a significant
              obstacle to our efforts. The importance of acquiring an instrument of this type
              is underscored by the commitment from the University of Arizona to cost share
              one-third of the cost of the laser.

