Title       : Micro-Scale Characterization of Machining Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0115467

Award Number: 0115467
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivasan Chandrasekar chandy@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas N. Farris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Dale Compton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The machining interface represents a situation where important phenomenological
              events occur over small spatial and short time scales.  By combining various
              optical techniques with the use of transparent cutting tools; e.g., sapphire,
              diamond, it is possible to directly observe and analyze these events by
              magnifying their length and time scales.  Having a visual record frequently
              gives clues to the physical processes taking place and is often advantageous in
              showing "what is and what isn't happening."  The nature of contact along the
              tool-chip-work interfaces, and the temperature distribution at these contact
              zones, will be studied in a novel series of experiments using optically
              transparent tools, high-resolution optical microscopy, high-speed, CCD-based,
              multi-wavelength infra-red (IR) pyrometry and high-speed micro-photography. 
              Preliminary observations show that a complete characterization of the contact
              boundary conditions (e.g. extent of sticking, sliding zones, etc.) and the
              first detailed map of the complete temperature and velocity distributions at
              these interfaces can be achieved with the use of these techniques.  The effect
              of parameters such as cutting speed both in the conventional and high speed
              machining regime, tool geometry, tool wear, and tool coatings, on the contact
              conditions and interface temperatures is being explored.  The experiments
              represent a natural and interesting evolution of previous in-situ observational
              work on the low speed cutting of metals.  The contact boundary conditions and
              the interface temperature distributions are key parameters for validation and
              refinement of models of the mechanics of machining; for control of tool
              temperatures, tool wear and work surface quality; and for realizing the long
              sought after goal of complete predictability of the machining process.

From
              a technological standpoint, the results of the research may be expected to have
              a major impact in enhancing the efficiency of machining processes, enabling the
              design of tools and coatings for reducing wear and reducing the application of
              fluids in machining.
