Title       : Investigation of Embedded Heat Pipes in Cutting Tools for Dry Machining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0115620

Award Number: 0115620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Y. Chiou ychiou@nimbus.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shih-Jiun Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to support research in building the theoretical
              basis and knowledge base in embedded heat pipe technology for elimination of
              the use of cutting fluids in the machining industry.  This research project
              adopts a new heat transfer concept for environmentally conscious cutting tool
              design. This research project will conduct the following investigations: (1)
              characterization of the embedded heat pipe systems in cutting tools; (2)
              thermodynamic and heat transfer finite element analyses to predict the
              temperature distribution of the specific cutting process; (3) evaluation of the
              performance of the embedded heat pipe for tool wear analysis. The cutting rake
              insert, heat pipe container, wick structure, and working fluids are design
              parameters to adjust the temperature distribution. The proposed research will
              lead to the development of predictive models for heat transfer behavior, and
              experimental investigation and predictive modeling of the tool wear due to the
              embedded heat pipes in cutting tools in machining processes. The outcome of
              these studies will be useful for dry machining in industry.

The impact of
              this research will facilitate the temperature control optimization in the use
              of the heat pipe in achieving a balance between process productivity and
              environmental consciousness. The models can then be used in selecting
              experimental conditions to explore, to interpret the experimental results, and,
              ultimately, to guide industrial tool design for dry machining.  Finally, the
              research results within this program will be integrated with education through
              interdisciplinary activities in curriculum development, Alliance for Minority
              Participation, high school joint research programs, university/industry
              seminars and conferences, and web information center.

