Title       : An Integrated Head for Optically Assisted (Hybrid) Magnetic Recording
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0115836

Award Number: 0115836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Bain jbain@ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tuviah E. Schlesinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT for Proposal No. ECS-0115836

Hybrid recording is a new recording
              paradigm that seeks to overcome
fundamental physical limits of existing
              magnetic and optical recording
technologies. Hybridization combines thermally
              assisted magnetic writing
with giant magnetoresistive readback, to circumvent
              the physical limits
of both magnetic and optical recording. This approach
              breaks the
coupling seen in magnetic recording systems among the size of a
              bit, the
field required to write it and the length of time for which
              the
information is stable. Thus, magnetic grains in the medium smaller
              than
10 nm can be stabilized, which is a critical advance for
              reaching
densities of 1 terabit/in2 and beyond. These advances will only
              be
possible, however, if a plausible head design is demonstrated
              that
integrates magnetic write poles with a localized source
              (probably
optical) of thermal energy. An essential insight being pursued for
              this
technology is how to apply magnetic write fields and heat, as well
              as
perform MR readback with a single packaged device from a single side
              of
the disk. It is the goal of this project to design, prototype, and
              test
devices suitable for this application. Specific novel devices that
              will
be investigated will include two-dimensional mode-index lenses,
              and
near-field optical antenna structures. The Data Storage Systems
              Center
(DSSC) at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) and GOALI
              collaborator,
Seagate Technology, has extensive experience in the design
              and
implementation of new head designs. The collaboration on head
fabrication
              will include a program of co-design with Seagate
researchers, joint wafer
              fabrication, and post-fabrication modification
of existing heads. It is
              anticipated that the result of this
academic-industrial collaboration will be
              a demonstration of a plausible
integrated head design for hybrid recording,
              which will remove an
important barrier to the advancement and eventual
              commercialization of
this technology.

