Title       : Development of High Energy Resolution Inelastic X-ray Scattering Instrument for
               Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0115852

Award Number: 0115852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Stephens peter.stephens@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ercan E. Alp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miles V. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clement Burns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program State
              University of New York at Stony Brook in partnership with several other
              universities and Argonne National Laboratories will build an optimized,
              high-resolution inelastic x-ray scattering beamline at the Advanced Photon
              Source.  The instrument will be completely dedicated to this technique, and as
              such will be the only general-purpose meV resolution x-ray scattering
              spectrometer in the United States.  It will serve a large community of users
              working on many different problems: dynamics of matter at very high pressure,
              picosecond dynamics of soft condensed matter and biological systems, high
              temperature superconductivity, etc.  It will be of high system resolution of
              0.8 meV (FWHM), and be able to probe a large range of wave vectors, up to
              several inverse Angstrom.
The design is dictated by the desire to reach sub
              meV energy resolution.  This requires the use of diced (segmented) crystals in
              backscattering geometry for analyzers, a novel nested monochromator to produce
              a very clean resolution function, and a cryogenically cooled monochromator for
              maximum x-ray flux.  The analyzers must be located eight to ten meters away
              from the sample, which dictates a large hutch and novel spectrometer
              designs.
The instrument will be available to members of the collaborative
              access team (CAT) as well as to a broad group of independent
              investigators.


For the hundred years since their discovery, x-rays have
              enhanced our understanding of the invisible world. The most familiar example is
              direct imaging of specimens ranging from the cardiac arteries of a beating
              human heart to pipeline welds and airplane baggage. The technique has enabled
              us to understand and control how the fundamental principles of how atoms fit
              together to make molecules, the materials of our daily lives (minerals, steel,
              semiconductors), and the fundamental elements of life (DNA and proteins). All
              of these techniques depend on using x-rays in one way or another to take
              snapshots of a sample.  This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
              Program to SUNY Stony Brook supports the development of an emerging technique
              involving the use of x-rays to measure dynamics (motion) of atoms on time
              scales that are inaccessible to other techniques.  Among the problems to be
              studied are sound waves in solids at conditions in the core of the earth, the
              way that liquids freeze, and the way that proteins fold once they are formed. 
              Many of the most interesting applications require measuring the energy of the
              x-ray to a precision of one part in thirty million.  This requires very special
              instrumentation, and the very intense source of x-rays available at the
              Advanced Photon Source. There is currently no such dedicated beamline in the
              US. The instrument will serve a broad community access team users, with a
              planned strong outreach program to involve people who are not technical experts
              in x-ray optics.  Furthermore, it is planned to be the most intense and highest
              resolution inelastic x-ray scattering station in the world.

