Title       : A New DNA Repair System for N6-Hydroxylaminopurine and other Base Analogs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0115188

Award Number: 0115188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Cunningham moose@cnsunix.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It has been shown that replication forks formed at the origin of replication in
              Escherichia coli are not likely to circumnavigate the chromosome and finish a
              round of synthesis during normal cell growth.  Replication forks are apparently
              derailed by endogenous DNA damage, and these forks must be reactivated in order
              to ensure cell division and bacterial cell survival.  Reactivation requires
              homologous recombination functions and a replication restart primosome.  The
              nature of the lesions that are formed under normal growth conditions are not
              well defined and may be either base lesions or strand breaks.  Preliminary data
              suggest a connection between purine nucleoside metabolism and a form of DNA
              repair that results in stalled replication forks. The purine analog
              hydroxylaminopurine (HAP) will be used to mimic the effects of mutations that
              disrupt a repair pathway in E. coli.  It is suggested that the endogenous
              lesions that block replication forks in E. coli under normal growth conditions
              arise from purine analogs that are converted into nucleoside triphosphates and
              then incorporated into DNA by replicative polymerases.  This hypothesis leads
              to many predictions and raises many questions. Is it possible to identify the
              specific mechanism for HAP-induced cell killing? Can HAP be used as a probe of
              the enzymatic processes that remove endogenous aberrant purine nucleotide
              triphosphates from the replication precursor pool? Is it possible to identify
              the nucleoside triphosphates in E. coli under normal growth conditions that
              trigger replication fork arrest and restart?    In order to answer these
              questions all the genes involved in the formation of nucleoside triphosphates
              containing base analogues and the subsequent removal of these compounds from
              nucleoside and nucleotide pools and from DNA will be identified. 
