Title       : GOALI: Computer-Aided Design (CAD) Guided Sensor Planning for Surface Inspection
               in Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0115355

Award Number: 0115355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ning Xi xin@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mumin Song  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1463,1504,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
              (GOALI) research is to develop a general Computer-Aided Design (CAD)-based
              method for constraint-satisfying robot motion planning in manufacturing.  In
              particular, the research will focus on CAD-based inspection planning, namely,
              the automatic planning of the inspection sensor, or camera carried by a robotic
              device, based on given CAD model of the inspected parts. First, a CAD-based
              sensor planning approach will be developed that utilizes the part geometric
              information from the CAD model and the sensor model to generate
              constraint-satisfying sensor configurations.  Second, to improve the efficiency
              and the kinematics performance of the inspection system, two optimization
              problems are formulated: one is to find the minimum set of viewpoints, while
              the other is the optimal kinematics to observe the  viewpoints.  By using a
              discretization scheme, the former is rendered as a set-partitioning problem,
              and the later as a weighted set-covering problem.  New algorithms will be
              developed to solve these problems.  Finally, the robot motion planning problem
              in the part inspection will be investigated.  This is formulated as a Clustered
              Traveling Salesman Problem (CTSP) and a new hierarchical algorithm will be
              developed to obtain suboptimal solutions.  In addition, the theoretical results
              will be implemented and experimentally tested.

The potential contributions
              of this effort include a new methodology for optimal sensor planning for
              inspecting large areas of part surfaces.  It can be used to easily extract the
              global geometric information on the part surfaces.  The methodologies developed
              in this research could also benefit many other CAD-based planning problems such
              as spray painting and CNC part programming. This research will contribute to
              the development of technologies and human resources in the area of
              manufacturing automation.


