Title       : Collaborative Research: How Single Genes Provide Proteins to Multiple Cellular
               Compartments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2002    
File        : a0115409

Award Number: 0115409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anita K. Hopper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a collaborative research program from Dr. Anita K. Hopper,
              Penn. State Univ. Coll. Medicine and Dr. Nancy C. Martin, Univ. Louisville that
              will examine how single genes provide proteins to more than one compartment
              within cells. The discovery that this occurs emerged from observations that
              mutations affecting cytosolic tRNA modification also affect mitochondrial tRNA.
               The enzymes making these modifications were called sorting isozymes because
              they came from a single gene and carried out the same function in multiple
              cellular compartments. Previous results from these investigators showed that by
              alternative use of in-frame translation initiation codons the yeast genes TRM1,
              MOD5 and CCA1 each encode multiple isozymes. For each, the isozyme initiating
              at the first initiator codon is mitochondrial. However, for Trm1p the
              amino-terminal extension is not essential for mitochondrial import and for
              Mod5p the long form is also found in the cytosol. The shorter forms of the
              proteins can be located in nuclei and/or the cytosol. Earlier results from this
              collaborative project showed: (1) organelles can share information with the
              rest of the cell; (2) isozymes can be located in more than one compartment; (3)
              sorting information resides in additional sequences missing from the
              eubacterial and archaeal counterparts; (4) compartments may have activity
              provided by more than one isozyme; (5) mitochondrial targeting information
              located at amino termini prohibits nuclear import. Despite the advances,
              important questions remain because the mechanisms that underlie #4 and #5 are
              still not understood.  Aim I is designed to understand how Trm1p can possess
              both mitochondrial and nuclear targeting information and yet not locate to the
              nucleus. Possible mechanisms by which commitment to mitochondrial import occurs
              will be tested using a novel system developed by the investigators that
              assesses where in a cell a protein destined to mitochondria folds. Experiments
              will also be performed to learn whether mRNA sorting, cytosolic retention,
              and/or nuclear export function to prohibit nuclear accumulation of Trm1p-I.
              Sorting isozymes are not only distributed to different organelles; they have
              distinct suborganellar locations. For example, the investigators showed that
              two sorting isozymes have distinct subnuclear locations; Trm1p, is located at
              the inner nuclear membrane (INM) and Mod5p is located in the nucleoplasm and
              the nucleolus.  Goals of Aim II are to confirm and characterize motif(s)
              specifying INM location and to identify gene products that tether Trm1p to the
              INM. Yeast mutants that fail to appropriately locate Trm1p to the INM will be
              characterized. The studies in Aim II will not only address how sorting isozymes
              locate to the correct suborganellar locations, but, in addition, will provide
              information concerning nuclear architecture and nuclear biogenesis - an
              important area of cell biology not understood for any eukaryote.
