Title       : Characterization of Insulin-Dependent Glucose Transporters in a Teleost Fish
               Model, the Goby Gillichthys mirobilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0115975

Award Number: 0115975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Kelley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1114,1136,1155,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One of the most fundamental biological roles of the pancreatic hormone insulin
              is to promote cellular uptake of glucose and other fuels from the blood and
              extracellular spaces.  The development of an insulin-regulated glucose
              transporter system is arguably a key physiological adaptation that supports the
              heightened energetic demands of cells and tissues in endothermic
              ("warm-blooded") animals, such as mammals.  Conversely, in ectothermic
              vertebrates, this and other aspects of insulin-regulated metabolism are
              hypothetically less developed.  Current understanding of insulin-regulated
              cellular glucose transport has been dependent almost entirely on studies of the
              insulin-regulated GLUT-4 glucose transporter of mammals.  By contrast, the
              status of this system "before" the evolution of an endothermic physiology
              (e.g., in fishes) is not understood, due in part to the lack of available
              models of insulin deficiency in ectothermic vertebrates to facilitate
              experimental analysis of the system. 
	The objectives of the proposed studies
              are (1) to characterize a teleost fish insulin-regulated glucose transporter
              system at the molecular and cellular levels, (2) to elucidate its physiological
              role in the regulation of glucose homeostasis in this vertebrate, and (3) to
              identify the likely evolutionary differences relative to that which exist in
              mammals.  The gobiid fish, Gillichthys mirabilis, is a particularly useful
              model for such studies, since it can be experimentally manipulated into a state
              of insulin-deficiency reminiscent of type-1 diabetes mellitus.  Previous work
              on this model indicates that insulin-deficient gobies exhibit high blood
              glucose levels and a pronounced impairment of insulin-regulated glucose
              transport activity in skeletal muscle, while insulin replacement therapy
              corrects these metabolic deficiencies.  In addition, insulin treatment
              stimulates glucose clearance in vivo and muscle glucose transport in vitro.  It
              is therefore hypothesized that an insulin-regulated glucose transporter,
              related to mammalian GLUT-4, exists in muscle of this teleost fish and plays an
              important role in glucoregulation, albeit with differences likely to reflect
              the different metabolic strategies represented by the ectothermic fish versus
              endotherms.  In support of this hypothesis, recent molecular cloning data in
              the goby and some other teleost fish species have identified at least two
              different cDNAs related to mammalian GLUTs 1 & 4.  The following three specific
              aims are proposed: 1) to isolate, clone, and characterize GLUT cDNAs from goby
              muscle, principally putative GLUT4 and GLUT 1, and to develop specific
              molecular probes (cDNA, antisera) for use in subsequent biochemical analyses;
              2) to define insulin's specific regulatory actions on the muscle glucose
              transporter system in the goby, both at the level of gene expression and the
              level of the cell-physiological response to insulin; and 3) to characterize the
              interaction of insulin and the hormones that antagonize its actions (so-called
              counterregulatory hormones) in regulating the muscle GLUT system and hepatic
              metabolism, in order to advance a more integrative understanding of
              glucoregulatory physiology in this fish.  These studies should provide a novel
              biological perspective and understanding of a fundamental action of the hormone
              insulin. 

