Title       : Beyond inertia: The science of mechanics in the seventeenth century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0115154

Award Number: 0115154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27648              (Estimated)
Investigator: Domenico Meli dbmeli@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project the publication of a book tentatively titled "Beyond inertia: the
              transformation of mechanics in the seventeenth century."  In that century the
              boundaries of mechanics were greatly expanded to include the study of motion
              and other areas. The study covers all areas of mechanics as it was understood
              at different times in the century, not just the motion of projectiles and
              celestial bodies.  Therefore, the project investigates the science of waters
              and the resistance of materials.   The project's methods pay close attention to
              the role of experiments, especially quantitative experiments, and to the
              mathematics employed. The best way to capture the wealth of domains 
              progressively incorporated is to focus on the objects studied by scholars,
              including: the lever; the inclined plane; the pendulum; beams; canals; falling,
              projected, and colliding bodies; slings; springs; vibrating  cords; pierced
              cisterns; hanging chains; bodies moving in resisting media; planets,
              satellites, and comets. These objects were studied empirically, including their
              material characteristics, and in abstract form. The study of the tensions
              between material and abstract objects is one of the defining methodological
              features of the project. 

This study covers a major transition period in the
              history of the mathematical disciplines. The topic is one of the classical
              elements of the history of science and has been widely examined in history of
              science courses.  Indeed, it is so important as to be often the object of
              specialized courses, besides being included in all history of science surveys.
              However, there is no recent or reliable monograph on this central topic. The
              project advances both knowledge and science education because the book is aimed
              at both scholars in the field and graduate students. The incorporation of
              technical material in appendices makes the main portion of the book accessible
              to a wide audience.

