Title       : Improving the Producibility and Predictability of Reactive Multilayer Joining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0115238

Award Number: 0115238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy P. Weihs   (Principal Investigator current)
              Omar M. Knio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is a combined experimental and computational effort that aims at
              improving the producibility and predictability of this joining process. 
              Reactive multilayer foils are a new class of  engineered materials that can be
              used as local heat sources for joining.  These multilayer foils are comprised
              of hundreds of nanoscale layers that alternate between elements with large
              heats of mixing, such as Al and Ni.  Self-propagating reactions can be
              initiated in these foils at room temperature, and the reaction properties can
              be controlled by varying the foil composition and the thickness of individual
              layers.  By placing a reactive foil between two braze layers and two components
              and initiating the reaction, heat from the foil melts the braze layers and
              joins the components.  This new method of joining requires no vacuum furnace
              and, with very localized heating, limits the temperature that is seen by the
              bonded components.  Both advantages open new possibilities in the joining of
              temperature-sensitive components and of dissimilar materials like metals and
              ceramics.  Computationally, this research aims to analyze the effect of heat
              losses, predict the melting of braze layers, and the evolution of temperature
              in the bonded components.  Predictions will be validated against experimental
              measurements and then applied to optimize the design of reactive joining
              applications. The physical properties and microstructure of the resulting
              joints will also be characterized.  Combined, the mechanical characterizations
              and numerical predictions will provide the fundamental tools that will be
              needed to insert this new joining technology into various manufacturing
              applications.

It is expected that this research will lead to significant
              changes in industrial joining operations and to educational experiences for
              high school students from a woman's high school as well undergraduate and
              graduate students. 



