Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation to Study the Effects of Odors on Sleep Quality
               and Post-Sleep Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a0115624

Award Number: 0115624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22059              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan Raudenbush raudenbc@wju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wheeling Jesuit University
	      316 Washington Avenue
	      Wheeling, WV  260036243    304/243-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Psychophysiology Laboratory within the Department of Psychology at Wheeling
              Jesuit University will purchase equipment for the construction of a sleep
              research laboratory. The primary equipment will consist of a BioPac MP100 Data
              Acquisition System and Samadhi Light and Sound Attenuation Chamber. The BioPac
              MP100 Data Acquisition System is a flexible, easy-to-use modular system
              designed to perform data collection and analysis. The software allows for
              recording, analysis, and data filtering in real time and off-line. The software
              also provides analysis tools for EMG, EEG, ECG, EOG, plethysmography, evoked
              responses, cardiovascular hemodynamics, pulmonary function, exercise
              physiology, sleep studies, in-vitro pharmacology, and psychophysiology.
              Accessory components include the hardware unit, computer cards, manuals,
              cables, transformers, electrode leads, galvanic skin response transducer, pulse
              phethysmograph transducer, respiratory effort transducer, air flow transducer,
              reaction timer, headphones, pressure transducer, variable range force
              transducer, stimulator, blood pressure cuff, stethoscope, hand dynamometer, and
              multi-lead cables. The Samadhi Light and Sound Attenuation Chamber is a
              lightweight, portable chamber designed to provide barriers to external lights,
              sounds, and other stimulation that might otherwise disrupt normal sleep. Light
              and temperature control accessories make the sleep environment as comfortable
              as possible for the participants, while observation cameras, a two-way intercom
              system, and video recording devices are installed to provide for constant
              participant monitoring and recording. The PI will use this equipment to assess
              the impact of odorant administration on (1) physiological changes during sleep,
              (2) measures of sleep quality and duration, and (3) measures of post-sleep
              cognitive performance and wakefulness. The equipment will also be used by other
              departmental faculty members in facilitating studies on social isolation,
              echo-location, child psychopathology, and cognitive mapping. This equipment
              will enhance current departmental research capabilities and extend the
              department's ability to afford undergraduates with meaningful and
              technologically advanced research experiences.
