Title       : Development and Evaluation of a Technology-Enhanced Success for All Reading
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0115659

Award Number: 0115659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5653056            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Slavin rslavin@successforall.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy A. Madden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Abrami  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bette Chambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Success for All Foundation
	      200 W. Towsontown Blvd.
	      Towson, MD  212045200    410/616-2300

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The goal of this project is to substantially increase the emerging reading
              skills of young children by employing technology to enhance the effectiveness
              of the Success for All (SFA) reading program.  The project will develop DVD,
              video, and computer technology to improve the SFA reading, ESL, tutoring, and
              professional development components, and systematically evaluate each component
              separately and then together in an integrated program.  By carefully
              integrating technology in various of aspects of the SFA program, the PIs'
              believe it is possible to double the effect size on reading measures from .5 to
              1.0 and to halve the failure rate. A new format for instruction called DaViD
              (DVD incorporating assessment and instruction) will integrate DVD technology
              with teacher instruction, incorporating material from Between the Lions, a PBS
              program designed to enhance children's literacy.  It will incorporate
              additional video/DVD presentations to present vocabulary used in Reading Roots
              (beginning reading) lessons and to preview the content of Reading Roots
              stories.  Additionally, a computer-assisted tutoring program, the Reading CAT, 
              will be created to support the performance of the student, the teacher, and the
              tutor, by providing an electronic skills development and information hub.  The
              Reading CAT is being developed by Concordia University who is a subcontractor
              to Success for All.  The Reading CAT will be used for practice (by students),
              for assessment (by tutors and teachers), for performance support (by tutors),
              and for communication (by tutors, teachers, and the facilitator).  A large
              scale evaluation will compare schools using  all technology elements to matched
              schools using standard SFA and to control schools over a two-year period.


