Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Genomics of Quantitative Traits: Expression Level
               Polymorphisms of QTLs Affecting Disease Resistance Pathways in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0115109

Award Number: 0115109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2354230            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dina A. St. Clair dastclair@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca W. Doerge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Michelmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1116,1165,1174,1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Genomics of Quantitative Traits.  Quantitative
              differences in the expression of genes involved in disease resistance responses
              will be investigated using a functional genomics approach that involves a novel
              application of quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis to microarray data.
              Regulatory QTLs controlling natural variation in induced gene expression
              patterns (i.e., expression level polymorphisms, ELPs) through QTL analysis of
              microarray data for ELPs from genetically segregating populations will be
              identified. Dissection of regulatory networks using genetic analysis of natural
              allelic variation will provide an efficient method for searching for regulatory
              loci at the systems biology level and avoids unnatural traumatic perturbations
              to gene regulation that are caused by extreme mutations. QTL dissection of
              natural variation is complementary to mutant analysis as it is likely to reveal
              different aspects of the regulatory network controlling disease resistance than
              mutant analysis because qualitatively inherited resistance genes do not account
              for all the aspects of complex pathways.  This project aims to: 1) develop
              integrated molecular and statistical approaches for the dissection of
              quantitatively inherited traits, 2) determine if expression level polymorphisms
              involved in the variation of disease resistance pathways in Arabidopsis
              thaliana are due to regulatory QTLs, structural QTLs, or both, and 3)
              characterize individual genes at the molecular level that encode the regulatory
              QTLs. This will be accomplished by surveying accessions for natural variation
              in ELPs in response to induction of defense related pathways by a salicylic
              acid analog (dichloroisonicotinic acid) and jasmonic acid using Affymetrix
              chips for the preliminary global screen and spotted microarrays to confirm
              reproducible ELPs. Recombinant inbred lines derived from crosses between
              polymorphic accessions will then be phenotyped for ELPs using targeted DNA
              microarrays designed with novel applications of statistical methods. QTLs
              associated with ELPs will be mapped by employing an innovative application of
              established QTL mapping methodologies, including composite interval mapping and
              permutation thresholds. This approach will allow the identification of
              regulatory QTLs, a subset of which will be cloned using a combination of
              candidate gene and extreme allele approaches. Ultimately, these approaches will
              enable massively parallel QTL analysis for mRNA, protein and metabolite levels
              relative to the whole plant phenotypes.  The data generated from this project
              will be available at (www.niblrrs.ucdavis.edu) and (www.genomics.purdue.edu).  
              This project will also provide multidisciplinary training at the interface of
              quantitative and molecular genetics, statistics, and genomics for postdoctoral
              researchers, graduate students, undergraduate students, and high school
              students.
