Title       : Legal Careers and their Trajectories in the 21st Century: A National
               Longitudinal Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0115521

Award Number: 0115521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166337             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryant G. Garth b-garth@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce S. Sterling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Sander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6513

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The legal practice world is undergoing significant change: the changing
              demographics of American society and of law school applicants, combined with
              escalating student loan debt, the proliferation of "alternative" forms of
              practice in multinational and multidisciplinary organizations, and widening
              gaps between private sector and public sector salaries and between corporate
              and public interest law firms. The proposed research is a longitudinal study
              that will follow a national cohort of law school graduates, all of whom joined
              or passed the bar in calendar year 2000, for ten years following graduation.
              The researchers will rely on mailed surveys to track the careers of over 5000
              lawyers, and will conduct in-depth interviews with 500 lawyers. The study draws
              on a capital assets approach, which is a multidimensional concept integrating
              work that examines legal careers though the concepts of human and social
              capital. This approach suggests that law graduates with particular capital
              assets may be able to maximize their career opportunities and determine their
              career trajectories more easily than graduates with lesser capital
              accumulations. By examining individual choices and how they are rewarded, this
              project will provide crucial information about the forms of capital that are
              valued and rewarded within the legal profession, any geographic variation in
              this professional valuation, and how these processes of opportunity and reward
              may be changing over time. This emphasis on the career trajectories of lawyers
              will provide a research base that is critical to understanding the future of
              the legal profession, while also providing data to explore how, in different
              legal markets across the US, lawyers build their careers in different ways.
