Title       : Nano-Contact Magnetic Random Access Memory Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0115327

Award Number: 0115327
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252713             (Estimated)
Investigator: Romel D. Gomez rdgomez@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A research and educational initiative to develop a new all-metal magnetic random
              access memory device, based on nano-contact ballistic magnetoresistance and
              current-induced magnetization switching is proposed.  The following research
              goals are planned:
-       To understand the mechanisms that govern the
              electrical transport on magnetic nanoconstrictions
-       To understand the
              mechanisms for domain wall propagation using
high-speed current pulses 
-    
                To design and fabricate a prototype magnetic random accessmemory based on
              these new concepts for detection and recording.  In this project, we offer a
              completely different operating principle for magnetic random access memory
              devices (MRAMS). Instead of exploiting giant magnetoresistance in multilayer
              devices for readback, we propose a scheme which is fundamentally different from
              the conventional approach in usual MRAM'S, which rely on external currents to
              produce magnetic fields higher than the coercivity of the ferromagnetic layers.
              In this
method, we will utilize the so called "s-d exchange" interaction to
              move domain walls.  The principle is to use pulsed current to move domain walls
              in the direction of electron velocity. The educational efforts include the
              training of graduate and undergraduate students specializing
in magnetism, and
              the development of a web-based teaching tool that visually demonstrates some of
              the key aspects of magnetic behavior. This project will produce animation
              videos of magnetic phenomena derived from actual experimental results and will
              be disseminated electronically via the internet to reach a broad audience.  The
              goal is to enhance the understanding of magnetism and promote enthusiasm
              towards science and technology. These efforts will utilize the existing
              technical expertise and experimental capabilities in surface science,
              nanolithography, scanned probe microscopy, magnetic imaging, and device
              fabrication. This
project is leveraged upon the results of an NSF CAREER
              award, and represents a related but distinct research direction.


