Title       : Optical Imaging and Fluorescence Microscopy Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0115927

Award Number: 0115927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Brisch brisch@mnstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Wallert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chris J. Chastain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Provost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minnesota St Unv Moorhead
	      1104 7th Avenue South
	      Moorhead, MN  56563    218/236-2011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ellen Brisch at Minnesota State University
              Moorhead (MSUM) to build on our microscopy capabilities by upgrading our
              current Olympus IX-70 brightfield/phase contrast microscope.  The funding
              provided by this grant will allow us to incorporate cell injection, image
              capture, image analysis and high quality figure preparation capabilities into
              our teaching and research.  This equipment will be shared between the PI; Dr.
              Ellen Brisch, and three Co-PIs; Dr. Chris Chastain, Dr. Joseph Provost and Dr.
              Mark Wallert.   The equipment and instrumentation this grant will fund
              includes: a cell injection system, additional immunofluorescent filter cubes
              and high quality 100x objectives, a software package which will enable us to
              detect and quantify subtle changes in pH, an isolation table and motorized
              stage, state of the art Macintosh computers for image analysis and figure
              preparation, and microscopy training workshops. All four investigators are
              engaged in undergraduate teaching and training.  Our current goals are to
              provide a state of the art education to our undergraduates by training them on
              state of the art equipment and also to bring our research programs to a higher
              level.  
The research programs led by the investigators vary.   Dr. Brisch's
              research program focuses on how the replication and segregation of a critical
              cellular organelle, the mitochondrion, is coordinated during cell division. 
              Dr. Brisch plans to examine a collection of yeast cell cycle mutants--yeast
              cells that fail to complete the cell division cycle correctly--by staining
              mitochondria and observing them with fluorescence microscopy.  Dr. Chastain's
              research program focuses on understanding enzyme activity in the C4
              photosynthetic pathway.  Dr. Chastain plans to examine the distribution of a C4
              photosynthetic enzyme in a C3 plant by employing immunolocalization studies. 
              Drs. Wallert and Provost collaborate significantly in their research efforts. 
              Their research program focuses on how mitogenic signaling pathways alter
              intracellular pH.  They plan to perform cell injection experiments by
              microinjecting a variety of interfering agents designed to alter specific cell
              signaling pathways.  They plan to quantitate the presence or absence of subtle
              pH changes after interfering microinjections by observing levels of
              immunofluorescence.   Sophisticated software designed for calcium ratioing will
              be used for their data acquisition and analysis.
MSUM is a regional
              comprehensive university that is committed to providing high quality research
              opportunities for undergraduates.  The equipment and training package proposed
              in this application will be used to enhance the research programs of Drs.
              Brisch, Chastain, Provost and Wallert.  It will provide their students with an
              advanced level of training.  These projects will involve 25-30 students per
              year.  These students will present their work at local, regional and national
              meetings and publish their results in review journals.  Nearly 70% of the
              students involved in these projects will be women, and our history suggests
              that approximately 80% of them will continue their education in graduate or
              professional schools.  In addition, an even greater number of students would
              have exposure to this state of the art equipment, as it would also be used in a
              number of our upper division courses.  Involving students in research and
              incorporating research-based exercises in our teaching laboratories enhances
              not only the student's education, but also the effectiveness and success of our
              university.


