Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Analysis of the Ubiquitin-Protein Liagase
               (E3)Families in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0115870

Award Number: 0115870
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3310050            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Vierstra vierstra@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy Callis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Estelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xing Wang Deng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ubiquitin (Ub)/26S proteasome proteolytic pathway plays an integral role in
              the growth, development, homeostasis, and defense of plants by selectively
              removing abnormal polypeptides and short-lived regulatory proteins.  In this
              pathway, proteins are first covalently tagged with Ubs; these substrates are
              then degraded by the 26S proteasome with the concomitant release of the Ubs for
              reuse.  The Ub-protein ligases (or E3s) determine the specificity of Ub
              conjugation and hence control the selectivity of the system. Their importance
              in plants is best demonstrated by the fact that the Arabidopsis genome encodes
              over 900 different E3s.  Preliminary genetic analyses of just a few have
              identified important roles for E3s in hormone and stress responses, light
              signaling, circadian rhythms, enzymatic regulation, and pattern
              formation.

To help define the depth and breath of ubiquitination in plants,
              this project will analyze the Arabidopsis E3 families in detail.  Bioinformatic
              approaches will be used to assemble the E3s into subfamilies.  For
              representative examples, protein interaction techniques will assign each with
              appropriate accessory factors and biochemical assays will confirm that each has
              Ub-ligase activity.  Their expression patterns and locations will be examined
              by DNA microarrays and by analysis of GFP-E3 fusions.  Yeast two-hybrid and
              mass spectrometric techniques will identify possible substrates.  Functions
              will be further explored by the phenotypic analysis of appropriate Arabidopsis
              mutants. All information will be released to the scientific community in a
              freely accessible public web site
              (http://www.hort.wisc.edu/vierstra/vierstra1.htm).  The results generated will
              form an essential framework for understanding E3 diversity, help reveal
              specific functions for each E3 type, and will develop a database of proteins
              whose abundance is affected by Ub-mediated proteolysis. Collectively, the
              project will provide comprehensive information on a large and important cluster
              of Arabidopsis genes/proteins that ultimately can be used to devise new
              strategies to alter proteolysis when it interferes with crop productivity


