Title       : US-Southern Africa Cooperative Research: International Distance Learning on the
               Environment of Southern Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0115438

Award Number: 0115438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Macko sam8f@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Swap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul V. Desanker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herman H. Shugart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1066,5928,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0115438
Macko 

This award supports a pilot program for a one-year
              international distance learning project in the environmental sciences to be
              conducted by the University of Virginia (UVA), the University of Eduardo
              Mondlane (UEM) in Mozambique, and the University of the Witwatersrand (WITS) in
              South Africa. Each participating university will transmit some of the seminars
              via satellite broadcast (six from UVA and two each from UEM and
              WITS).

Southern Africa has undergone and continues to experience large-scale
              land use/land cover changes largely brought about by human intervention with
              the environment.  These changes can have environmental repercussions at the
              regional, continental, and global scales.  Environmental education is essential
              for understanding these impacts on the global environment, and on the
              environment of the United States.  This pilot project will explore the
              feasibility of exposing US and Southern African undergraduate and graduate
              students to leading edge technology and scientific content through a
              satellite-based seminar series in the environmental sciences.  The seminar
              broadcasts will enable US students to have direct exposure to and interaction
              with regional expert lecturers and African students.  The US and African
              students will also interact with each other through the internet, using the
              classroom internet tools provided by UVA.  This project is expected to foster
              the transfer of knowledge and information on regional system level
              environmental problems by harnessing the existing broad spectrum of academic
              excellence within the partner universities.  It is also expected to help create
              an internationally oriented generation of young environmental scientists in
              both the United States and Southern Africa.  It is anticipated that up to 100
              undergraduate and 20 graduate students from UVA will participate in these
              seminars, as well as approximately 40 students from Southern Africa.  The
              project also includes visits by the US investigators to Southern Africa and
              visits by representatives from UEM and WITS to UVA for collaborative input to
              and evaluation of the program. 

