Title       : GOALI: Growth of GaSb-Related Materials and Devices by Metalorganic Chemical
               Vapor Deposition for Advanced Optical Fiber Communication Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0115329

Award Number: 0115329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell D. Dupuis dupuis@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Long-wavelength lasers emitting at ?= 1.33 or 1.55 m are one of the most
              important and widely used optoelectronic devices for optical fiber
              communication systems in the present modern information technology era. For
              optical-fiber communications, the lnGaAsP quaternary III-V semiconductor
              material system, which is lattice-matched to InP, covers the wavelength range
              corresponding to low dispersion or low attenuation in optical fibers.
              Therefore, lasers for optical communication application with low dispersion or
              low attenuation have been developed and commercialized using an InGaAsP active
              layer grown on InP substrates. However, InP-based lasers have generally
              inferior characteristic performance compared to GaAs-based lasers. Especially
              for vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs), lnP -based lasers have
              been problematic due to the lack of good lattice-matched distributed Bragg
              reflector (DBR) material combinations, which should have high refractive index
              contrast, low electrical resistance, and low thermal resistance. Compared to
              lnP-based VCSELs, GaAs-based VCSELs with AlAs/GaAs DBR mirrors have better
              characteristics. However, the system performance characteristics, such as the
              transmission capacity, are limited by the bandwidth of compatible multimode
              fibers, since they have a short-wavelength spectral range (?~O.85 m).
To
              obtain high-performance long-wavelength lasers, the ideal practical combination
              should be that of an ~active layer" emitting in the long-wavelength range
              compatible with the well-established GaAs-based laser technologies. The GaAs
              system offers several important advantages over the alternate InP-based system,
              including larger area wafer processing, better thermal properties higher doping
              concentrations, an oxidation-compatible material system, and high-performance
              DBR materials. Several possible approaches have been proposed and investigated.
              One of the most promising is explored here.
The study of InAlGaAsSb epitaxial
              growth using MOCVD is a research topic that is of increasing interest
              throughout the world. The realization of high-quality epitaxial layers and
              heterojunctions are important elements in the development of advanced
              semiconductor devices, in particular, VCSELS. The research proposed here will
              result in the practical realization of X=1.33pm VCSELs as well as for the study
              of the fundamental properties of Sb-based heterojunctions and in the study of
              Ill-Sb quantum dots. The work of the primary topic of the study of Sb growth
              and fundamental properties couples directly to that of a second research topic
              on devices, specifically, VCSELs-an area that we are already exploring with
              collaborators at Agilent Technologies. This research will provide new
              fundamental insight into the physics of two-dimensionally confined systems in
              Ill-Sb materials. These topics have a strong potential for broad impact in
              optoelectronics and also in electronics, e.g.. high-speed electronics could be
              developed.

