Title       : The Acquisition of Virtual Reality Tools to Upgrade our Virtual Cognition
               Laboratory for Research in Cognitive Psychology, Sensation and Perception, and
               Consciousness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0115904

Award Number: 0115904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99928              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Flannery kflanner@anselm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Finn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Krauchunas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Anselm College
	      
	      Manchester, NH  03102    603/669-1030

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Virtual Cognition Laboratory at Saint Anselm College was established in 1998
              to support faculty research and undergraduate research training in Cognitive
              Psychology, Sensation and Perception, and Consciousness, as well as develop
              innovative, hands-on laboratories for related courses. This grant supports
              upgrades and expansion of the Virtual Cognition Laboratory.

Today, the
              Virtual Cognition Laboratory Research Center has two testing computers with
              related peripheral devices and an EEG station to support three different
              programs of research: gender differences in navigation, developmental models
              for place learning, and the impact of daytime sleepiness on attention. In
              addition, the Virtual Cognition Laboratory Education Center has another six
              computers to support hands-on laboratories for students to complete as part of
              their requirements for a variety of courses. Since the inception of the Virtual
              Cognition Laboratory, the development of software, hardware, and peripheral
              devices to support highly immersive virtual reality environments (IVEs) has
              grown at a rapid pace. In order to offer faculty and students a
              state-of-the-art facility to conduct research and support research training,
              the laboratory will be enhanced to include two new high speed computers,
              software, and peripheral devices. The peripheral devices include two different
              delivery methods, i.e., head mounted display versus dome.

The acquisition of
              this equipment will support both ongoing and new research activities in the
              following areas: developmental models for place learning, individual
              differences in linear optical trajectory strategies, and the impact of daytime
              sleepiness on a variety of cognitive processes. The Virtual Cognition
              Laboratory will facilitate interdisciplinary research activities on our campus
              and collaborations with investigators from other institutions. The Virtual
              Cognition Laboratory will also support research training for undergraduates and
              provide them with the opportunity to use state-of-the-art equipment to develop
              their technical skills. Finally, the Virtual Cognition Laboratory will continue
              to serve as a resource center for faculty to develop new laboratory modules for
              their courses.
