Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Comprehensive Functional Analysis of the Arabidopsis RCD Gene
               Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0115004

Award Number: 0115004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $660000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry J. Klee hjklee@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. McCarty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan A. D. Zeevaart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Apocarotenoids are a diverse set of plant secondary metabolites derived from
              carotenoid breakdown. They have significant roles as developmental and
              environmental response signals. They also have important roles as contributors
              to flavor and nutritional quality. A critical advance in elucidating
              apocarotenoid synthesis occurred when the first gene encoding a carotenoid
              dioxygenase, maize Vp14, was cloned. Vp14 encodes the limiting enzyme in
              abscisic acid synthesis, 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase (NCED). Arabidopsis
              contains nine members of a gene family encoding enzymes related to NCED,
              referred to hereafter as RCDs (Related to Carotenoid Dioxgenase). Only a subset
              of the family is directly involved in abscisic acid synthesis and the other
              members of the family likely encode enzymes that metabolize a range of
              carotenoids to multiple volatile and non-volatile apocarotenoids. One of the
              family members, RCD1, does indeed cleave multiple carotenoid substrates at a
              different position than NCED, supporting this hypothesis. Thus, the RCD family
              exhibits variation both in carotenoid substrates and position of cleavage. We
              will establish the functions of the complete Arabidopsis RCD gene family. We
              have identified knock-out mutants in every RCD gene and will construct double
              and triple knockout combinations, as appropriate. Using bacterial expression
              and in vitro assays, the substrate specificities and products of each member of
              the RCD enzyme family will be determined. The apocarotenoid metabolic profiles
              of each mutant, as well as appropriate double and triple mutants, will be
              quantified. Mutants will also be examined for phenotypic alterations associated
              with altered apocarotenoid profiles. 

Upon completion of the project, we
              will have defined the functions of a complete set of evolutionarily related
              enzymes that synthesize a broad range of apocarotenoids. We will have further
              isolated mutant lines deficient in synthesis of specific subsets of these
              biologically active moleculaes and determined the consequences of loss of
              subsets of apocarotenoids on plant growth and development. 

Current
              information on the RCD gene family and characterization of the individual gene
              products may be obtained at
              http://www.hos.ufl.edu/kleeweb/2010RCDprogram.htm

All  gene knockouts will
              be deposited with the Ohio State University Arabidopsis stock center
              (http://www.biosci.ohiostate.edu/~plantbio/Facilities/abrc/ABRCHOME.HTM) by the
              end of 2002. 



