Title       : Innovating Health Care Delivery Using Toyota Production System Principles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0115352

Award Number: 0115352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Durward K. Sobek dsobek@ie.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project proposes a test of the application of well-established principles
              of the Toyota Production System (TPS), or lean manufacturing, to health care
              delivery. Transferability has been limited by the system's roots in
              manufacturing, its reliance on manufacturing-based tools and metrics, and the
              difficulty of defining comparable approaches and metrics for service settings.
              Drawing on recent work suggesting actionable principles for the application of
              the TPS, the project proposes to address the following questions: (1) Can the
              principles of the TPS improve health care delivery? (2) If so, what
              implementation strategies are more likely to lead to success? Based on answers
              to these questions, the project will develop a user-friendly set of tools and
              training materials to help health care institutions nationwide improve through
              application of the principles of lean manufacturing.
          The proposed
              work will be carried out as a collaborative project between Community Medical
              Center of Missoula, MT, and Montana State University. Using
              participant-observation, journaling, products of redesign efforts, and
              interviews, the researchers propose to explore cultural and psychological
              barriers to TPS in healthcare, and assess the organizational strategies and the
              effectiveness of tools and exercises used, as well as the progress of shifts in
              individuals and groups required for TPS implementation. This project holds
              great promise for significant and lasting theoretical and practical outcomes,
              both through expanding knowledge of production methods in an important service
              industry and deepening understanding of efficient design and management
              emphasizing quality improvement. Potential practical benefits in improving the
              quality and efficiency of health care delivery are very large.

