Title       : SDEST: Teaching Research Ethics - An Institutional Change Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0115480

Award Number: 0115480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Pritchard michael.pritchard@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sylvia Culp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R._Wayne Fuqua  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Van Valey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to implement a process that will alter the
              institutional climate at Western Michigan University with respect to research
              ethics. Its objective is to communicate, rapidly and effectively, information
              about research-related ethical issues and decision-making across the several
              colleges that make up the university. The long term goal is to increase the
              level of ethical research behavior and decision-making within the university.
              The short term goals are: first, to create a group of change agents within the
              institution (the Research Ethics Fellows) who, along with the project team,
              will be able to help train others, serve as resource people for their peers,
              and model ethical behavior in research; second, to put in place a comprehensive
              and systematic approach to teaching research ethics that not only cuts across
              disciplines (colleges/departments) but also across levels (faculty/graduate
              student); and third, to implement a structural approach to research ethics
              training that becomes part of the institutional fabric itself. The project team
              is proposing a curriculum in the area of research ethics which includes a
              series of instructional modules. Following a baseline survey of faculty and
              graduate students, the modules will be presented in a workshop (with a keynote
              speaker), to a set of ten faculty/graduate student teams (20 Research Ethics
              Fellows) representing departments across the institution. The modules will
              subsequently be offered to the faculty, graduate students, and staff of the
              university community. During this same time, the Fellows will continue to meet
              with one another in study groups, carry out projects, and also engage in
              dissemination efforts within their departments and colleges. Finally, the
              project will sponsor a university-wide conference, again with a keynote
              speaker, at which the research team and the Fellows will present the results of
              their various projects, and share their dissemination efforts.  A follow-up
              survey of faculty and graduate students will also be carried out. Along with
              the baseline and follow-up surveys (covering knowledge, attitude, and behaviors
              of faculty and graduate students at WMU), evaluation will include the learning
              improvement and the satisfaction of all people who participate in the
              instructional modules. The second year will follow the same structure, with
              another set of ten faculty/graduate student teams from across the institution.
              In addition, the previous Fellows will assist the project team in presenting
              the instructional modules during the year and continue to participate in the
              study groups. Evaluation efforts will also continue. Furthermore,
              representatives from other post-secondary institutions in the region will be
              invited to attend the spring conference as part of an effort to extend the
              impact of the project to other institutions.  The institution has committed
              resources to continue the program after the initial award period.
