Title       : Development and Validation of Design Ideation Models for Conceptual Engineering
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0115447

Award Number: 0115447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jami J. Shah jami.shah@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research project is to produce the knowledge needed to
              evaluate the effectiveness of engineering design idea generation methods and to
              distinguish between their necessary and superfluous components. This research
              will combine the highly controlled lab experiments and atomic process models
              from cognitive science with design experiments from design research. Instead of
              conducting experiments by using an idea generation method in its entirety, each
              method will be decomposed into its key "ideation" components and its overall
              effectiveness predicted by testing the effectiveness of its components and
              their mutual interactions. Lab experiments will be directed at studying key
              ideation components individually, while the design experiments will examine
              interaction between components and their relation to outcome by mutating their
              constituent components. Explanations for why and how ideation components are
              effective will be researched from accepted models of atomic processes and
              structures already available in cognitive science. Effectiveness will be
              evaluated in terms of four measures: fluency, quality, variety, and novelty of
              design concepts generated. The results of the study will be consolidated into a
              model of design ideation by combining and modifying several elements from
              existing models. The proposed ideation model will be validated through final
              experiments in industry settings.

Two important results should emerge from
              this research:  (1) data from the empirical studies that can be interpreted in
              terms of both theory and applied practices, and (2) a system for pursuing
              additional research questions about ideational aspects of conceptual design
              theory.  An understanding of the relationship of ideation processes to design
              outcome will help companies determine which method to use under given
              conditions and how to constitute design teams. This work will also help
              educators in finding better ways of teaching design synthesis.
