Title       : Robust Control of Constrained Linear Parameter Varying Systems and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0115946

Award Number: 0115946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Sznaier msznaier@frodo.ee.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115946
Sznaier

Robust control of linear time invariant systems has
              undergone extensive developments in the past two decades, leading to powerful
              formalisms such as H8, u-synthesis/analysis and, more recently, l1optimal
              control, that have been successfully applied to challenging practical problems.
              In contrast, tools for handling linear parameter varying plants have just
              emerged and are still far from complete. An open issue, central to many
              practical problems, is the non-conservative handling of constraints, both on
              the outputs and in the control action. The proposed research is aimed at
              addressing this issue by incorporating into the LPV frame-work the capability
              to deal exactly with a broad class of performance specifications and model
              uncertainty.  Specifically, the objectives of the proposed research are:

O
              Development of an analytical framework for synthesizing robust LPV systems
              subject to hard constraints.  This framework should exhibit the following
              properties:

(a) Handle control and output constraints in a non-conservative
              fashion;
(b) Identify the intrinsic limits of performance of the system as
              well as the limiting factors; and
(c) Result in computationally tractable
              procedures leading to practically implementable controllers.

O Application
              of the resulting theory to several problems spanning a broad spectrum of
              applications such as active vision and oil prospection.

The proposed
              research will combine elements from functional analysis, viability theory and
              dynamical systems theory, following an approach successfully used by the co-PIs
              to handle constraints in the case of LTI systems. Preliminary results indicate
              that this approach leads to a framework with the desired features.

The PI 
              expects that this research effort will result in an expanded robust control
              framework for LPV systems, capable of addressing realistic problems
              necessitating neither potentially conservative approximations nor multiple
              trial and error type iterations. Moreover, in addition to advancing the state
              of the art in control theory, he expects that by removing some of the
              limitations of currently available LPV tools, it will foster progress in
              related areas. An example is computer vision, an area where recent
              technological advances have rendered a number of practical applications
              feasible, provided that certain related control issues can be resolved. These
              applications range from intelligent highway systems to remote surgery and have
              the potential to broadly impact society.

The proposed research will also
              have a direct bearing upon the quality of graduate and undergraduate education
              both at Penn State University (PSU) and the Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana
              (UAM). In addition to direct student involvement and incorporation of the
              results into the curriculum, it will allow students from the UAM to use
              state-of-the-art computer vision equipment available at PSU, while Penn State
              students will benefit from having access to proprietary data and experiments
              from the Mexican Petroleum Institute.

