Title       : Polyandry: Proximate Mechanisms and Ultimate Causes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0115986

Award Number: 0115986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344480             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne A. Zeh jaz@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Zeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              IBN-0115986, Lay Abstract

The revolution that has taken place in molecular
              biology over the past decade has revealed one of nature's best kept secrets,
              namely, that females across a wide range of animal species commonly mate with
              more than one male. Identifying the causes and consequences of such polyandrous
              behavior is of general significance to a broad spectrum of biological
              disciplines, ranging from developmental and conservation genetics to the study
              of new species formation. Unfortunately, however, the technical difficulties
              associated with evaluating the alternative material and genetic benefit
              hypotheses that have been proposed to explain polyandry make investigation of
              this behavior largely intractable in many species. 

The development of
              powerful, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques for assigning paternity,
              in combination with a unique suite of reproductive and behavioral
              characteristics, make the pseudoscorpion, Cordylochernes scorpioides, a model
              invertebrate organism for experimental investigation of the selective forces
              favoring polyandry. Accurate assessment of female sexual receptivity in these
              pseudoscorpions is greatly facilitated by their indirect method of sperm
              transfer via a spermatophore deposited on the substrate. Female reproductive
              status and embryonic development can be readily monitored without the need for
              invasive techniques, due to Cordylochernes scorpioides' "external womb" form of
              viviparity (live birth), in which females nourish embryos in an external,
              translucent brood sac overlying the genital aperture. In addition, these
              pseudoscorpions produce large broods, have a rapid generation time, and are
              highly amenable to large-scale, laboratory behavioral, rearing and genetic
              studies of individuals derived directly from natural populations.

Previous
              research has established that polyandry in Cordylochernes scorpioides
              significantly enhances female lifetime reproductive success, and that it is an
              active strategy in which females recognize and reject previous mates. Over
              their lifetime, females mated to two different males gave birth to 32% more
              offspring than did females mated twice to the same male. This was primarily as
              a consequence of a significantly reduced rate of spontaneous abortion, strongly
              suggesting that polyandry reduces the risk and/or cost of fertilization by
              genetically incompatible sperm. The goal of the proposed research is to gain a
              better understanding of the behavioral and physiological mechanisms underlying
              polyandry in Cordylochernes scorpioides. A combination of behavioral
              experiments and molecular techniques will be used to address the following
              questions:

1. What is the recognition mechanism used by females to
              discriminate against previous mates and preferentially accept sperm from novel
              males in order to access the reproductive benefits of polyandry? 
2. To what
              extent is the enhanced lifetime reproductive success of polyandrous
              Cordylochernes scorpioides females due to 'cryptic material benefits' deriving
              from a rescuing effect of multi-male seminal fluid products, as opposed to
              post-mating mechanisms that bias paternity in favor of more compatible or
              genetically superior males?
3. To what extent do processes acting prior to
              fertilization (sperm competition and/or female choice of sperm) versus
              processes acting after fertilization has occurred (reallocation of maternal
              resources from defective/inferior embryos to viable/superior embryos during
              gestation) contribute to paternity biasing in polyandrous females? 

As the
              first study to investigate the relative importance of pre- versus
              post-fertilization paternity-biasing mechanisms in a live-bearing species, the
              findings of this research should contribute to a better understanding of the
              role that reproductive mode may play in the evolution of female mating
              behavior.    

