Title       : GOALI: Flow Dynamics and Inclusion Transport in Continuous Casting of Steel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a0115486

Award Number: 0115486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366759             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian G. Thomas bgthomas@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Surya P. Vanka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre Dauby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project aims
              to improve the understanding of transient flow, inclusion transport and defect
              formation in the mold region during the continuous casting of steel slabs,
              through the development, validation, and application of fundamental
              computational models of transient fluid flow.  Continued viability of the
              domestic steel industry depends upon improved efficiency and steel quality,
              relative to low cost imports.  Lowering defects from internal inclusions is one
              way to achieve this, while simultaneously improving steel minimum strength,
              fatigue life, surface appearance, yield and energy efficiency (from reduced
              rejects).  Continuous casting produces 96% of the 100 million tons of steel
              manufactured in the U.S. and is the last, and most important, processing step
              where inclusions can either be generated or removed.  Plant observations have
              found that many serious quality problems, including inclusion entrapment, are
              directly associated with the flow pattern in the mold.  Many mold process
              parameters, such as nozzle geometry and gas injection rate, are easy and
              inexpensive to change and yet have a profound influence on flow and
              corresponding quality.  With many different operations and mold designs to
              optimize, the traditional trial and error approach is too costly.  

With
              this grant, computational models of transient flow in continuous casting will
              be applied to study the associated transport and entrapment of inclusion
              particles.  The models will be calibrated, validated, and tested through water
              model experiments, steel plant trials, and metallographic measurements at the
              industrial partner, LTV Steel, and several other steel companies who are
              cosponsoring this research.  The results will increase fundamental
              understanding of inclusion transport, and lead to improved mold flow patterns
              which minimize inclusion defects.  Furthermore, the computational tools
              developed in this work can be applied to optimize flow in other processes.


