Title       : Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0115978

Award Number: 0115978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164244             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura J. Jenski jenski@marshall.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan H. Jackman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia A. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicola LoCascio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles C. Somerville  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marshall Univ Res Corp
	      401 11th Street
	      Huntington, WV  25701    304/696-4837

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Laura Jenski at Marshall University to acquire a
              flow cytometer.  Six faculty in three units will use this instrument for their
              research projects, thesis projects of graduate and undergraduate students, and
              training students in undergraduate courses in research applications of this
              technology. Acquisition of a flow cytometer will bring a new and important
              technology to the faculty and students at Marshall University.

The immediate
              research applications of the flow cytometer are diverse, and include
              exploration of fatty acid-induced changes in membrane function, protein
              expression during epidermal development and apoptosis in skin embryogenesis,
              cell cycle and quantitative gene expression during plant growth, and analysis
              of environmental samples for specific microbial populations.  In addition,
              three courses are targeted for introducing flow cytometric applications as part
              of the independent exploration component of the courses.  One is a core cell
              biology course and another is a combined undergraduate and graduate plant
              physiology course in Biological Sciences; the third is a course in the
              Integrated Science and Technology Program.  Students pursuing graduate thesis
              research or undergraduate projects will have access to this instrument if
              properly trained and supervised by faculty, and collaborations established
              through the engagement of students in flow cytometry will, in addition to
              campus seminars and workshops, help to bring new users to the
              instrument.

The flow cytometer will benefit students and faculty at Marshall
              University, and have a positive impact on the university and the state of West
              Virginia.  Students at Marshall University will gain exposure, and in many
              cases hands-on experience, with flow cytometry, thereby contributing to a
              better trained and more scientifically sophisticated workforce in a state
              aiming to achieve more high technology jobs.  Faculty at Marshall University
              will have a new technology available to them to apply to research questions,
              and this will improve their competitiveness in gaining funding for their
              projects.  The availability of shared instrumentation and the intellectual
              exchange among the group of users will stimulate collaborative projects, also
              improving faculty research success.  Finally, acquisition of research
              instrumentation will help Marshall University to build its national research
              presence and, in this fashion, offer modern creative experiences to its
              undergraduate and graduate students.


