Title       : DesignExplorer: Knowledge Management, Modeling, and Synthesis for Conceptual
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0115211

Award Number: 0115211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janis P. Terpenny terpenny@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding for the research and development of a function-based
              representation to support concept modeling and solution synthesis in early
              design.  The approach will focus on contributing to the standards currently
              under development at the National Institute of Standards and Technology for
              function representation and knowledge interoperability.  The representation of
              semantics, meaning of design intent, in a modeling and synthesis environment is
              a challenging problem.  As envisioned, the representation will include
              knowledge that is fuzzy (difficult to quantify but reflects engineering
              expertise and preference) and computable knowledge (based on scientific and
              engineering principles).  Through close collaborations with industry partners,
              Pratt and Whitney and Telaxis Communications, the research will address issues
              that are not only fundamentally challenging, but also responsive to and
              informed by the needs of industry.  Example problems from jet engine and
              telecommunication design will inform, validate, and demonstrate the research
              and development of the function-based representation.

If successful, the
              generalized representation will provide the foundation needed for the exchange
              of design rationale, design preferences, and knowledge for modeling and design
              optimization currently not available in today's design systems.  This project
              is the first step in the research needed for the development of an integrated
              design environment and the nation's next generation of design systems, wherein
              customers, designers, suppliers, manufacturers, and distributors work
              collaboratively in a distributed and integrated environment.  The results of
              this work will provide the needed representation and foundation for such an
              environment.

