Title       : 800 MHz NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a0115795

Award Number: 0115795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Weber dweber@umaryland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Guiles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for acquisition of an 800 MHz Nuclear
              Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer for a group of 16 investigators.  The
              instrument will be placed in a new center for structural biology in Baltimore
              along with a six-year old 600 MHz NMR; both instruments will be available for
              use by faculty and researchers of the University of Maryland and of the
              University of Maryland Biotechnology Center.  The request for NSF support was
              submitted through an joint program of the NSF and the NIH that allows both
              agencies to support the purchase of very expensive research instruments that
              will be shared by three or more independent users.  Thus, in addition to funds
              provided by NSF through this award, partial support for the purchase is being
              provided by the Shared Instrumentation Grant program of the NIH.  In addition
              to the support provided by federal sources, the University will provide
              approximately $1 million of its own funds to purchase the instrument.
The use
              of NMR for study of the structure and behavior of proteins and other large
              molecules has rapidly expanded in recent years as the availability of
              instruments capable of operating at high frequencies and field strengths has
              increased, and techniques for their use have been perfected.  Only at the
              highest frequencies can instruments resolve the minute differences in the NMR
              signals of each atom in a large protein or nucleic acid. The minute differences
              allow researchers to locate the relative positions of each atom with the
              precision needed to establish structure at the atomic level. The users of this
              instrument will explore varied topics, all involving the structure and dynamics
              of large proteins or complexes of several proteins that require use of a very
              high field instrument of the type to be purchased.

