Title       : Active Control of Tool Deflection and Chatter During Precision Milling
               Operations Using Magnetic Bearing Spindles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0115175

Award Number: 0115175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Dow thomas_dow@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory D. Buckner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1468,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant will be used to determine the feasibility of quasi-static and dynamic
              error compensation for precision machining applications using small diameter
              end mills.  The prime mover for these active control schemes will be a
              commercially-available, magnetically-suspended, 70,000 rpm spindle.  Such a
              spindle is capable of creating the high surface speeds needed for miniature
              milling tools, can adjust the center of rotation to compensate for tool
              deflection, and has the high bandwidth necessary to provide active chatter
              compensation.  The control strategies will have two modes: low-frequency path
              correction for tool deflection and high-frequency compensation for chatter. 
              The controller used to position the magnetic bearing spindle will require major
              modifications to implement the algorithms described above.  The controller
              supplied with this spindle senses the rotor displacements and manipulates
              electromagnet currents to keep the spindle rotating around the inertial center.
               A high-speed processing board will be added to implement the proposed control
              strategy of estimating the magnitude and direction of dynamic tool deflections
              and modifying the spindle rotor setpoint to compensate for these static and
              dynamic deflections.

If successful, the techniques demonstrated in this
              project will improve the capability to machine precision surfaces such as
              injection molds dies for plastic optical and mechanical parts.  But the results
              will have much broader applications including a scientific basis for
              generalized tool deflection compensation, actively reducing the effects of
              chatter on surface finish, and high-bandwidth control of magnetic bearings.  In
              addition, real-time frequency analysis techniques will be developed to analyze
              the displacement signals and extract high-frequency components for chatter
              detection and correction.  It is anticipated that these results will have
              immediate application to both high-precision and full-scale, high-speed milling
              applications.
