Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Microsphere Based Tissue Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0115595

Award Number: 0115595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cato T. Laurencin laurencin@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed A. Attawia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0115595
Laurencin

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Cato Laurencin, Professor of Chemical Engineering, and Dr.
              Mohamed Attawia, Research Assistant Professor, Department of Chemical
              Engineering, Drexel University, and Dr. Wafaa Ismail, Department of Ceramics at
              the National Research Center (NRC), in Cairo, Egypt.  They plan to develop and
              study novel three-dimensional matrices useful for tissue engineering of bone. 
              These matrices, developed at Drexel and based on polymeric microspheres,
              demonstrate the ability to allow for attachment and growth of bone in vitro and
              cellular ingrowth in mineralization in vivo.  Work by researchers at the NRC
              has demonstrated the ability of chitosan to support the growth and phenotypic
              expression of osteoblasts and other mesenchymal cells.  Recent research for the
              modifications of chitosan chemistry and chitosan complexation resulted in new
              materials with ranges of physicochemical properties.  The investigators plan to
              study microsphere based matrices for tissue engineered matrices made from
              chitosan and microsphere based matrices for tissue engineering using degradable
              polymeric materials combined with chitosan based complexes.

 Scope:  This
              award will permit collaboration between US and Egyptian scientists who have
              complementary capabilities and research experience in polymers and biomaterial.
               The two US scientists are eminent in their field and are highly published in
              areas related to the problem.  The Egyptian collaborator is an active
              researcher with skills and expertise in ceramics, polymers, and biomaterials. 
              One US student and one Egyptian student will participate in this research and
              will gain experience from the international collaboration.  The research topic
              is of broad interest both to the materials science (especially biomaterials)
              community and to the medical science community.  This proposal meets the INT
              objective of increasing international scientific collaboration in areas of
              mutual benefit.  The project is supported by the Division of Bioengineering and
              Environmental Systems and the Division of International Programs.

