Title       : Shear and Extensional Rheology of Nanoclays and Nanotubes in Polymer Melts and
               Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0115445

Award Number: 0115445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt W. Koelling   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Bechtel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Gregory Forest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the comprehensive characterization of the
              non-linear rheology, particle orientation, and structure development of
              nanoclay/polymer and carbon nanotube/polymer composites, in both shear and
              elongation, and the development of simulation tools for control and
              optimization of processes for nanocomposites.  Polymer nanocomposites exhibit
              significantly enhanced performance properties, including increased strength,
              stiffness, barrier properties, and heat resistance, without a significant loss
              in impact strength.  Two types of nanoparticles, naturally occurring layered
              nanoclays and synthesized carbon nanotubes, show promise in improving the
              mechanical and electrical properties of thermoplastic and thermoset polymers. 
              However, these improvements come with a cost in processing: small additions of
              the high surface-area-to-volume-ratio nanoclays and nanotubes have been
              observed to significantly increase the viscosity and elasticity of polymer
              melts and solutions, complicating the extrusion and injection molding of
              polymer nanocomposite products.  In addition, the effect of processing on
              nanoparticle orientation and structure development, and hence performance
              properties of the product materials, is not well understood.  

With the
              proposed comprehensive rheological and structural characterization of polymer
              nano-composites, questions such as the following will be addressed: What are
              the shear and extensional viscosities of melts and solutions filled with
              extremely large aspect ratio nanoparticles?  What are their dependencies on
              nanoparticle geometry, varying between tubes and discs of different aspect
              ratios?  What is the particle orientation and structure development in shear
              and extensional flow? What models can be developed for process modeling of
              stress/strain/structure?  To what degree do nanoparticles become aligned in an
              extensional flow?  What are the correlations between elastic properties of
              nanotubes and nanoclays and the viscoelasticity of the polymer melts and
              solutions, between nanoparticle concentration and viscoelastic properties of
              solutions, between orientation and structure development and viscoelastic
              properties?  What are the flow-aligning properties of the nanoparticles in
              extension and shear, and do the tubes and platelets have very different
              flow-aligning structures? 
