Title       : Grass Genome Biodiversity: Application of Genomic Tools from Sorghum and Related
               Grasses to Identify and Analyze Variation in Structure and Function of C4 Grass
               Genomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0115903

Award Number: 0115903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3962498            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew H. Paterson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rod A. Wing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Gingle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Soderlund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Kresovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              As a grass genome model, the Sorghum genome (~760 Mb) is the most logical
              complement to that of rice  (~420 Mb), a distant relative that will be the
              first grass genome to be completely sequenced.  Sorghum is an important bridge
              to closely-related large-genome crops in its own tribe (Andropogoneae) such as
              maize (~2500 Mb) and sugarcane (~2500-4200 Mb).  Analysis of the levels and
              patterns of genomic diversity within and between sorghum, sugarcane, rice, and
              maize (and others) promises to advance understanding of the biology and
              evolution of Poaceae grain and biomass crops, and create new opportunities for
              their improvement. Data and tools from rice will aid in completion of a robust
              sorghum physical map and also serve as an important point of comparison to
              identify, and gain insights into, the basis of genomic diversity.  Comparative
              tools will foster the extension of these results to neglected crops such as
              Bermuda grass and millet, and to noxious weeds such as 'Johnson grass.'
              Deliverables include a sorghum physical map that will support individual gene
              isolation and/or complete sequencing in sorghum and other genomes aligned to
              sorghum by comparative data.  The physical map will also integrate genetic,
              comparative, cyto-molecular and diversity data into a rich Web-accessible
              resource to identify and study the 'footprints' of selection associated with
              plant evolution and crop improvement.  A sorghum-sugarcane EST comparison is of
              far-reaching importance, shedding light on genes that differentiate grain and
              biomass crops that sustain humanity. Research is closely-tied to strong
              training and outreach programs with a successful history of engaging groups
              under-represented in the sciences, as well as K-12 students and undergraduates.
