Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant--The Political Economy of Inter-Regional
               Exchange in Uruk Mesopotamia: Geochemical Analyses of Utilitarian Trade Goods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0115596

Award Number: 0115596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gil J. Stein g-stein@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Gil Stein, Mr. Mark Schwartz  will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. Long-distance trade has always been important in the
              development of civilizations throughout history.  The effect that
              inter-regional trade has on developing societies is a current focus of debate
              in anthropology.  An excellent area to explore this issue is the ancient Near
              East because the rise of the first states in Mesopotamia in the 4th millennium
              BC is linked closely to long-distance exchange with developing areas of
              Anatolia, Syria and Iran. This research will test the hypothesis that trade
              with Mesopotamia produced an overspecialization in Anatolian polities making
              them more vulnerable to economic collapse. While many earlier analyses have
              relied on indirect evidence of trade, this research will provide direct
              evidence through geo-chemical analyses of the utilitarian good, bitumen. This
              research is centered around Hacinebi Tepe, a local Anatolian settlement on the
              Euphrates River that had an enclave of Mesopotamian merchants during a later
              phase of its history. The stratigraphic sequence of levels before and during
              contact with Mesopotamians allows one to look at the impact of Mesopotamians on
              this Anatolian polity.  

An analysis of this ancient exchange system must
              involve the sourcing of trade goods.  Unfortunately, many of the prestige goods
              involved are extremely rare in archaeological deposits and hard to source
              chemically.  This has made many key economic questions concerning exchange
              patterns and the geographic origins of trade goods unanswerable.  To remedy
              this, Mr. Schwartz's dissertation focuses not on prestige goods, but on the
              utilitarian good bitumen.  This petroleum tar is found throughout the Near
              East, is associated with Mesopotamian and Anatolian activity, is abundant in
              archaeological deposits at Hacinebi and is chemically sourceable.  Employing
              detailed geo-chemical analyses, Mr. Schwartz's pilot study used bitumen to
              investigate the ancient exchange of a petroleum product in the Near East. For
              the first time, the presence of goods from Mesopotamia in Anatolia was
              demonstrated with scientific evidence.

Preliminary identifications of
              bitumen sources hint at some of the dynamics trade at Hacinebi. Stable carbon
              isotope analyses suggest that the ancient exchange network was complex in terms
              of the sources utilized, the exchange routes and the consumers involved.  Only
              when complete, will this project have the potential to alter our view of this
              early exchange system and Mr. Schwartz will perform chemical analyses on all
              414 bitumen samples from Hacinebi in order to develop a full regional
              perspective on exchange patterns. These data will be combined with functional
              analyses of bitumen artifacts from different stratigraphic levels and cultural
              contexts to determine if an increase in bitumen use, an emphasis on distant
              sources or a focus on trade related activities demonstrates a shifting economic
              specialization on long-distance exchange by the Anatolians at Hacinebi.  


