Title       : Acquisition of Environmental Chambers for the Enhancement of Research Activity
               in the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0115546

Award Number: 0115546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73337              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent A. Cobb cobbva@nsuok.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna D. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Clifford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Monica Macklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern State Univ
	      600 N. Grand
	      Tahlequah, OK  74464    918/456-5511

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Vincent Cobb, Dr. Craig Clifford, Dr. Donna
              Smith and Monica Macklin at Northeastern State University in Oklahoma to
              develop problem-based laboratory experiences in their Biology curriculum.  In
              addition, this grant will promote student and faculty research.  To support
              these objectives, eleven environmental chambers will be purchased which will
              allow students and faculty to investigate the effects of temperature and light
              on plants and animals.  Biology majors will get instruction in experimental
              design and data analysis early in their university training.  This will begin
              at the introductory level in General Botany Laboratory.  The experimental
              process will be further integrated into the curriculum at the upper level. 
              Students in upper level courses such as Plant Physiology, Animal Physiology,
              and Entomology will participate in more advanced investigation-centered
              laboratories that examine the effects of temperature and light on plants and
              animals.  Once students have gained familiarity with these instruments in
              classes, they will be more likely to participate in independent research with a
              faculty mentor.

 	Although environmental chambers are simple instruments,
              they control two of the most important environmental variables for many living
              organisms, temperature and light.  At the introductory level, General Botany
              students will work in small groups to develop experiments.  Four of the
              purchased chambers will be Arabidopsis Growth Chambers.  Arabidopsis is
              considered the gold standard for plant research.  Many genetic variants are
              available of this small mustard-like plant making it an excellent model for
              student experimentation.  In the upper level courses, laboratories will use
              environmental chambers to control environmental conditions, thus allowing the
              students to design and execute their own experiments.  Possibilities include
              sorting genetic mutations in plants using cell signaling pathways for growth
              hormones or determining the effect of different nutritional diets on insect
              growth and reproduction.  Independent student and faculty research will involve
              examining the effect of temperature on ectothermic animals, such as reptiles. 
              Among the factors to be examined will be embryonic developmental rate,
              morphological abnormality frequency, locomotor ability, and physiological
              performance.

Students in the sciences need numerous hands-on experiences to
              grasp the true nature of science and experimentation.  With this grant, NSU
              will strengthen its students' curriculum by making class laboratories more
              experimental and will also promote student and faculty research.  Experience in
              designing and carrying out experiments involving the manipulation of
              temperature and light as variables will give students a better understanding of
              the scientific process and help them to develop the confidence to pursue
              careers in science.

