Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Finnigan MAT DELTA Plus Stable Isotope Ratio Mass
               Spectrometer With Gasbench II for Environmental Hydrological Study of Acid Mine
               Drainage & Watershed Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0115884

Award Number: 0115884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric B. Melchiorre emelch@depauw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePauw University
	      313 South Locust Street
	      Greencastle, IN  461350037    765/658-4800

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115884
Melchiorre

This grant, made through the Major Research
              Instrumentation (MRI) Program, provides partial support to purchase a Finnigan
              MAT DELTAplus stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer with GasBench II. This
              equipment will be a key part of our Environmental, Hydrology, and Geochemistry
              program for both undergraduate research and the research of the P.I. 
              Instrumentation will be housed within the newly renovated $32 million Julian
              Science and Mathematics Building at Depauw University. The requested equipment
              will serve growing student interest in environmental geochemistry as well as
              ongoing collaborative research on acid mine drainage and basin hydrology with
              the Indiana Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) and Indiana Geological
              Survey (IGS). The P.I., his students, and colleagues will also utilize the
              spectrometer for research on deep basin groundwater and formation fluid
              migration. Ongoing projects with significant student involvement includes
              studies of contaminant transport from acid mine drainage sites within Indiana
              (with IDNR and IGS), studies of surface water/groundwater interactions in the
              Wolf-Red (Wisconsin) and Tippecanoe-Wabash (Indiana) watersheds, isotopic
              studies of groundwater systems in fracture-flow and karst environments in
              southern Indiana, and studies of tectonic-driven formation fluid migration in
              California. Faculty at DePauw University with separate funding will make
              significant use of the laboratory to examine fluvial sediment transport and
              systematics and to participate in the Indiana Riverwatch Program. As a member
              of both the American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) and the
              Society for Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS),
              the P.I. is firmly committed to promoting student participation for those
              groups traditionally underrepresented in the Earth Sciences. This commitment is
              echoed and supported by DePauw University, and efforts are underway to link the
              environmental stable isotope laboratory with DePauw's Women in Science Program
              and to participate in projects with Native American Tribal Colleges in
              evaluating the isotope hydrology of the Red-Wolf river basin of Wisconsin. This
              environmental stable isotope facility will be open to in house use as well as
              outside students and colleagues.
***

