Title       : Acquisition of an Organic Semiconductor Processing and Characterization Facility
               for Research and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0115970

Award Number: 0115970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Twieg rtwieg@lci.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brett Ellman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Songping D. Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program to Kent State
              University supports the acquisition of a glove box system for an organic
              semiconductor processing and characterization facility. Organic semiconductors
              will play a central role in a variety of scientifically and technically
              important processes and devices including xerography, light emitting diodes,
              photovoltaics, thin film transistors and photorefractive media. The physical
              properties of these organic and organic-inorganic hybrid materials often differ
              significantly from those of the well known inorganic semiconductors. In order
              to understand the basic physical properties of these organic materials a
              facility for purification, deposition and device fabrication with time of
              flight and microwave conductivity/mobility analytical capabilities is being
              assembled. This facility will permit the creation of device structures from
              novel materials in a highly controlled environment so that the intrinsic
              properties can accurately and reproducibly be examined. The facility will be
              ideal for student training as it provides a highly interdisciplinary

This
              award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program to Kent State University
              supports the acquisition of a glove box system for an organic semiconductor
              processing and characterization facility. Organic semiconductors present major
              and largely unexplored opportunities for the improvement of a variety of
              electronic devices. To exploit these materials a sophisticated facility
              comprised of several components for the characterization of novel materials and
              systems based on organic molecules is being assembled. A glove box with an
              integrated and highly versatile thin-film deposition system will provide a
              clean environment for material purification and device (e.g., field effect
              transistor) fabrication.  These novel systems will then be evaluated using
              state-of-the art electronics and optical characterization tools including
              tunable laser sources, microwave conductivity instrumentation and a powerful
              temperature-dependent x-ray diffractometer for structural determination.  These
              facilities will provide a rich interdisciplinary training environment for
              students and post-doctoral researchers.

 

