Title       : Investigation of Wind Structure Interactions for Low Rise Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0115761

Award Number: 0115761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y.K. Lin linyk@casr.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tsung-Chow Su  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Historical records have shown that damage to properties and loss of lives due to
              extreme winds have occurred almost every year, and that at current levels, the
              total economic loss in the US has been estimated in the order of $40 billion
              per year.  Most wind damages occur in low-rise buildings, yet systematic
              fundamental studies of wind flow over them are very few.

In the proposed
              study, interactions between extreme winds and low-rise building are
              investigated experimentally on building models in a water-channel facility. 
              Flow visualization techniques are used to gain fundamental insights into
              complicated wind-structure interactions, in particular, the characteristics of
              roof flow and base flow around typical low-rise building.  The effects of wind
              directionality and of nearby interfering structures are also investigated. 
              Carefully controlled water flows are produced to resemble the natural wind flow
              in action.

Stress pattern on a building envelope is investigated using the
              techniques of photoelasticity.  Photoelastic coating is applied on a building
              model, which is then tested in the water channel to reveal the distribution of
              stresses and their magnitudes during wind-building interaction.

The ability
              to observe simultaneously the nearby flow field and the stress distribution on
              the building, resulting from fluid loading, represents a significant advance
              towards understanding the detailed nature of wind-structure interaction.  The
              results of the present investigation are of fundamental importance to
              developing a sound engineering-science base for the design of low-rise
              buildings against extreme wind.

