Title       : Laser Assisted Machining of Ceramic Parts with Complex Features
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0115172

Award Number: 0115172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yung C. Shin shin@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to theoretically and experimentally establish a scientific
              basis for laser assisted machining (LAM) of various structural ceramic
              materials, which can significantly reduce the fabrication costs and improve
              end-state properties for ceramic parts.  Theoretical treatments of LAM
              processes will be used to determine the thermo-mechanical behavior of ceramics
              during LAM, by developing thermal models, temperature dependent properties of
              the materials, constitutive models and process simulation models.  Supporting
              experiments will be performed to characterize machining performance in terms of
              sub-surface
damage and surface finish of machined specimens, tool wear and
              maximum material removal rate.  The feasibility study with silicon nitride
              parts demonstrated the capabilities of LAM by achieving long tool life of
              approximately 40 minutes, surface finish commensurate with those of grinding
              and little sub-surface damage cracks and heat affected zone as well as
              significantly higher material removal rates than grinding under nominal
              machining conditions.  Based on this successful feasibility study, laser
              assisted turning processes will be expanded to machining of various important
              structural ceramic materials such as silicon
carbide (SiC), alumina (Al2O3),
              mullite, zirconia (ZrO2) and silicon nitride (Si3N4).

In particular, the
              proposed research seeks to develop the capability to fabricate parts with
              complex geometry by developing requisite in-process monitoring and control
              techniques.  This will lead, along with the developed
modeling capabilities,
              to facilitating the implementation of LAM in industry.




