Title       : Conflict on the Borders of Science in Medieval Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a0115556

Award Number: 0115556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan Cadden jcadden@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Joan Cadden, University of California-Davis
Conflict on the Borders of Science
              in Medieval Europe: Drawing Boundaries

This project explores the processes
              by which a scientific community and society at large shape the understanding of
              what sorts of problems can properly be addressed by science and what sorts of
              problems cannot. The project takes the form of a historical case study,
              focusing on how scholars who undertook explanations of natural phenomena in the
              thirteenth through fifteenth centuries ("natural philosophers") addressed or
              declined to address the question of why some men experience homosexual desires.
              It considers not only the institutional forces, such as the Catholic Church and
              the universities, but also the reactions of individual natural philosophers to
              a subject that was widely regarded as pertaining to religion and ethics, as 
              well as (or rather than) to the domain of scientific investigation. Although
              concerned with a specific society and a distant time, the study sheds light on
              the complex interaction of powerful institutions, prominent authorities, and
              ordinary scientists in adjudicating the borders of science.

With NSF
              support, the Principal Investigator examines two aspects of this larger
              project.  First, she undertakes an analysis of a group of medieval texts in
              Latin and French that treat a variety of sexual topics. She finds that medieval
              Christian authors sought to tame their controversial subject matter by applying
              well established scientific principles to it and, at the same time, made
              explicit or implicit attempts to justify it in various ways. Since much
              research and education in the Middle Ages centered on explicating and expanding
              upon authoritative texts inherited from the Greek and Arabic traditions, and
              since the subject of male homosexual desire appeared in a text attributed to
              Aristotle, the proposed research studies the reactions of individual authors
              who engaged in discussions of the subject -- or declined to do so.  The sources
              are in manuscript form. The fact that, before the advent of printing, every
              book was made by hand provides the opportunity for the second aspect of the
              investigation: detecting the responses of individuals who made copies of the
              texts in question for themselves or others. By omitting or adding material
              --whether whole sections of a work or just a few words --and sometimes by
              making direct comments, copyists could express their views about what did and
              what did not count as proper scientific subjects. In addition, medieval
              manuscripts often contain marginalia and other interjections made by readers,
              and these too constitute evidence about how readily contemporaries accepted
              treating this volatile topic as a phenomenon of nature, subject to explanation
              in terms of natural causes. Much of the work to be done involves gathering and
              evaluating this fragmentary information, so that, taken together, it can 
              provide insights into the broad participation of natural philosophers in
              negotiating, and perhaps expanding, the acceptable limits of the science of
              their day. 

