Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0115848

Award Number: 0115848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellengene H. Peterson peterson@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott L. Hooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas J. Goetz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank M. Horodyski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia J. Kieliszewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. E. H. Peterson and four co-PIs at Ohio
              University for the purchase of a laser scanning confocal microscope for
              biological research. Confocal microscopy is an essential tool in modern life
              science research, particularly in molecular biology and neuroscience. With it,
              the investigator uses one or more lasers to illuminate tissues, and
              computerized imaging to record and analyze the resulting data. The confocal
              microscope will be configured with four laser lines and specialized software
              for three-dimensional image reconstruction and quantification and for
              measurement of physiological processes. Costs of the confocal microscope will
              be shared by Ohio University and the Ohio Board of Regents. 
        The
              confocal microscope will serve several federally funded research programs
              including (a) biomechanics of receptors in the inner ear, (b) molecular
              analyses of plant cell wall function, (c) interactions between endothelial
              cells and nanoparticles that can be used for drug delivery, (d) biochemical and
              physiological precess in insects, (e) neural networks in simple biological
              systems, (f) transgenic tomato and tobacco cells, and (g) calcium dynamics in
              epileptic brain tissues.
        The new confocal microscope will serve
              faculty and students in three colleges and six academic departments. It
              provides a state-of-the-art imaging facility for graduate and undergraduate
              student training in a traditionally underserved area: rural Appalachia. Ohio
              University's primary mission is undergraduate education, and the science and
              engineering departments have a strong tradition of mentoring undergraduate
              research through intramural programs and federal grants. The new confocal
              microscope will be available to these students through their research projects
              with science and engineering faculty. In addition, it will enhance existing
              course offerings and research training for the university's science and
              engineering graduate students.

