Title       : Asymptotics and Bounds for Stochastic Networks in the Presence of Heavy Tails
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0115034

Award Number: 0115034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303436             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl Sigman sigman@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Asymptotics and bounds for steady-state quantities of interest (such as delays,
              delivery dates, sojourn times, queue lengths and workload) in stochastic
              networks used in production, manufacturing, and telecommunications for example,
              are fairly well understood when component probability distributions are
              ``light-tailed" (e.g., have tails that decay like exponential tails). The basic
              result is that the asymptotics and bounds are exponential. Such results have
              led to some very good approximations in practice for quantities of interest.
              But data gathered from the Internet (and other areas) supports the existence of
              ``heavy-tailed" phenomena (e.g., tails decay slower than any exponential tail;
              they have infinite moment-generating functions). Here, it is proposed to derive
              asymptotics and bounds for complex models such as queuing networks with
              feedback (customers can return back to a node already visited) and general
              routing (non-Markovian) in which one or more of the component distributions
              (such as service times) is heavy-tailed (subexponential). The purpose is to
              obtain approximations and bounds that can be used in practice. It is also hoped
              that such an investigation will yield new insight/results concerning stability
              of networks with general (dependent, non-i.i.d.) input, and shed new light on
              connections between stochastic fluid models with long-range dependent input and
              queueing networks with heavy-tailed service.

Currently the Internet is
              witnessing explosive use and growth, and delays (waiting times) can be a
              considerable problem. For example, the waiting time for documents to download
              (or upload) between servers and desktop computers, or for links to become
              available to a user can become of considerable length when congestion is high.
              Evidence suggests that this kind of congestion is quite different from that
              found in classical telecommunication systems (phone congestion for example), in
              that it involves long random periods/times, known as "heavy-tailed" times, that
              do not decay rapidly. Studying this congestion by use of mathematical modeling
              is a very helpful way of understanding such delays and how to control them. By
              creating and studying stochastic (probabilistic) models that exhibit such
              behavior (while capturing the relevant complexity of the real system), and also
              by simulating such models, the proposed research will lead to ways of more
              precisely measuring the congestion, help better understand how it occurs, and
              how to control it. The research will ultimately help future planning of various
              related technologies such as complex systems in manufacturing and production
              that increasingly involve components linked to Internet technologies (and hence
              are susceptible to heavy tails).

