Title       : SDEST: Scientists and Policy-Making: Objectivity, Moral Responsibility and Risk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0115258

Award Number: 0115258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44752              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather Douglas hdouglas@ups.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puget Sound
	      1500 North Warner
	      Tacoma, WA  984160075    253/879-3400

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              As the role of scientists in policy-making has grown over the past half-century,
              there has been increasing difficulty characterizing how science should be used
              to formulate public policy, from debates about the role of science in the
              courtroom to disputes over which science should inform environmental policy.
              This grant will support philosophical analysis of the role of scientists in
              public decision-making. For the period of the grant, the investigator will
              consider central issues that underlie the relationship between science and
              society, namely the understanding of scientific objectivity, the moral
              responsibility of scientists, and the proper role of science in risk analysis.
              Scientific objectivity is often the justification given for why scientists
              should be heavily involved with public decision-making, but objectivity is a
              complex concept, and not all aspects are either possible or desirable in the
              public decision-making setting. A more careful examination of this concept will
              help clarify what the public role of scientists should be. This public role is
              intimately tied to the issue of whether and to what extent scientists have
              particular moral responsibilities to the rest of society. A divergent set of
              views on this issue have been expressed over the past fifty years, and a more
              careful examination of these views and the arguments behind them will help
              determine to what extent and in what situations scientists must consider
              certain ethical issues. Finally, both of these areas, objectivity and moral
              responsibility, play a crucial role in how the U.S. conceptualizes the use of
              scientists in risk analysis for public policy. There has been considerable
              debate about the appropriate risk decision-making process, and the relationship
              between scientists and citizens lies at the heart of these debates. Using a
              wide variety of sources, from scientists, philosophers, historians, and
              policymakers, to gather the basic arguments and positions, the primary
              investigator will develop three related pieces of written work on the above
              topics. These pieces will be submitted to peer reviewed journals for refinement
              and publication. In addition, these three pieces will become part of a larger
              written work, for which the primary investigator has additional support from
              her home institution. This final work should help clarify the historical
              development of scientists in policy-making, the philosophical understanding of
              science that shaped that development, and how altering that philosophical
              understanding should change how scientists function in the public eye.
