Title       : Collaborative Research: Program for Modeling of Microstructure Evolution During
               Hot Bulk Forming of Al-Mg-Si Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a0115330

Award Number: 0115330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233196             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antoinette M. Maniatty maniaa@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop a simulation tool, validated by
              experiments, capable of predicting the evolution of key microstructural
              characteristics in Al-Mg-Si alloys during hot bulk forming. New models and
              simulation tools will be developed and used to model the phenomena the govern
              the evolution of the microstructure during hot forming. Carefully designed and
              controlled experiments will be used for model calibration and validation. 
              Al-Mg-Si alloys are among the most common materials used in aerospace,
              construction and automotive industries. The ability to predict final
              microstructure, and therefore mechanical properties, in a final aluminum part
              that results from a controlled deformation process is extremely important for
              the US aluminum industry and its customers. This work will guide process
              designers to design processes that are lower in cost and produce aluminum
              products with improved material characteristics. 

If successful, this
              project will benefit aluminum producers and their customers, may have a
              positive environmental impact, and will contribute to the advanced training of
              engineers. The research will lead to a better understanding of the way Al-Mg-Si
              alloys behave during forming and could lead to the design of new forming
              processes resulting in improved material properties at lower cost. This would
              make it more economical to use aluminum components in automobiles, for example,
              which would result in lighter weight vehicles, and thus improved fuel
              efficiency. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will participate
              in the research, and the results will be widely disseminated.


