Title       : GOALI: An Integrative Approach to Concurrent Process Planning and Production
               Planning in Electronics Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0115469

Award Number: 0115469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98631              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly P. Ellis kpellis@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Hatch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
              develop an integrative approach for concurrent process planning and production
              planning, with an emphasis on electronic assembly systems.  Today, the
              development of process plans and production plans occurs more often due to the
              reduced life cycle of electronic products, more frequent introduction of new
              products, and continual changes in customer demand profiles.  Furthermore, the
              transition from low volume demand to high volume demand for a product can occur
              rapidly.  Thus, an effective means of generating complementary process plans
              and production plans is important to improve productivity and responsiveness in
              electronics manufacturing systems.  The objectives of this research effort are
              as follows: (1) to develop an integrated framework and identify critical
              decision problems, (2) to develop analytical models and solution approaches for
              the resulting decision problems, and (3) to evaluate the impact of an
              integrated approach on the efficiency and productivity of the manufacturing
              system.  With this integrative approach, the following questions can be
              investigated:  (1) Under which demand profiles should various setup strategies
              be employed to maximize productivity?  (2) How should products and resources be
              allocated for a given demand profile? (3) What levels of resource capacity are
              needed in order to achieve the manufacturing objectives?
 
New decision
              models will be developed to efficiently integrate the process planning and
              production planning functions.  Expected results include techniques to increase
              productivity through improved planning decisions, algorithms to support
              management decisions, and new case study results.  The proposed research has
              the potential to increase responsiveness and productivity through the improved
              integration of manufacturing functions, to reduce capital expenditures through
              more effective use of expensive assembly equipment, and to reduce engineering
              time required to evaluate and implement changes.  These research objectives are
              pursued in collaboration with Ericsson, Inc.

