Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Laser Confocal Microscope for Research and
               Education in Biology and Biochemistry at Luther College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0115709

Award Number: 0115709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256813             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jodi L. Enos-Berlage enosbejo@luther.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Luther College
	      700 College Drive
	      Decorah, IA  521011045    563/387-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jodi Enos-Berlage at Luther College to purchase
              a scanning laser confocal microscope.  This instrument, which enables
              three-dimensional imaging and superior resolution of biological specimens, has
              become an essential tool for modern biological research. This microscope will
              be used for eight projects that will enhance research and education at Luther
              College.  These projects span diverse areas of biological research, including
              studies of plant physiology, developmental biology, eukaryotic cell biology,
              bacterial "multicellularity", and techniques in light microscopy.  The eight
              proposed projects include four faculty/student research projects and four upper
              division courses, representing the research and teaching activities of at least
              5 science faculty in two different departments (Biology and Chemistry). 
              Acquisition of a confocal microscope will increase student research
              opportunities at Luther College and is expected to result in a concomitant
              increase in the number of students that pursue graduate studies in science,
              along with preparing them better for this endeavor.  Together with the faculty,
              we expect that 60-70 students will be users of this instrument on an annual
              basis.
	The eight projects that will utilize scanning laser confocal
              microscopy (SLCM) are as follows:  In project 1, SCLM will be used to study
              various forms of bacterial "multicellularity".  The model organism Vibrio
              parahaemolyticus will be used to determine how bacterial cells are organized in
              colonies and biofilms, how these communities develop, and what environmental
              and bacterial factors are required.  Project 2 will utilize SCLM to investigate
              lipid trafficking in eukaryotic cells.  Fluorescent lipid analogs will be used
              as probes to study the concentration, movement, and metabolism of lipids and to
              determine the factors that influence the sorting mechanisms of lipids.  Project
              3 involves investigating the nature of plant border cells, which form at the
              root tips of plants and easily detach to form a specialized root tissue.  SCLM
              will be used to examine border cell production and characterize their potential
              involvement in a fungal pathogen-plant interaction.  The developmental biology
              of the model organism Drosophila is the focus of project 4.  Confocal
              microscopy will be used to assay developmental protein localization patterns in
              Drosophila embryos of wild type and mutant strains.  In project 5, bacterial
              biofilms will be investigated in a general microbiology course.  Students will
              grow biofilms, observe their development using SCLM, and identify environmental
              factors that affect biofilm formation.  Project 6 will incorporate confocal
              microscopy into an existing course in light microscopy.  Various laboratories
              will be developed to demonstrate how SCLM is being used for current research
              and to train students on the operation of the instrument.  In project 7,
              confocal microscopy will be used to demonstrate concepts in a biochemistry
              laboratory course.   Eukaryotic cellular processes and organelle structure and
              function will be examined using a variety of fluorescently-labeled probes. 
              Finally, project 8 will utilize SCLM for an integrative laboratory experience
              in cell biology.  Specifically, students will use fluorescently-labeled
              antibodies that crosslink cell surface proteins to examine the structure and
              fluidity of the plasma membrane and functioning of the cytoskeleton.
	The
              research projects described above will increase understanding of a number of
              important biological processes.  A better understanding of such processes has
              broad implications.  For example, knowledge of bacterial biofilm formation will
              aid in control of these structures, which play a role bacterial pathogenesis. 
              Understanding lipid trafficking will aid in diagnosis and treatment of persons
              with disorders caused by alterations in these processes.   A more thorough
              understanding of plant-pathogen interactions will facilitate improvements in
              controlling plant infectious diseases.  Knowledge of Drosophila development can
              be applied to developmental processes in humans.  Significantly, several of the
              above projects involve an educational component.  By using the confocal
              microscope, students will have a better understanding of a variety of
              biological processes and modern techniques.  The general and scientific
              communities will benefit by having persons that are better educated in these
              areas.

