Title       : Urban Systemic Program in Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education (USP):
               Boston's Math and Science Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0115606

Award Number: 0115606
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Celestine Pea                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3597753            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Payzant   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann Hamadeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Joyce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sidney W. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda R. Davenport  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston Public Schools
	      26 Court Street
	      Boston, MA  021082505    617/442-5200

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Boston Public Schools

Proposal Abstract

The Boston Public School
              District (BPS) proposes to advance significantly the science, mathematics, and
              technology (SMT) education of all K-12 students through the Boston Urban
              Systemic Program (BUSP).  The District plans to accomplish this task by
              building on the existing infrastructure developed by reform efforts that began
              in 1995.  These efforts included a complete revision of the reading, Language
              Arts, and mathematics programs.  The lessons learned from these efforts will be
              used to facilitate change in science and other core subjects.  The foundational
              tenets of the extant infrastructure include a strong K-12 leadership team, a
              standards-based curriculum for science and mathematics based on the state's
              curriculum framework, an aligned assessment system, and policies specific to
              science and mathematics.  The infrastructure also include the convergence of
              fiscal and intellectual resources to improve science and mathematics education,
              significant external support from multiple institutions of higher education,
              business partners, and the at-large community.

The BUSP goals parallel those
              of the USP that seeks to: 

1. Increase student achievement in science and
              mathematics as measured by higher scores on standards-based assessments,
              increasing enrollments in higher level courses, and greater articulation to
              institutions of higher education; 
2. Advance the implementation of
              standards-based, inquiry-centered science and mathematics program for all
              students, and employ research and assessments as effective tools in improving
              the teaching and learning of science and mathematics; 
3. Increase the
              competency and diversity of the science and mathematics instructional
              workforce; and 
4. Promote collaborations with colleges and universities and
              the engagement of the community to improve teaching and learning for all
              students to meet high standards. 

