Title       : Acquisition of Multi-Imaging System For Use in an Undergraduate Institution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0115919

Award Number: 0115919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen E. Kirk kirk@lfc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Houde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diana K. Darnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shubhik K. DebBurman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Forest College
	      Sheridan & College Road
	      Lake Forest, IL  60045    312/234-3100

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Kirk, Houde, Darnell, and DebBurman in
              the
Biology Department at Lake Forest College to acquire a
              state-of-the-art
multi-imaging system to further biological research and
              enhance the
undergraduate biology curriculum.  Faculty in the biology
              department
currently utilize molecular techniques to research basic aspects of
              biology
such as chromosome replication, neural development and degeneration,
              and the
evolution of sexual behavior.  The multi-imaging system will allow
              the
department to transition from conventional analyses of protein and DNA to
              a
highly sensitive and quantitative approach utilizing fluorescent
              and
radioactive signal detection.

Faculty-student collaborative research
              and teaching at Lake Forest College
relies heavily on the use of modern
              molecular techniques in order to
visualize a particular class of DNA or
              protein, separated from all other
molecules of its kind.  For example, Dr.
              Karen Kirk studies the interaction
of specific proteins that bind to
              telomeres, the ends of chromosomes, in the
cell cycle of the protozoan,
              Tetrahymena.  Dr. Diana Darnell studies the
expression of certain genes
              affecting neural development in chick, and Dr.
Shubhik DebBurman studies the
              effects of protein-remodeling factors on human
disease-associated proteins in
              yeast.  Dr. Anne Houde will initiate a new
molecular fingerprinting project in
              her ongoing studies of the evolution of
sexual behavior and color polymorphism
              in guppies.  The multi-imaging system
is so versatile that it can be used in
              all these research contexts.  Data
will be collected much more efficiently and
              quantitatively from a variety of
techniques, including agarose and acrylamide
              gel electrophoresis of nucleic
acids and proteins, polymerase chain reaction
              (PCR), colony library
screening, and Southern, Northern, and Western blotting.
               Acquisition of the
multi-imaging system will allow more rapid processing of
              the data and hence
greater throughput in laboratory procedures and will extend
              quantification
capabilities to allow faculty and students to employ new
              experimental
approaches.

Lake Forest College and its Biology Department are
              committed to an
educational mission that stresses integration of research and
              teaching and
provides an environment in which students can engage in original,
              publishable
research. Students majoring in biology at Lake Forest College
              receive
training in modern research methods through these research programs
              and
through their course work.  The undergraduate biology curriculum
              emphasizes
student-designed investigation using current technology. This kind
              of
environment in small colleges has been shown to contribute
              disproportionately
to the pool of future research scientists.  Lake Forest
              College has a strong
track record in collaborative faculty-student research
              and will benefit
substantially from the availability of a state-of-the-art
              multi-imaging
system. Ultimately, the enhancement of the research and training
              capabilities
of the biology department will help attract larger numbers of
              talented
students interested in research and research careers.  Currently,
              the
majority of biology majors at Lake Forest College are women and 
              a
significant number are minority students. The college is strongly
              committed
to recruitment of underrepresented groups and improved research
              facilities
will help to achieve this goal.


