Title       : MRI: Development of an XRF Laboratory: Integrating Geology Undergraduate
               Coursework with Geochemical Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0115647

Award Number: 0115647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith D. Putirka   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Lake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Devki N. Talwar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Hovan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115647
Putirka

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
              Program, provides partial support of the costs for development of an x-ray
              fluorescence (XRF) laboratory at the Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP).
              This grant includes acquisition of a Philips MagiX Pro x-ray fluorescence
              spectrometer. The new laboratory will represent the only XRF facility in the
              western PA region, and will thus satisfy a crucial need within the region for a
              flexible and precise chemical analysis tool. In particular, this laboratory
              will support a wide range of research activities at IUP, Penn State and the
              University of Pittsburgh. For reasons of flexibility, this instrument includes
              a He attachment, which allows for the analysis of liquid and loose powder
              samples, and a new crystal developed by Philips (PX-9), which increases the
              intensity gain on transition and rare earth elements by a factor of 1.5-1.8,
              compared to the LiF (200) crystal. This grant also includes funds for an array
              of sample preparation equipment, including furnaces, crucibles and a Claise
              fusion machine for the preparation of glass beads, and a press and ancillary
              equipment for the preparation of pressed powder pellets. The research
              activities at IUP that will be supported by this acquisition include: 1) An
              investigation of the volcanic plumbing systems within the Snake River Plain,
              Idaho, and at Mauna Kea volcano, Hawaii.  2) An unraveling of the paleoclimate
              record contained in terrigenous sediments recovered from deep-sea cores. 3) The
              elucidation of crystal structures and defects of organic and inorganic
              substances. 4) A study of InAs/InxGa1-xSb and GaN/GaxIn1-x solid solutions,
              which are being developed as electronic devices. This laboratory facility will
              also provide a central component to curriculum revisions at IUP that aim toward
              a seamless incorporation of research and undergraduate coursework. A new course
              will be developed that will be devoted to the instruction of analytical
              methods. Several of our existing courses (Mineralogy, Geochemistry, X-ray
              Crystallography, Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology) will also be revised to
              incorporate meaningful research components. IUP's existing General Chemistry
              sequence will also be modified so that students at the freshmen/sophomore level
              are introduced to XRF analytical techniques; analytical methods will thus be
              reinforced throughout the undergraduate curriculum. 
***

