Title       : Development of Tracer Methodology and Fluorescent Microscopy in Faculty/Student
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0115758

Award Number: 0115758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78633              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Haley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Mt St Vincent
	      6301 Riverdale Avenue
	      Bronx, NY  104711046    212/549-8000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. James E. Haley of the College of Mt. St.
              Vincent. Recent research in the biological sciences has taken on more
              sophisticated methods and instrumentation. One active current area involves the
              use of cell/tissue culture analyses of cell function especially for neurally
              derived cells from the rat brain including neurons and astrocytes as well as
              other glial cells. We are fortunate to offer such rare training experience at a
              small liberal arts college including a heavy emphasis on student involvement in
              faculty research activities. Most of our majors and graduates, about a total of
              40 per year, are women and there is a growing enrollment of minority students
              who will have direct use and instruction with this sophisticated equipment.
              This type of training is critical for the preparation of future health science
              professionals. However, we are at present deficient in many state-of-the-art
              equipment necessary to expand the efficiency, skills, capacity, level of
              sensitivity, and potential for faculty/student research in the areas of
              neuroscience, plant cell biology, and pharmacology. The equipment requested
              include the following: 1) Liquid scintillation counter to be used in tracer
              methodology to examine proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, and other bio-active
              molecules made by cells. 2) A water purification system to produce ultrapure
              water necessary for cell culture. 3) A fluorescent microscope with photographic
              capabilities to examine cultured cells for specific proteins/molecules using
              indirect immunofluorescence staining and an efficient way to collect data. 4)
              An automated X-ray film processor to more proficiently develop film previously
              exposed to radiolabeled biomolecules resolved by gel electrophoresis to examine
              alterations after specific exposure to a variety of substances; for example
              drugs. 5) The research students as well as all graduating seniors are required
              to orally present their findings and conclusions or monographs at regional
              meetings and/or to the entire faculty. The purchase of a Polaroid Propalette
              would greatly facilitate the professional preparation of colored slides, an
              essential training for the students. In summary, this equipment would greatly
              facilitate the training and research experience of both our students and
              faculty.
It is hoped that this undergraduate experience will more adequately
              train, prepare, and attract more students into the health professions as well
              as biology science teachers. The research area in neuroscience, specifically,
              may lead to a better understanding of the interaction between nerve cells and
              astrocytes, the later, which represents by far the most prominent number of
              cells in the central nervous system. It is thought that the formation of a
              glial (astrocyte) scar after damage to the brain prevents reformation of
              neuronal connections. This may lead to potential mechanisms for the treatment
              of brain injury.


