Title       : MRI: Acqusition of Electrofishing and Multi-parameter Water Sampling
               Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0115770

Award Number: 0115770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82254              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Hodgson jim.hodgson@snc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Norbert College
	      
	      De Pere, WI  54115    920/337-3181

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. James R. Hodgson, St. Norbert College (SNC), De
              Pere Wisconsin that funds: 1) a 17-foot electrofishing boat  equipped with
              shocker box capacities to electrofish in both hardwater and softwater systems,
              2) a backpack shocker, 3) three Multi-Parameter Monitoring systems YSI 6600
              Sondes, and 4) a lap top computer). This equipment is considered to share a
              common research focus.  Additionally, the electrofishing gear and continuous
              monitoring limnological instrumentation will greatly increase our versatility
              as an undergraduate teaching institution.

The boat and backpack shocker will
              allow us to collect fish of different species and sizes from our experimental
              lakes.  Monitoring fish recruitment, growth rate and diet (including tracing
              13C isotope though the food web) is essential to the overall goals of the
              current research design.  Obtaining fish diet data is central to our ecosystem
              approach to resolving questions relative to the importance of within-system
              primary production versus terrestrial organic matter in fueling lake ecosystem
              food webs.  To answer the question to what degree do top carnivores (e.g.
              largemouth bass) depend on lake primary producers or on terrestrial and wetland
              plants as a carbon source depends on reliable means of fish collection.  The
              multi-parameter water monitoring systems will allow us to meter a suite of
              limnological properties at a fine scale of all our study lakes.  The YSI
              multi-parameter monitors will allow for measurement of whole-system gross
              primary production and respiration using continuous diel (daily) O2
              measurements over the duration of the project in all experimental lakes
              simultaneously.

Additionally, this instrumentation will provide continued
              opportunities for SNC to further develop its capacity to use the Fox River and
              the bay of Green Bay as a convenient undergraduate aquatics laboratory (e.g.
              ecology, limnology and environmental chemistry) and independent student
              research and senior theses. Aquatic research is one of the emphases of the
              faculty in biology and environmental science and with the improvement of water
              quality of the Fox River, sampling gear appropriate for large riverine habitats
              becomes an ever increasingly high priority.

