Title       : Collaborative Research on Population Differences in Vervet Monkey Life History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0115993

Award Number: 0115993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29317              (Estimated)
Investigator: Trudy R. Turner trudy@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Patricia Whitten and Trudy Turner
              will investigate the role of life history in divergence of populations of
              vervet monkeys in Kenya. This collaborative research combines data and
              expertise from genetics, endocrinology, morphology, demography and behavior.
              Life history analyses link the events and processes of an individual's life to
              demographic and evolutionary events at the population and species level. The
              timing of growth, maturation and aging have important consequences for
              behavior, demography and the genetic structure of populations. This research
              will investigate these effects using a unique data set combining genetic,
              morphometric and socioecological information in four ecologically distinct
              populations of vervet monkeys. Genetic relatedness will be assessed with 8-10
              polymorphic microsatellite loci. Allele frequencies will be used to determine
              migration rates and differentiation among groups and populations. Paternity and
              maternity will be ascertained by examining allele sharing between individuals.
              Serum concentrations of adrenal and gonadal steroids will be assessed by
              radioimmunoassay. Endocrine data will be combined with morphological data to
              assess population differences in maturation and aging. These analyses will be
              used to address several questions: 1. Do males migrate to troops where they
              have brothers? 2. Are stress hormones higher when living in groups with more
              competitors and lower genetic relatedness? 3. Do stress levels in males and
              females and paternity in males affect behavior toward offspring? 4. Do
              increases in adult body size in a population result from delayed maturation and
              prolonged growth in males and females living in that population? 5. Do
              individuals in populations with richer resources mature and age more rapidly?
              

This research is important for several reasons. The data set provides an
              opportunity to gain an in-depth portrait of a group of organisms that is rarely
              obtained in animal studies, because of both the number of animals sampled and
              the range of biological systems examined. These data provide a link between
              population level phenomena and individual physiology that will provide new
              insights into social behavior and life history. Within species variation in
              life history is poorly documented. A better understanding of the balance
              between facultative and evolutionary adaptations to local conditions within
              species can enhance our understanding of the evolution of life history
              differences across species.

