Title       : GOALI: Smart Wiring for In Situ Testing of Aging Wiring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0115157

Award Number: 0115157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249974             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia Furse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob H. Gunther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115157
Furse

The National Transportation Safety Board, the Federal Aviation
              Administration, the Aviation Pilots Association, and the Naval Air Warfare
              Command have identified aging aircraft wiring as one of the most significant
              safety issues facing aviation today.   In spite of the severity of the problem,
              the technology to inspect the wiring to prevent serious accidents is still very
              limited.  

This grant is part of an ongoing effort to develop a "Smart
              Wiring" system for in situ testing of aging aircraft wiring that promises to
              dramatically improve wire testing and maintenance with resulting improvement in
              aircraft safety.  While present technology is nearing completion for pre-flight
              testing, the purpose of this grant is to expand the science available for
              in-flight testing of live wires.  This requires adapting spread spectrum
              communication techniques to overlay FDR signals on live wires, using matched
              detection filters for optimal signal detection, and use of blind source
              separation (signal processing) techniques to analyze the returned signals to
              detect damaged wires.  

The "Smart Wire" concept promises a dramatic change
              in how cable and wire are built, analyzed, and tested in the near future.  Wire
              will no longer be a "passive" part of a system, but will actively participate
              in its own diagnosis and maintenance planning.  The ability to test and
              diagnose wire failures is critical to virtually all electronic systems, and
              extends far beyond aircraft wiring.  The space shuttle, nuclear reactors, high
              speed trains, critical data and communication networks, life saving medical
              equipment, and even the family car will benefit by an in situ cable monitoring
              system.



