Title       : Acquisition of a 600MHz NMR spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0115230

Award Number: 0115230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $543000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Cavanagh john_cavanagh@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Agris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce E. Eaton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Novak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stefan Franzen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Cavanagh at North Carolina State University to
              assist in the purchase of a 600 MHz high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance
              (NMR) spectrometer. This instrument will be a driving and enabling technology
              in a myriad of disparate research areas. Twelve different research programs
              will be immediately enhanced along with many teaching programs. The problems to
              be addressed that will utilize and develop this state-of-the-art technology are
              noted below: (i) determination of the structures of proteins involved in cell
              response to stress, exchange of genetic material between bacteria and calcium
              transport in cells; (ii) modifications in RNA structures that impact binding to
              proteins and peptides; (iii) studies of polymers with predetermined functions,
              sizes, electronic/optical properties and conformations; (iv) examination of how
              viruses enter cells; (v) electronic properties of DNA; (vi) design of quantum
              computer methods; (vii) study of the mechanisms by which proteins transport RNA
              in plants; (viii) investigation of how the proteins involved in inflammatory
              response fold into their active shapes; (ix) diagnostics of biological fluids;
              (x) study of how peptides and proteins form solid structures; (xi) examination
              of the catalytic properties of enzymes at high temperatures and (xii) molecular
              pores capable of spanning biological membranes and mediating solute
              transport.

The acquisition of a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer will allow
              researchers at North Carolina State University to generate high-resolution
              three-dimensional structures of the proteins, nucleic acids and peptides.
              Determination of such accurate structures gives insight, at the molecular
              level, as to how the chemical/biological/electronic/optical function of the
              various systems actually occurs. This information is critical if these
              mechanisms of action are to be enhanced or inhibited.

The processes to be
              investigated are all fundamental phenomena that need to be studied as part of
              expanding our general knowledge base. However, these investigations are by no
              means esoteric, and all have the potential to have enormous practical impact.
              For example, the development of a successful quantum computer would increase
              computing speeds and power by orders of magnitude; studies of polymers with
              defined electronic and optical properties is needed in the computing and
              electronics fields; the proteins involved in genetic exchange, calcium
              transport and solid deposition will assist in the understanding of antibiotic
              resistance and neurodegenerative disorders; diagnostics of bodily fluids will
              allow cholesterol levels to be efficiently measured; pores spanning membranes
              offer the opportunity to deliver appropriate chemicals to cells.

From a
              teaching point of view the new instrumentation will expand the teaching
              capability for undergraduates and graduates in Chemistry, Biochemistry,
              Structural Biology, Chemical Engineering, Genetics, Plant Pathology and
              Molecular Biophysics. 

In summary, a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer will be of
              enormous benefit to the North Carolina State University research community. It
              will be a focal point for countless interdisciplinary research programs,
              fostering interactions between scientists of different disciplines. Such
              interactions will, undoubtedly, suggest new and important research directions
              to pursue



