Title       : Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Applications in
               Anthropology, Ecology and Conservation Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0115837

Award Number: 0115837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162855             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tosha Dupras tdupras@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Roth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arlen F. Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Z. Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Waterman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Dupras and colleagues at the University of
              Central Florida to acquire an isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS).  This
              instrument is a specialized class of mass spectrometer designed to measure,
              with high precision, small differences in natural abundances of the light
              stable isotopes (non-radioactive types of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, oxygen and
              hydrogen).  The primary application for this instrument is to measure naturally
              occurring stable isotope ratios in tissues of plants, humans, and other
              animals.  In recent years, these stable isotopes have become essential tools in
              investigations in physical anthropology, archaeology, ecology, and conservation
              biology.  Stable-isotope analysis is especially valuable in reconstructing
              diets since the isotope ratios in animal tissues reflect the isotope ratios of
              the foods consumed.  Estimating the diets of humans and other animals with this
              type of instrumentation allows investigators to reconstruct environments,
              examine patterns of health, determine differential use of alternative foods,
              and detect patterns of migration.
	The research activities planned for this
              instrumentation include projects in several disciplines. The specific
              activities in anthropology and archaeology include: reconstructing the diet of
              past inhabitants of the Dakhleh Oasis, Egypt, in order to understand human
              bio-cultural adaptation to the harsh Saharan ecozone; determining differences
              and changes in diet among the inhabitants of ancient Maya sites, such as
              Caracol, Belize; and, analyzing patterns of prehistoric human migration.  The
              research in ecology and conservation biology include: investigating
              predator-prey interactions, feeding relationships, and energy flow in the small
              mammal communities of coastal Florida; determining current and historical diet
              of Canada lynx across their range for use in developing conservation strategies
              for this endangered species; and, tracing the source of the diet of Florida
              manatees to determine feeding habits, as well as the historical foraging
              strategies, of this endangered marine mammal.
	This grant is a cooperative
              effort by faculty in several different disciplines to acquire basic equipment
              that has become integral to their fields.  Recent advances in technology
              (decreasing the time and cost of analysis) and an increased recognition of the
              utility of stable-isotope ratios have promoted a dramatic increase in the use
              of this technique to reconstruct diets and trace the flow of energy and
              nutrients in ecological communities. The purchase of an IRMS for researchers at
              the University of Central Florida will speed the process of scientific inquiry
              on already existing scientific collections, and will enhance interdisciplinary
              and multi-disciplinary scholarship.  The IRMS will also have implications for
              undergraduate and graduate education at UCF.  Use of the IMS in
              multi-disciplinary lab techniques courses will provide practical, hands-on
              experience for graduate students and advanced undergraduates; students trained
              in stable isotope analysis will have valuable expertise in this rapidly
              expanding field. Thus, the acquisition of an IRMS also will strengthen the
              connections between teaching, learning, and research at UCF.

