Title       : Modeling Silicon Carbide Devices for Power Supply Performance Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0115534

Award Number: 0115534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270219             (Estimated)
Investigator: Homer A. Mantooth mantooth@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Hefner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kraig J. Olejniczak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will concentrate on compact circuit simulation models for Silicon
              Carbide (SiC) devices. Namely, the power MPS diode, PiN diode, BJT, and npnp
              thyristor and MTO devices will be investigated. Specifically, the project
              objectives are to:
 Physically characterize MPS, PiN, BJT, and thyristor SiC
              devices
 Design & develop circuit simulation models for these devices

              Validate the SiC power device models against actual device measurements

              Demonstrate and validate SiC power device models in key power electronic
              applications
Compact circuit simulation models enable designers to more
              effectively utilize a technology in circuits and systems. Power electronic
              designers rely on computer simulation for insight into the details of the
              operation of their circuits. In addition to nominal operating conditions, the
              designer analyzes the robustness of the design through a number of studies such
              as dynamic thermal analysis, worst case analysis, statistical variations in
              circuit performance due manufacturing tolerances on parts, and failure modes
              and effects to determine the safe operating area of the circuit. In order to
              perform these simulations, models are required. Such analysis cannot
              practically be performed using hardware prototypes. 
Silicon carbide is
              capable of operating temperatures of 500C because of its unique electrical and
              mechanical properties. Other advantages compared to silicon-based devices exist
              regarding reliability, higher immunity to thermal runaway, reduced switching
              losses, and higher current density. Due to SiC's high thermal conductivity,
              significant savings in system cooling requirements, mass, and cost are likely
              for many aircraft, shipboard, vehicle, and utility power conversion
              applications.
Now that SiC power devices are becoming more reliable and
              reproducible, it is time for research and development of accurate,
              physical-based models to commence. As the number of commercially available SiC
              devices increase, designers will require an increasing number of component
              models (characterized parts) for use in circuit simulators. Since it takes on
              the order of two years to correctly construct and validate an accurate model,
              it is imperative that SiC device models be developed somewhat in parallel with
              the device technologies. 
Collaborators at two federal agencies, National
              Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and NASA Glenn, will provide
              access to SiC devices, facilities, and summer employment to the UA researchers
              throughout the duration of the project. Further collaboration will occur with
              Cree Research and Northrop-Grumman.

