Title       : INT'L. CONF. ON POWER SYSTEM OPERATION & PLANNING (ICPSOP 2002) Experiences and
               Challenges of Technical and Policy Reforms in a Restructured Power Industry,
               Nigeria, Summer 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2001       
File        : a0115575

Award Number: 0115575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44092              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Dzidzienyo vdzidzienyo@fac.howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115575
Dzidzienyo

This grant will support a second international workshop
              on the experiences and challenges of both US and African power industry
              restructuring activities.  It will strengthen and broaden the scope of power
              restructuring technical, economic and legal activities.  The experiences and
              lessons from the implementation of restructuring and privatization worldwide
              will be directed towards the enhancement of future activities in the energy
              sector.  The workshop will involve energy experts, researchers, university
              scholars and students.

The emergence of a competitive utility environment
              presents new planning, operation, reliability, and costing issues that
              constitute new challenges to power system managers, practicing engineers,
              researchers and developers.  There are already conferences, workshops,
              symposiums and studies to address several of these important issues.  However,
              there is a lack of dialogue and a lack of visionary goals towards
              identification of the most effective methods to deal with obstacles such as
              computational challenges, institutional barriers, policies, etc.  In order to
              overcome these obstacles, the proposed international workshop in Abauja,
              Nigeria is aimed at synthesizing ideas, setting directions and developing joint
              projects to assist the participating countries.

The objective of this
              proposal is to organize a focused workshop between US and Sub-Saharan Africa
              countries to address the following issues:  promotion of effective planning,
              optimal strategies and paradigms for competitive power systems:  development of
              dialogues through open exchange on different power system structures,
              experiences and challenges in restructuring; evaluation of available
              computational techniques to address technical challenges in a restructured
              environment, policy analysis and social sector issues; and to promote
              cooperation between US and African utilities/vendors, universities, and policy
              makers in the energy sector to address the issues:  economics of restructuring,
              incentives for capital investment, congestion management, distributed
              generation (DG) in a restructured utility environment, reliability assessment
              technology, costing and pricing of the power market, collection and billing
              issues, human resources/training issues, policies, legal concerns, and
              environmental concerns.

