Title       : Evaluation of Low Dietary Iron as a Nutritional Adaptation to Infectious Disease
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0115717

Award Number: 0115717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65610              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bettina K. Shell-Duncan bsd@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Anemia affects an estimated 700 million people worldwide.  In most cases it is
              regarded as a disorder arising from inadequate dietary iron that requires
              treatment with supplementation.  In recent years, however, research has
              demonstrated that low circulating iron levels can arise from a well-regulated
              non-specific immunological defense against infection, the iron withholding
              response.  This response protects a human host by sequestering iron needed by
              microorganisms for growth.  The research proposed here will investigate whether
              low circulating iron from low dietary intake similarly protects the host from
              infection in a high disease load environment.  Specifically, this research will
              weigh the potential protective benefits of moderate iron deficiency against the
              possible adverse consequences, particularly in relation to the specific immune
              response.  This study will investigate the effect of iron deficiency on one
              aspect of the specific immune response, cell-mediated immunity, using blood
              spots collected on filter paper from 314 Kenyan children.  The investigators
              will refine an assay for serum transferring receptor, a marker that is
              currently considered the gold standard for assessing iron status.  Commercial
              assay kits that are designed to be used with venous blood samples will be
              modified for use on dried capillary blood spots, resulting in an easy,
              minimally invasive, "field-friendly" method that will also be useful for future
              community-based assessments.  The results of this study will contribute to a
              broader understanding of the functional tradeoffs of mild iron deficiency and
              the nutritional ecology of disease resistance.
