Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science: Development of Force-Frequency Shifting for
               Low Frequency Structural Vibrations Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0115593

Award Number: 0115593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26894              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin W. Trethewey mwt2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,5912,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0115593
Trethewey

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Martin Trethewey of the Pennsylvania State University
              and Professor Leonhard Koss of Monash University in Victoria, Australia.  This
              project will undertake a study of the development of Force Frequency Shifting
              (FFS) for low frequency structural vibrations testing.  Experimental vibration
              testing of civil and architectural structures has proven helpful in health
              assessment and in developing vibration absorbers for troublesome facilities. 
              These target systems are characterized by having 1) low natural frequencies, 2)
              large mass, and 3) high damping.  These conditions create a demanding set of
              vibration excitation specifications for experimental modal testing or active
              control applications.  The vibration excitation problem stems from the
              inherently difficulty in creating high amplitude forces at low natural
              frequencies.  The goal of the research is to develop and evaluate a novel low
              frequency vibration excitation technique ultimately suitable for vibration
              excitation of civil, architectural, and heavy machinery structures.  Through a
              mechanical modulation process, a component of an efficiently generated high
              frequency excitation force is shifted to a low frequency.  It is this shifted
              low frequency excitation signal that is the focus of this research.  

The
              project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities.  The value of vibration testing of
              large-scale systems has developed a proven track record of delivering valuable
              information in relation to a number of varied issues.  Research in this are
              could assist in the assessment of bridge structural health, building occupant
              acceptability, wind excited motion, earthquake isolation performance and floor
              vibration for sensitive installations such as medical MRI equipment.  The
              project advances international human resources through the participation of
              graduate and undergraduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and
              technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
              international understanding and cooperation.  Results of the research will be
              published in international scientific journals and will also be presented at
              scientific meetings in the U.S. and abroad.


