Title       : STS: The Nature Study Movement in Education, 1890-1932
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0115772

Award Number: 0115772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27864              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally G. Kohlstedt sgk@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract 
Sally Kohlstedt, University of Minnesota
The Nature Study
              Movement in Education, 1890-1932

In the late nineteenth century for the
              first time educators began to make instruction in the natural sciences an
              integral part of the public school curriculum down to the most elementary
              grades. Advocacy for and experiments with science teaching had been tried in
              private schools and even a few public ones, but only at the turn of the century
              was there a national movement to introduce the natural sciences into urban and
              rural publicly funded school classrooms. The most visible and widely advocated
              pedagogical technique was "nature study"  and its proponents offered multiple
              justifications for introducing children to plants, insects, birds,
              meteorological observation, and other phenomena. This historical project
              provides the first extensive discussion of the nature study movement from its
              origins in the early 1890s through the 1920s when educational leaders called
              for a radically distinct pedagogical approach.

The often profoundly
              different geographic, social, and economic circumstances of children in urban
              centers, in suburban locations, in small towns, and in the rural countryside
              serviced by one and two room schools also meant programs differed in rationale,
              in quality of teacher preparation, in availability of resources for teaching,
              and in the interests of the children. Nonetheless, there were elements that
              made nature study a movement, including several prominent textbooks used for
              teacher training and for classrooms, a specialized educational journal,
              Nature-Study Review, and a membership organization of administrators and
              teachers in the movement. Increasing standardization in normal school training
              and in bureaucratic urban and even state-wide school systems made
              implementation possible, but it was broader commitment by local communities as
              well as school administrators and teachers that  established nature study
              across the American landscape, although apparently not much in the poorer
              schools of the South. Nature study education framed a set of principles for
              learning first hand about the natural world that was extended into informal
              settings like the Boy and Girl Scouts, the new environmental nature centers
              ringing urban areas, and junior clubs within the Audubon and Wild Flower
              societies.

This project allows the investigator to spend a month doing the
              final research that extends the discussion of the movement to geographical
              locations that have not been fully investigated.  It also supports the efforts
              of a graduate student to survey the nature study literature generated during
              this forty-year period, including materials from Germany.  Historians of
              science have long noted the nature study movement, often mentioning it in
              passing and presuming that it was ephemeral or not highly relevant.  The
              publications from this research establish its pervasiveness over several
              decades and its relationship to the dynamic changes in the natural sciences
              during this period. 

