Title       : Device Controller Synthesis for Systems of Interacting Discrete-State Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0115694

Award Number: 0115694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Holloway holloway@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With complex systems, monolithic models become impractical and it
              becomes
necessary to model them through subsystems and components. Development
              of control
logic for such systems also becomes complex, unless the structure
              of the subsystems
and components can be exploited in a systematic way. In this
              proposal, we consider the
development of methods that use the structure of
              discrete-state model components for
synthesizing control logic and diagnostic
              information. These methods are automated,
generating formal control logic
              models that can be analyzed, generating control software
that can be executed,
              and generating diagnostic models that can provide fault diagnosis
hypotheses.
              Such automated methods would reduce controller development time, would
provide
              enhanced reliability compared to manually developed controllers, and would
              be
automatically reconfigured as underlying system designs are modified. In
              this research,
we propose to develop such tools and techniques by building
              upon our prior research. In
our previous research, techniques were developed
              for: modeling common components
of manufacturing systems; assembling such
              components together to represent custom
system designs; synthesizing control
              logic called "taskblocks" for control of those
components; and assembling
              those taskblocks together sequentially and hierarchically
in order to achieve
              given specifications. Software tools were developed for graphical
entry of the
              component models and the specifications, and for automatically converting
the
              synthesized control logic into C++ code. An automatically synthesized
              software
"supervisor" then coordinates the multiple concurrent control
              activities, steering the
system around undesired states. The models we
              consider are a form of discrete event
system, and the synthesis techniques
              build upon discrete event control methods.
There are several unresolved issues
              with this current approach that will be addressed in
the proposed research.
              One major emphasis of this work is recognizing and exploiting
the multiple
              layers of interaction with components of the system. The modeling frame-
work
              and our current analysis methods are ideally suited for such models of
              interacting
components, but they must be extended in order to compactly
              represent components
with large state spaces. A second issue involves the
              timed dynamics of the system.
Some activities may be time critical, such as
              turning off an actuator within a certain
period of time or immediately upon
              receipt of a sensing. The synthesized control
software should consider such
              time issues, and should ensure appropriate priorities
among various
              potentially concurrent activities. Finally, we propose to extend our
              current
software tools to become a resource for other researchers and
              educators. This would
allow others to test, develop, and evaluate other
              techniques using our graphical system
editor, our code synthesis tool, and our
              hardware interface techniques. The automated
control synthesis and diagnostic
              synthesis techniques will be demonstrated using both
manufacturing and
              embedded control applications.
