Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: System-Theoretic Approach to Teletraffic
               Analysis and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0115779

Award Number: 0115779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20070              (Estimated)
Investigator: Khosrow Sohraby sohrabyk@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 5940,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0115779 
Sohraby

Description:  This project supports collaborative research
              by Dr. Khosrow Sohraby, Professor of Computer Science and Telecommunications
              (CST), University of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC), and Dr. Nail Akar, Department
              of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. 
              The investigators will study traffic modeling and analysis and traffic
              engineering as applied to telecommunication networks.  Queuing systems are the
              fundamental systems in telecommunication networks, of which traffic is the
              major constituent.  Solution of queuing systems in most cases reduce to the
              solution of a certain set of structured Markov chains if the traffic and server
              process are modeled as Markovian processes.  The two scientists have introduced
              a new paradigm "Generalized Invariant Subspace Approach," which was used to
              numerically solve a set of structured Markov chains, the so-called M/G/1-type
              Markov chains.  They plan to extend the applicability of the approach to a
              wider set of Markov chains, used in numerical solution of queues ranging from
              fluid queues to random servers, and from finite capacity queues to
              continuous-time queues.  They also plan to introduce an interdisciplinary
              technique using "optimal control" to set the foundation for a theory to
              synthesize path-splitting mechanisms that are used in engineering of current
              Internet infrastructures.

Scope:  This project enables two qualified
              scientists with complementary expertise to address a problem that is important
              in the management of Internet and wireless data transmission.   The two
              scientists collaborated in the 1994-1996 period and produced significant
              results.  This project will allow them to combine expertise in this
              multidisciplinary research field to produce a very generic engine that solves
              most Markovian systems that arise in the field of performance evaluation of
              communication networks.  One or more graduate students from Bilkent University
              are expected to join the research at UMKC. 

