Title       : Acquisition of an Organic Thin Film Deposition System for Research and Training
               in Molecular Electronics and Nanophotonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0115886

Award Number: 0115886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179077             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Kippelen kippelen@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Seth R. Marder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Mathine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neal R. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115886
Kippelen

This proposal is to acquire a highly specialized organic
              thin film deposition system for the development and characterization of new
              organic electronics and nanophotonic materials. The instrumentation will impact
              not only research in Optical Sciences, but is also considered to be critical in
              the training of students in Chemistry and Physics, through established and
              pending collaborations between these three departments. The Principal
              Investigator (Kippelen) was recently awarded an NSF CAREER Program on Organic
              Photonic Materials and Plastic Optoelectronic Technologies, an ECS grant #
              9985222 and is engaged in several multidisciplinary research programs with
              faculty from The University of Arizona (Optical Sciences, Chemistry, and
              Physics) through programs funded by federal sources (AFOSR,DOE, NSF, ONR) and
              by industrial contracts (3M, Durel Corporation, eMagin, Intel, and Nitto Denko
              Corporation).

The acquisition of the proposed low temperature organic thin
              film deposition system will complement existing high temperature deposition
              systems that are used for the deposition of inorganic materials and will become
              a key building block in the research capabilities of the Optical Sciences
              Center at The University of Arizona, a Center that has one of the nation's
              finest teaching programs in optics at both the graduate and undergraduate
              levels. With this new instrumentation, students and postdoctorals will be able
              to create multifunctional organic materials for optical storage, displays and
              imaging -- three technologies expected to significantly impact both local and
              regional economies in coming decades. The development of processable, low cost,
              high performance organic materials and well trained students will play a key
              role in enabling such technologies. Instrumentation of this type does not exist
              currently on this campus, but is compatible with technologies developed
              recently in Chemistry (Armstrong). A true symbiosis between this proposed
              facility, and the materials characterization capabilities in Chemistry, is
              anticipated.

With the proposed organic thin film deposition system, the P1
              will capitalize on recent breakthroughs in photorefractive and light-emitting
              polymers made possible by collaborations between faculty of the College of
              Science and the Optical Sciences Center to carry out research in the following
              areas: (i) highly efficient and reliable organic electroluminescent displays
              and organic lasers; (ii) photorefractive polymers for applications in
              communications and information processing, including dynamic holographic
              storage, and imaging; (iii) organic based photovoltaic technologies; (iv)
              nanometer thick patterned organic layers for organic field-effect transistors;
              and (v) organized nanostructures for nanoelectronics. The goals of these
              programs are to establish the foundations for an understanding of charge
              injection, charge transport, charge trapping, and light-emission in organic
              molecules and at interfaces with metallic electrodes. These advances will lead
              to new materials and disposable devices on light weight and flexible substrates
              that can be mass produced at low cost.

The ability to fabricate organic
              films with nanometer thickness control is essential for the advancement of new
              and improved organic photonic technologies. Current deposition systems at
              Optical Sciences for organic materials are limiting the performance of devices
              under investigation and the pace at which new samples can be produced. The
              SPECTROS system offered by the Kurt J. Lesker Company has been specially
              designed for the low temperature deposition of organic materials. It combines
              four sources for the evaporation and co-evaporation of organic materials with
              two sources for the deposition of metallic contacts. This unique system enables
              the fabrication of organic multilayer optoelectronic devices and their
              electrodes without breaking the vacuum or having to transfer samples between
              small bell-jars in a glove-box assembly. Since exposure to air and moisture is
              a critical parameter in determining the intrinsic optical and electronic
              properties of organics, this system will provide us with the capabilities
              required to compete with other research groups at the National and
              International levels in an area of intense global competition.

