Title       : MRI: Integrated Sampling and Analysis Platform for the Investigation of Lake
               Geochemistry Over a Range of Temporal and Spatial Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0115900

Award Number: 0115900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99716              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Whitney King dwking@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer Shosa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Gastaldo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115900
King


This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will allow
              the investigators to assemble a cost-effective and technically sophisticated
              instrument platform for coordinated biogeochemical investigations in lakes. 
              The platform is based in a Godfrey Marine pontoon boat equipped with: four
              on-line FIA-based instruments (Fe, H2O2, and nutrient analysis), CTD
              (temperature, depth, conductivity, pH, eH, O2, fluorescence), GPS navigation,
              and a vibracoring system.  This instrument provides the capability to measure
              multiple geochemical parameters in the water column and sediments over a range
              of scales - both temporal (seconds to centuries) and spatial (cm to km). 
              Fieldwork will be concentrated in the Belgrade Lakes, where both general types
              of Maine lakes coexist and can be compared.  The integrated sampling and
              analysis platform will be used to investigate the spatial and temporal
              distribution of iron, H2O2,, NO3-, and PO43- in these lakes.  Critical to this
              investigation is an estimate of nutrient inputs from ground waters and
              historical burial of nutrients as it pertains to internal nutrient loading. 
              Fluid flow through the system will be modeled using Visual MODFLOW software
              calibrated against actual physical and chemical fluid flow over seasonal, and
              watershed scales.  Vibracores of watershed sediments will be obtained using the
              platform.  Using standard sedimentological techniques a detailed historical
              record of the transition from marine to freshwater conditions will be
              developed.  Stratigraphic elemental analyses across the basins, reflecting
              long-term temporal and spatial changes, will be mapped and assessed.  Using
              these data, coupled with similar chemical data obtained on a daily, weekly,
              monthly, and yearly basis, lake geochemical dynamics will be evaluated over
              several scales.

Student participation is an integral part of this study. 
              Student research assistants will help with all aspects of the project during
              the summer months.  In addition, approximately 40 students a year will actively
              use the integrated sampling and analysis platform as part of two Geology and
              two Chemistry courses.  Analysis of data over a range of space and time will be
              used to draw connections between the research projects.  Such research efforts
              will provide the linkages between what students generally consider unrelated
              disciplines, helping them to recognize that Earth processes are system
              processes.
***

