Title       : Stochastic Optimization for Revenue Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0115385

Award Number: 0115385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341706             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Cooper billcoop@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tito M. Homem-de-Mello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project will focus on methods to solve certain problems in the area of
              revenue management. In particular, it will center on the development of
              techniques to determine how to dynamically manage the availability of multiple
              types of products comprised from a common pool of resources for sale to
              multiple classes of customers. The proposed methods involve the integration of
              techniques from two different fields:  Markov decision processes and Monte
              Carlo-based stochastic optimization.  The key idea is to exploit the strengths
              of both tools by using a Monte Carlo-based technique to obtain an initial
              static solution, and then using the exact, but computationally-intensive,
              Markov-decision-process approach to dynamically refine the solution.  Recently,
              a great deal of attention has been devoted to the control of inventories of
              perishable items. In a number of settings, products must be sold before the
              resources, from which the products are made, "perish."  Typical examples are
              the airline, hotel, and rental car industries; however, similar ideas have
              application to other contexts as well. The area of study that addresses these
              issues is called revenue management.  This project aims to analyze an important
              aspect of revenue management - namely, the development of mathematical
              approaches to determine the quantities of various items to sell to different
              classes of customers at each given point in time. This is significant to both
              industry and consumers, since such methods help ensure an appropriate match of
              supply and demand. Even with powerful computers, such problems can be
              intractable, because of the extremely large number of variables involved.  To
              overcome this obstacle, this project will develop methods that blend together
              techniques from separate mathematical fields to efficiently solve various
              revenue management problems.  Since quantitative methods form the cornerstone
              of revenue management efforts, this will support the continued growth of the
              field from both practical and theoretical standpoints.

The major benefits of
              this project are as follows:  (1) This research will contribute to the field of
              revenue management, both for academics as well as for practitioners.  (2) The
              successful implementation of this technique will help establish such an
              approach as a viable alternative tool for similar problems.  (3) The students
              involved will be introduced to new application areas and will learn new
              mathematical techniques that will broaden their knowledge, and improve their
              perception of operations research as a key ingredient to improve the
              performance of real systems.

