Title       : MRI: Undergraduate Research in Genetics and Cell Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0115831

Award Number: 0115831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly Perrine kgperrine@anderson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Anderson University
	      1100 E. Fifth Street
	      Anderson, IN  460123462    317/649-9071

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Perrine at Anderson University to enable
              undergraduate students to experience research opportunities in the fields of
              genetics and cell biology. The goals of the study are to educate students in
              modern research principles and prepare them for careers in biotechnology, as
              well as to further understanding of paramyxovirus-mediated cell fusion.
              Paramyxoviruses, such as Respiratory Syncytial Virus, cause upper respiratory
              infections. These viruses gain access to cells in the respiratory tract by
              fusing with the cell membrane. The viral proteins responsible for this fusion
              show similarities to the fusion proteins of influenza virus and HIV. 

The
              genetic experiments will focus on the relationship between the sequence of the
              primary fusion protein, F, and function.  The gene sequence of the cloned F
              gene will be altered by substitutions, deletions, and additions. The altered
              protein will be expressed in an artificial system that allows easy
              visualization of the extent of fusion. In this manner, the relationship between
              specific changes and the ability to fuse cells in the reporter system will be
              detailed. The cell biology experiments will focus on the characteristics and
              requirements for fusion, including the time course of expression, the
              requirements of pH and temperature, and the role of protein modifications. In
              addition, different types of cells and different paramyxoviruses will be tested
              for their ability to undergo fusion.

This project will enrich student's
              undergraduate education and prepare them for careers in the research fields of
              genetics and cell biology. They will experience research opportunities on a
              similar, but smaller scale, to what is being done in major research
              institutions around the country, including Eli Lilly and Roche Pharmaceuticals
              that are located in the geographical vicinity of Anderson University in
              Indiana.
 Many of these students will continue post-graduate education in
              areas of medicine and biotechnology. This project will also contribute to the
              understanding of viral infections.  Several viruses, including the
              paramyxoviruses, influenza, and HIV, use fusion to gain access to the cells of
              our bodies.  An understanding of the requirements for viral fusion enables
              researchers to prevent infection by preventing fusion.  These studies will find
              practical application in the development of vaccines and anti-viral therapies. 
