Title       : Colorado Field Research for Linguistic Atlas of the Western States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0115654

Award Number: 0115654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9210               (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Kretzschmar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. William Kretzschmar, Mr. Lamont Antieau will collect
              linguistic data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct dialectology
              research on Western American English with particular focus on Colorado due to
              its status as the cultural center of the Rocky Mountain region. The project
              will elicit speech from representative speakers of various parts of the state
              and then analyze the linguistic forms found therein. A combination of tools
              used by dialect geographers will inform the research (e.g., more traditional
              methods like maps, as well as more recent innovations like computers and
              statistical testing). The newer tools will enable researchers to examine all
              levels of language, including syntax.

The project has broad significance.
              Since the collected speech will be transcribed and made publicly available via
              the Linguistic Atlas website (http://us.english.uga.edu), researchers will be
              able to use the data for a wide range of investigations into language change.
              These include comparing the data collected for this project to older data sets,
              and studying dialectal variation between Colorado and other regions in the
              United States as well as variation within the Colorado corpus. The interviews
              will elicit names for objects because this is an area in which there is a great
              deal of variation between regions. So the data may also be useful to
              anthropologists and historians. In addition to what the project will teach us
              about the speech of Colorado and how it compares to speech elsewhere in the
              United States, this research will contribute to a better understanding of
              dialect in general and inform theoretical models of language and culture.

