Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Combined GC and HPLC System for Undergraduate Research and
               Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0115905

Award Number: 0115905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99468              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Malloy malloyt@stthom.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Palasota  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of St Thomas
	      3812 Montrose
	      Houston, TX  770064626    713/522-7911

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115905
Malloy

This grant, funded through the Major Research Instrumentation
              (MRI) Program provides support for the acquisition of a combined gas
              chromatography (GC) and high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system
              for undergraduate research and training at the University of St. Thomas in
              Houston, TX. This system will be used initially for environmental and other
              research projects conducted by faculty and undergraduate students in Chemistry
              and Environmental Studies. The system comprises an automated HPLC with an
              autosampler, diode array detector, and a gas chromatography system with a GC
              autosampler system, computer and associated software, which will operate as a
              common interface between the two systems.  In addition, maintenance supplies
              and a service contract are included in the grant. The initial projects
              supported by this equipment grant include trace detection and measurement of
              air pollutants, particularly those related to ozone formation, an issue of
              prime importance in the Houston area. Related research includes analysis for
              similar types of oxygenates in ozonated drinking water. The second project has
              to do with analysis of components in wine samples from the sophomore organic
              laboratory. Winemaking has been included as part of the organic curriculum for
              over 20 years and this addition will allow integration of analysis for various
              components, including multifunctional components, to be integrated as special
              projects in the laboratory. The automated nature of the instrumentation will
              allow efficient processing of the 50+ wine samples in a short time period. The
              third project involves the investigation of HPLC methods for the detection and
              quantitation of carbamates and related species in drinking water.  Once the
              method development stage is complete, samples of local drinking water will be
              analyzed for the presence of these analytes and the contamination level
              determined. The fourth project is the use of chemical analysis in conjunction
              with the development of a Foraminiferal Laboratory. The environmental studies
              program at the University is actively engaged in research concerning the use of
              both benthic foraminifera and ostracodes in the determination of water quality
              in the environments of the bays of the Texas coast.  This equipment acquisition
              will complement and supplement work on GC/MS equipment for both electron
              ionization and positive and negative chemical ionization already present in the
              department. In addition to research projects, the automated nature of the
              equipment will allow integration into normal laboratory course work. Recent
              collaboration on projects with a member of the Biology department has led to
              future possibilities for use of this equipment.
***

