Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Equipment to Study the Structural and Chemical Properties of
               Molecular Subtances Using Positron Annihilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0115984

Award Number: 0115984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76700              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Schoepf schoepf@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, Bucknell
              University will acquire equipment that is central to for the study positron
              annihilation in molecular solids. When positrons are injected in molecular
              solids they can form a positroniums, which are bound states with electrons.
              Along with the annihilation rate of free positrons, measurement of annihilation
              lifetime of positronium in molecular solids provides both chemical and
              structural information about the molecular solid. The instrument acquired
              through this award will allow measurement of both positron annihilation
              lifetime spectra and Doppler broadened annihilation spectra from in an effort
              to investigate these properties of a variety of molecular solids. Crucial
              timing resolution of two hundred picoseconds and energy resolution of the order
              of one kiloelectronvolts will be achieved. The instrumentation will be used in
              supervised research opportunities for undergraduates using positron
              annihilation to study structural and chemical properties of materials such as
              zeolites and will support an existing REU summer research program. 

With
              this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, Bucknell University
              will acquire equipment that is central to for the study positron annihilation
              in molecular solids. When positrons are injected in molecular solids they can
              form a positroniums, which are bound states with electrons. Along with the
              annihilation rate of free positrons, measurement of annihilation lifetime of
              positronium in molecular solids provides both chemical and structural
              information about the molecular solid. The instrument acquired through this
              award will allow measurement of both positron annihilation lifetime spectra and
              Doppler broadened annihilation spectra from in an effort to investigate these
              properties of a variety of molecular solids. Crucial timing resolution of two
              hundred picoseconds and energy resolution of the order of one kiloelectronvolts
              will be achieved. The instrumentation will be used in supervised research
              opportunities for undergraduates using positron annihilation to study
              structural and chemical properties of materials such as zeolites and will
              support an existing REU summer research program. 

