Title       : Molecular Mechanism of Protein Transport into Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0115581

Award Number: 0115581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Keegstra Keegstra@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1114      CELLULAR SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5921,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Chloroplasts are the organelles within plant cells that are responsible for
              photosynthesis in addition to many other important aspects of metabolism. 
              However, most of the proteins needed for the functions performed by
              chloroplasts are encoded in nuclear genes and imported into the organelle
              following their synthesis in the cytosol.  While the basic outlines of the
              import process have been described, many aspects remain unknown.  This project
              will investigate the details of precursor protein import into chloroplasts
              using a site-specific cross-linking strategy.  Unnatural amino acids containing
              a photoreactive functional group will be incorporated into specific locations
              within precursor proteins and then allowed to interact with the transport
              apparatus of isolated intact chloroplasts.  Following treatment with UV light
              to activate the cross-linking reagent, the products will be analyzed in an
              effort to map the set of interactions that occur as precursor proteins are
              transported across the chloroplastic envelope membranes.  The expertise
              required to perform this specialized cross-linking strategy is not widely
              available, but is available at the University of Nagoya in Japan.  Thus the
              project will be done in collaboration with the laboratory of Professor Endo to
              accomplish these experiments. 

