Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope and Ultramicrotome for
               Research in the Natural Sciences at St. Joseph's University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0115962

Award Number: 0115962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina King-Smith csmith@sju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. McCann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen M. Snetselaar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Joseph's University
	      5600 City Avenue
	      Philadelphia, PA  191311308    215/879-7300

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Christina King-Smith (Principal Investigator)
              and Drs. Michael McCann and Karen Snetselaar (Co-Principal Investigators) at
              Saint Joseph's University (SJU) to acquire a  transmission electron microscope
              (TEM) with digital imaging capabilities, an ultramicrotome, and ancillary
              equipment.  The requested ultramicrotome will be used by faculty and students
              in the Biology Department for cutting ultrathin sections of biological
              materials which will be examined and characterized at very high magnification
              using the TEM.  The electron microscope will also be used by members of the
              Chemistry and Physics departments for qualitative analysis of metallo-organic
              compounds and electron diffraction.  The requested equipment will replace the
              currently available, antiquated EM equipment and will be housed in an existing
              Light and Electron Microscopy suite in the Biology Department. It will be
              available for use by all faculty and students in the Departments of Biology,
              Chemistry, Physics and Environmental Science as the cornerstone of an Advanced
              Image Analysis and Processing Center, which is proposed as part of a planned
              Science Center renovation program at SJU. The requested instrumentation will
              therefore serve both to update existing research tools and as a centerpiece for
              a programmatic initiative involving all of the Natural Science
              departments.
	The research activities that will benefit from this
              instrumentation span several disciplines in the Natural Sciences.  In the
              Biology Department, one project focuses on the protein skeleton of retinal
              pigment epithelial (RPE) cells, a type of cell found in all vertebrate eyes. 
              These cells are used as a model system to investigate mechanisms for transport
              of components through the interior of a cell, a basic cellular activity in
              nearly all animal and plant cells.  Another research project will characterize
              the structure and organization of photoreceptors from the compound eyes of
              mantis shrimps, invertebrate animals which have extremely unusual and
              complicated eyes.  This project will compare structure of eyes from different
              species of mantis shrimp found at different depths in the ocean, with the goal
              of discovering the structural adaptations these organisms make to maximize
              their visual capabilities under low light conditions in aquatic environments. 
              The instrumentation will also be used to investigate cellular structures and
              life cycle events of the corn smut fungus, a pathogenic fungus of corn. 
              Studies will include characterization of the structures the fungus uses to
              infect corn plants, and other features of its life cycle.  The interaction
              between this fungus and corn represents a useful model system for understanding
              general mechanisms of how pathogenic fungi interact with their host plants or
              animals.  Another project will focus on patterns of cartilage mineralization in
              sharks.  This research has developmental and evolutionary significance, since
              the mineralization of cartilage in organisms such as sharks is important in
              understanding the origin of vertebrate skeletal tissues.  Microbiological
              research will also make use of the instrumentation through the study of an
              unusual bacterium that is a predator of other, larger bacteria.  These studies
              focus on the genes and proteins involved in the development and growth of this
              organism.  This basic research will contribute to the understanding of
              fundamental patterns of genetic control of development.  Researchers in the
              Chemistry and Physics department will use the TEM for qualitative studies of
              non-biological materials.  One project in the Chemistry department is centered
              on understanding the chemical transformations that occur to organic pollutants
              in the environment.  These studies will involve the examination of the size,
              shape, and physical properties, discovered by electron diffraction, of metallic
              particles that are formed as a result of the interaction between metallic
              compounds and organic pollutants.  This research will enhance our knowledge of
              the behavior of pollutants in the environment.  
	The overall significance of
              the research activities that will benefit from the requested instrumentation
              lie principally in the areas of basic biological and chemical research.  The
              cell biological studies, microbiological research, and fungal pathogen studies
              will all contribute to our general knowledge of the way cells function,
              extending from single-celled organisms such as fungal pathogens and bacteria,
              to cells from multicellular organisms, such as RPE cells from vertebrate eyes. 
              The ultrastructural studies on shrimp visual systems and mineralization of
              cartilage in sharks will expand our basic understanding of structural
              adaptations and development of visual systems and bone.  The use of this
              instrumentation in materials research to investigate the reaction product of
              metallic compounds and organic pollutants will provide insight on how these
              pollutants react in the environment, with potential benefits to environmental
              pollutant remediation.  In addition to these advances in research, this award
              will also have significant impact on the quality of research training for
              undergraduate and masters level students.  Students involved in research at SJU
              work alongside faculty on the research projects described above.  The electron
              microscope and digital camera will interface with all of our existing image
              analysis and processing equipment, and thus will greatly increase our
              productivity and ability to train undergraduate and masters level students in
              digital electron microscopy. 

