Title       : MRI: Acquistion of a Tunable Solid-State Laser System for Applications in
               Atmospheric Chemistry, Aerosol Analysis, Process Monitoring and Reaction
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0115857

Award Number: 0115857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189469             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Young mark-young@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Arnold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul D. Kleiber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki H. Grassian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory R. Carmichael  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Iowa will acquire a tunable
              solid-state laser system for applications in atmospheric chemistry, aerosol
              analysis, process monitoring and reaction dynamics. This equipment will be
              utilized in the following applications:  a) laser-based probes of heterogeneous
              atmospheric chemistry; b) single particle mass spectrometry in real-time; c)
              real-time analysis of CO in fuel cell engines; d) reaction dynamics and
              spectroscopy of metal ion-molecule clusters; and e) photochemistry and
              spectroscopy of charge/proton-transfer complexes.  


A laser provides a
              directed beam of coherent monochromatic visible or infrared light, which
              enables researchers to obtain with unprecedented detail, important information
              about fast chemical reactions and/or the structure of molecules.  Its use may
              enable breakthroughs in our understanding of the properties of reactive and
              nonreactive molecules.  These studies will have an impact in a number of areas
              such as atmospheric chemistry and combustion chemistry.  





