Title       : Global Modeling of HIgh Frequency Circuits and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0115548

Award Number: 0115548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Goodnick stephen.goodnick@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Prendergast  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samir M. El-Ghazaly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115548
Goodnick

The conventional approach to analyzing circuits and/or
              systems is to model the behavior in terms of lumped-parameter descriptions of
              the current-voltage relationships. Hence, device, circuit, and system modeling
              is often reduced to establishing the parameters that describe I-V
              characteristics of lumped circuit elements. However, present system operating
              frequencies characterized in terms of bandwidth and/or clock-speed are
              increasing at a rate analogous (and even faster) than Moore's law for
              integration density. As the operating frequency (or the clock speed) increases
              in circuits, one must treat the signals as electromagnetic waves propagating on
              transmission lines, rather than the simple voltages and currents.  At even
              higher frequencies in the tera-hertz and far-infrared regime, one has to
              account for radiation absorption and emission including the interaction with
              the whole environment. This higher frequency regime is not only being
              approached from increasingly higher speed devices and circuits, but also from
              the optoelectronics side as long-wavelength sources and detectors are sought
              for new optical communication channels, as well as a variety special use
              applications such as sensing. This requires the development of new CAD tools
              that combines both electromagnetic theory and semiconductor device concepts.
              This approach is known as Global Modeling referring to its ability to model
              complete circuits using one unified scheme.

Herein is proposed funding for a
              three-year program of research with the goal of developing device and circuit
              simulation tools for accurate simulation of high frequency electronic circuits
              as well as long-wavelength optoelectronic systems. These semiconductor device
              tools will employ a full-band Cellular Automata/Monte Carlo particle-based
              techniques developed under previous NSF funding for efficient accurate physical
              solution of the semi-classical Boltzmann transport equation, coupled
              hierarchically with lower level models such as hydrodynamic solvers, and
              distributed transistor behavioral models. These techniques will be combined
              with robust field solvers based on full-wave solutions of Maxwell's equations
              using finite difference time domain (FDTD) techniques. The 3D solution of the
              coupled FDTD/Device problem is challenging from a computational standpoint,
              hence a large fraction of effort will address algorithmic improvements
              including parallelization in a distributed workstation environment.

The
              device/FDTD simulation kernel will be embedded in a larger simulation domain
              representing for example the passive elements and stripline coupling of the
              matching circuit for an amplifier.  Comparison and calibration of the
              simulation tools will be performed in collaboration with industrial partners.
              High frequency scattering parameter measurements on devices obtained from
              industrial collaborators will be used to calibrate global simulation results
              using the above techniques. The PIs will focus on the modeling of high
              frequency amplifier technologies such as GaAs MESFET and HFET technology, as
              well as more advanced material systems such as SiGe HBTs and GaN field effect
              transistors.  Consideration of thermal effects will be included as well for
              power amplifier applications. They will also apply the proposed simulation tool
              to the investigation of tera-hertz sources and detectors used for example in
              electro-optic sampling, where comparison will be made to ultrafast optical
              switching measurements

