Title       : Development and Implementation of Algorithms for Stochastic Integer Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0115166

Award Number: 0115166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolaos V. Sahinidis nikos@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research addresses stochastic optimization problems that are further
              complicated by the presence of integer decision variables to model logical and
              other discrete decisions in a multi-period or multistage setting.  To cope with
              the computational complexity of multistage stochastic integer optimization
              problems, this research will develop new methodology, algorithms, and prototype
              software.  Fundamental properties of the value function of integer programs
              will be exploited in conjunction with inherent decomposability of these
              optimization problems in order to develop algorithms that scale well with
              problem size.  A large number of problems in production planning and
              scheduling, location, transportation, finance, and engineering design require
              that decisions be made in the presence of uncertainty.  Uncertainty, for
              instance, governs the prices of fuels, the availability of electricity, and the
              demand for chemicals.  Stochastic optimization is the branch of applied
              mathematics that provides systematic tools to prudent decision-making under
              uncertainty.  A key difficulty in stochastic optimization is in dealing with an
              uncertainty space that is huge and which leads to very large-scale optimization
              models. 

The developed algorithms will be implemented in the investigator's
              widely distributed global optimization package BARON and made available to the
              research community.  If successful, this project could have profound
              implications in decision-making under uncertainty in many sectors of the
              economy.

