Title       : Incumbent Resurgence: Lessons from the U.S. Machine Tool Industry, 1975-2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0115393

Award Number: 0115393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59772              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan McEvily smcevily@katz.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raja Roy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This proposal seeks to examine the adaptation of firms in the U.S. machine tool
              industry to changes in their environment, to understand the factors affecting
              firms' capability to transition to computer-numerically controlled designs and
              modular production techniques, as well as more extended relationships with
              customers required by this equipment. Many U.S. manufacturers lacked the skills
              to respond, and as a result employment in the industry and its importance to
              the domestic economy was substantially reduced. Nevertheless, other firms not
              only survived but thrived in the changed environment. This study will trace the
              responses of U.S. machine tool incumbents to the technological and market
              challenges facing the industry between 1975 and 2000 to discern the differences
              between failing and surviving firms.
Prior studies have focused on factors
              that lead to behavioral inertia, offering little insight for how firms act when
              not demonstrating inertia, or how performance is affected by these behaviors.
              The researchers suggest that incumbents may exhibit three types of responses to
              change: (1) They may continue with their existing strategy; (2) they may
              imitate new entrants' products; or (3) they may innovate away from both their
              existing products and those offered by rivals. The strategy a firm enacts, and
              its effect on the firm's survival and performance is expected to depend upon
              the adaptability of the firm's competencies at the time of competitive
              challenge. Thus this study goes beyond extant literature by empirically
              investigating the proposed tradeoff between survival and performance, by
              focusing on survivors of radical technological change, and by exploring the
              relative influence of accumulated competencies and firm choice in affecting
              these outcomes.

