Title       : US-Egypt Workshop: Advanced Material Characterization and Metal Manufacturing
               Techniques, Cairo, Egypt, December 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0115417

Award Number: 0115417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hassan E. El-Shall helsh@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0115417 
Elshall
Description: This project supports a US-Egypt Workshop on
              Advanced Materials Characterization and Metal Manufacturing Techniques to be
              held in Cairo, Egypt, December 2001.  The organizers are Dr. Hassan El-Shall,
              Department of Materials Science and Engineering, the University of Florida,
              Gainesville, Florida and Dr. Adel A. Nofal, President, Central Metallurgical
              Research and Development Institute (CMRDI), Helwan, Cairo, Egypt.  The purpose
              of the workshop is to exchange information between the US and Egyptian sides on
              advances in materials characterization and manufacturing, and to discuss R&D
              needs that may be met through cooperative research projects.  Topics to be
              included are: fine particles preparation and surface coating, powder
              metallurgy, vacuum melting and coating, high pressure die casting, shell
              molding of chemically bonded sand, heat treatment of super-alloys, laser use in
              surface treatment, cutting and welding, and material characterization. 
              Possible avenues for collaboration will be discussed.

Scope: This project
              enables US and Egyptian scientists to participate in a workshop to discuss an
              area of importance to both countries and to identify potential collaborative
              research where the two sides can complement each others' capabilities.  Dr.
              El-Shall is Associate Director for Research in the NSF-funded Engineering
              Research Center for Particle Science and Technology at the University of
              Florida.  He has participated in past seminars and in cooperative research
              projects with scientists at the CMRDI.  Dr. Nofal is the head of the main
              research center in materials science and engineering in Egypt.  His institute
              is well equipped to organize the workshop and to secure participation from
              various academic and industrial research organizations in that country.  Among
              the US participants are several junior scientists.  The project meets INT
              objectives in supporting mutually beneficial joint workshops. This project is
              being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
              scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out joint scientific
              activities.
