Title       : Whispering-Gallery Microlaser with Nanocomposite-Film Gain Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0115442

Award Number: 0115442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert T. Rosenberger atr@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna K. Bandy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas A. Kotov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0115442
Rosenberger

This project is an investigation of laser action in the
              whispering-gallery modes (WGMs) of individual fused-silica spherical
              microresonators (100-1000 um in diameter). The high quality factor (Q) of a
              microsphere WGM enables lasing with a very low threshold. Using a
              layer-by-layer assembly process, a microsphere can be coated with a thin
              polyelectrolyte film containing nanoparticle inclusions of HgTe. The composite
              film then serves as the gain medium, interacting with the evanescent component
              of a WGM into which pump laser light is coupled by optical tunneling via a
              tapered fiber. Pumping with a wavelength around 800 nm can produce lasing in
              the 1400-1700 nm range, with the laser emission coupled out of the
              microresonator by the same tapered fiber. The objectives of this project
              include the following: verify that lasing occurs; optimize the laser output;
              produce stable, tunable single-mode operation; and concurrently
develop the
              theoretical counterpart, for purposes of guiding the experiment and
              interpreting its results. To meet these objectives, the PIs previously
              developed experimental techniques for tuning and frequency-locking the
              microsphere become invaluable. In this project, light from a probe laser around
              1550 nm is coupled into the microsphere to measure optical gain. Then an output
              threshold is sought, and the coincident linewidth narrowing of the output
              provides further evidence of lasing. Analysis of the laser output spectrum is
              performed using a scanning monochromator, a scanning confocal optical spectrum
              analyzer, and a second tuned microsphere acting as a filter. By
              compression-tuning the lasing microsphere and using a second microsphere as a
              filter, tunable single-mode emission can be produced. The theoretical analysis
              includes an evaluation of the laser threshold and relative gain that is
              produced in different WGMs under various pumping conditions. Possible mode
              competition and instability are also explored for normal laser operation and
              also for the microlaser with injected signal. Two exciting new areas of
              research are combined here: resonant optical enhancement in microsphere WGMs
              and easily-fabricated nanocomposite films. The potential impact is great,
              because a single microlaser can act as a source for 100-channel (or more)
              wave-division multiplexing. In addition, with the future use of conducting
              and/or electroluminescent polymers in the film, electrical pumping may replace
              optical pumping. Such a microlaser can be a tremendous asset to the
              telecommunications industry. This work continues and expands preliminary
              exploratory studies, the early results from which are promising. The requested
              funding is to enable a longer-term (3-year) concerted effort in this area,
              while providing partial support for the educational and professional
              development of three Ph.D. candidates, and a hands-on introduction to
              multidisciplinary experimental and theoretical science for two undergraduates
              each year.

