Title       : Acquisition of a Preparative Ultracentrifuge and Tabletop Superspeed Centrifuge
               for Faculty Mentored Undergraduate Research Training in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0115902

Award Number: 0115902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne Romagni romagnj@stthom.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Frohlich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rosemarie C. Rosell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of St Thomas
	      3812 Montrose
	      Houston, TX  770064626    713/522-7911

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of a Preparative Ultracentrifuge and Tabletop Superspeed Centrifuge
              for Faculty Mentored Undergraduate Research and Training in Biology
University
              of St. Thomas, Dept. of Biology, Houston, TX 77006

	A grant has been awarded
              to Dr. Romagni at the University of St. Thomas to acquire a preparative
              ultracentrifuge and  supporting desktop superspeed centrifuge.  It includes the
              cost of several necessary rotors, service for three years, and required
              training for personnel using the equipment.   This instrumentation is an
              important component of departmental research strategy and fills an obvious void
              in the current undergraduate biology research program.  The equipment will by
              used by undergraduate students at the University of St. Thomas, an ethnic
              minority serving undergraduate institution with a majority of women students,
              in independent research projects and in the classroom.  These investigations
              are part of a faculty/student mentoring approach that has grown out of work
              originating in biology classes, and/or to research that is tied to the foci of
              various faculty.  The equipment will also be integrated into such introductory
              biology classes as General Biology and, more intensively, in upper division
              undergraduate classes, such as Molecular Ecology, Cell Biology, Plant
              Physiology, Plant Physiological Ecology, and Biochemistry. 
	Current faculty
              research that will utilize the acquired instruments include the molecular
              ecology and population dynamics of marine invertebrates used as indicators of
              estuarine water quality.  They will also investigate the population genetics of
              several insect vectors of plant disease, in particular, whiteflies.  Another
              area of research includes studies of whitefly-vectored viruses of plants. 
              Finally, the equipment will be used for the ecophysiological/biochemical
              studies of plant secondary metabolites, the elucidation of their modes of
              action and their potential as environmentally friendly pesticides. 
	With
              these funds, many of the current projects that require subcontracting of
              non-campus personnel to run experiments or that require faculty to complete
              some work off-campus, will be completed at the University of St. Thomas.  This
              is a clearly advantageous for students who require a comprehensive laboratory
              experience as part of their science education.  Not only will funding allow
              students to complete entire experiments/protocols themselves, it would also
              enable them to gain valuable technical skills for future work in the biological
              sciences and complete projects for publication in peer reviewed journals. 
              Finally it will permit faculty to undertake research activities currently not
              possible because of the lack of centrifuge capabilities at their
              institution.


