Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Theoretical Study of Dielectric Response
               Function and Applications to the Screening, Optical, & Superconducting
               Properties of Solid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9604493

Award Number: 9604493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11890              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Louie sglouie@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin L. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9604493  Louie    This award provides funds to permit Drs. Steven G. Louie and 
              Marvin L. Cohen, Department of Physics, University of California,  Berkeley, to
              pursue with Dr. Kee Joo Chang, Department of  Physics, Korea Advanced Institute
              of Science and Technology  (KAIST), and Dr. Jisoon Ihm, Center for Theoretical
              Physics,  Seoul National University, for 24 months, a program of  cooperative
              research on the dielectric response function and its  applications to solid
              systems.  Applications will be made to  investigate optical properties,
              quasiparticle excitations  energies, electron-electron repulsive interactions
              in  superconductors, and dielectric screening of large systems.    Recent
              theoretical advances, going beyond the standard momentum  space formalism, have
              allowed the efficient first-principles  calculation of the dielectric matrix
              and the electronic structure  of solids.  The significance of the proposed
              research is to  provide deeper insight into the understanding of electron- 
              electron interactions in solids, in particular, those manifested  in
              exchange-correlation effects and local-field screening.  The  collaborators are
              recognized experts in the field of this  research.  Their collaboration, which
              will include their graduate  students, is intended to provide an intellectual
              bridge between  the U.S. and Korea in this field of science.  This project is 
              relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science  Program which
              seeks to increase the level of cooperation between  U.S. and Korean scientists
              and engineers through the exchange of  scientific information, ideas, skills,
              and techniques and through  collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  This
              project  provides an international research experience for a U.S. graduate 
              student.  Korean participation is supported by the Korea Science  and
              Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  ***
