Title       : Analysis of the Drosophila Gene Rhomboid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9604048

Award Number: 9604048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ethan Bier ebier@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bier  9603801    The goal of this research proposal "Analysis of the Drosophila
              gene rhomboid" is to understand how the Drosophila rhomboid (rho) gene
              amplifies signaling through the EGF-Receptor (EGF-R) pathway. rhomboid encodes
              an integral membrane protein (Rho) which is concentrated in unique plaque-like
              structures at the apical cell surface. The products of the rho and Star genes
              are likely to promote EGF-R signaling since mutations in rho, Star, Egf-r, and
              a gene encoding an EGF/TGF-a type of growth factor (spitz) lead to extremely
              similar embryonic phenotypes. rho is expressed in a spatially restricted
              pattern corresponding to cells requiring hyperactivity of the EGF-R pathway,
              while genes encoding EGF-R, Star, and the Spitz (Spi) ligand are ubiquitously
              expressed. This localized expression of rho is critical for limiting augmented
              EGF-R signaling to appropriate cells. The following are specific research goals
              for this proposal:  I. Dr. Bier will determine whether Rho interacts physically
              with other proteins by generating epitope tagged versions of the Rho protein
              and using characterized antibodies against the epitope tags to
              immune-precipitate active tagged Rho proteins along with other potential
              interacting proteins such as Star or EGF-R. He will also determine whether Rho
              and Star proteins co-localize in plaques. II. He will identify functionally
              important regions of the Rho protein  by generating a limited set of targeted
              rho mutants using in-vitro mutagenesis and random in vivo mutagenesis to revert
              the dominant ectopic vein phenotype of a fly stock carrying a mix-expressed rho
              transgene. He will sequence recovered rho mutants to determine whether they
              cluster in potential functional sub-domains of Rho and whether mutant Rho
              proteins can form plaques.  III. He will compare the genetic requirements for
              rho, Star, and spi during wing vein development and mix-express rho clonally
              using the flip-out technique to further investigate the locally non-autonomous
              action Of rho. He also will us e mosaic analysis to determine the role of spi
              in wing development.
