Title       : Genetic Organization and Epigenetic Silencing of R-marbled Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1999    
File        : a9604919

Award Number: 9604919
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Eggleston weggles@saturn.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604919  Eggleston    The R-marbled (R-mb) complex of r genes in maize
              exemplifies many features of epigenetic gene silencing in plants.  First,
              kernel pigmentation is inhibited irregularly in a pattern characteristic of
              transposable element action.  Germinal revertants confer strong seed and
              scutellum color and weak scutellar node color.  Unique among r alleles, in
              combination with dominant alleles of the a3 and pl loci, this allele permits
              variegated anthocyanin expression in anthers.  Even more remarkably,
              heterozygosity between R-mb and certain other r alleles on the homologous
              chromosome leads to heritable inactivation of the latter (paramutation).  No
              change in R-mb is observed.  Genetic linkage of Lc, a displaced copy of r not
              normally sensitive to paramutation, to R-mb leads to a gradual suppression of
              Lc expression.  Questions to be addressed in this proposal include:  How are
              the determinants of cis and trans gene silencing in R-mb organized and are they
              related? Is expression of gene sin R-mb itself suppressed by these
              determinants?  What types of molecular/genetic changes alter the potential for
              silencing? To study those questions, the   R-mb complex will be fractionated by
              intralocus recombination and the products analyzed by a of genetic and
              molecular methods.    Results from this work will lead t a better understanding
              of mechanisms of gene silencing and evolutionary forces affecting duplicated
              sequences in plants and other species.  The results also will elucidate some
              epigenetic, or non-Mendelian effects to be expected, and avoided or enhanced,
              during the use of transgenes in basic research and in crop and animal
              improvement.
