Title       : Cloning the Mouse Mesoderm Development Gene (msd)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9604530

Award Number: 9604530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernadette Holdener holdener@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Holdener  96046530    The formation of specialized cells called mesoderm
              is a turning point during the embryonic development of species as   diverse as
              jelly fish, insects, and mammals. Mesoderm organizes the early embryo,
              constitutes the vast majority of cells   in the blood, heart, muscle, and bone
              of vertebrates, and indirectly influences the formation of all other major
              organ systems.   Considerable progress has been made towards identifying growth
              factors with mesoderm inducing capabilities. However,   even with these
              advances, we have a limited understanding of how these pathways are connected
              or how cells become   competent to respond to these signaling molecules.  One
              powerful approach toward defining the molecular mechanism   of mesoderm
              differentiation is the analysis of mutants defective in this process. While a
              small number of mouse mutations   have been identified that alter the
              characteristics of mesoderm, only the mouse msd mutation completely blocks
              mesoderm   formation. Msd mutant embryos fail to form mesoderm and consequently
              do not form specialized tissues and organs. Extensive characterization of gene
              expression and cell differentiation demonstrate that defects in msd mutant
              embryos are restricted   to mesoderm differentiation. Thus, the msd mutation
              defines a new gene critical for mesoderm differentiation and provides a  
              valuable tool that can be utilized to identify additional components of this
              complex genetic pathway. The broad goal of    Dr. Holdener's research is to
              understand the molecular mechanisms controlling mesoderm induction. To
              accomplish this   goal, she proposes to characterize the chromosomal region
              encompassing the msd gene. These studies will include identification of
              delimiting deletion breakpoints, construction of a physical map of the region,
              and establishment of a DNA contig spanning the msd functional region. Combined,
              these studies will provide essential reagents for the future identification of
              the msd gene, a key   component of the mammalian  mesoderm induction pathway.
