Title       : Multi-User Shared Phosphorimager with Chemifluorescence Capability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9604727

Award Number: 9604727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59651              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tarun B. Patel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gabor Tigyi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                        The purpose of this application is to acquire a  phosphorimager with
              chemifluorescence capabilities for the use of  seven major users and several
              secondary users. The University of  Tennessee, Memphis is committed toward the
              acquisition of this  instrument. However, because the desired system is
              expensive, the  University cannot provide total funding for the equipment. 
              Therefore, the request to the NSF represents 67.66% of the costs  that we will
              incur; the University of Tennessee, Memphis will  provide the remainder 32.33%
              of the costs for the system.              A number of investigators in the
              Departments of  Pharmacology, Physiology & Biophysics, and Biochemistry at our 
              Institution are employing a variety of molecular biological  techniques for the
              performance of their research. These techniques  range from detection of
              phosphorylated proteins to Northern,  Southern, and Western analyses, as well
              as in-situ hybridization.  Presently, a number of the users in this proposal
              use  autoradiography for detection of radioisotopes in their  phosphorylation,
              Northern, Southern, and DNA sequencing protocols.  For Western analyses the
              investigators rely heavily upon the  chemiluminescence detection assay which
              also requires the use of X-  ray film. Although these procedures involving use
              of X-ray film are  adequate for detection, the low linear range of the film
              severely,  limits quantification of the differences that one observes. The 
              problem of quantifying data from X-ray film exposed to  radioisotopes or
              chemiluminescence is further compounded by the  fact that the film has to be
              subjected to densitometric analyses.  Thus, depending upon the quality of the
              image on the X-ray film and  the capabilities of the densitometer, in the final
              analyses, the  data may at best be semi-quantitative.              The StormTM
              system that we have requested has the  capability of detecting radioisotopes as
              well as chemifluorescence  signals. The system uses the phosphor storage
              technology and  provide s a larger linear range as compared to the X-ray film.
              In  addition, the system provides direct quantification of signals and 
              therefore, the need for a separate densitometer is circumvented.  These
              features coupled with the versatility of the Imagequant  software which permits
              the quantification of irregular shapes (e.g.  ellipses) as would be seen in
              phospho-peptide mapping provides a  rapid, exquisitely sensitive, and
              quantitative method for analyses  of radioisotopes and chemifluoresence.       
                    One of the added advantages of the StormTM system that we  envisage is
              that because of its ability to detect  chemifluorescence, several investigators
              will be able to switch to  non-radioactive detection methods for their
              protocols. This would  be highly desirable since some of our experimental
              protocols, by  decreasing the generation of hazardous radioactive waste, will 
              become more environment-friendly. Moreover, the direct fluorescence 
              capabilities of the StormTM system will also allow us to switch  over to
              certain procedures not involving mutagenic, hazardous  chemicals such as
              ethidium bromide to detect DNA.              The availability of the StormTM
              instrument will not only  expedite the progress of the research of several
              investigators as  elaborated upon in the proposal but also facilitate the 
              interpretation of their data. Preliminary data are provided to  demonstrate the
              sensitivity of the system that is proposed over  conventional X-ray film
              technology. In addition to using the  StormTM system for research, we also
              intend to use the equipment  for educational purposes involving graduate
              students, postdoctoral  fellows and high school as well as college students
              from the Mid-  South area who participate in a variety of programs at our 
              Institution.
