Title       : Analysis of the Drosophila Cysteine-String Proteins and Their Role for
               Neurotransmission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9604889

Award Number: 9604889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360038             (Estimated)
Investigator: Konrad E. Zinsmaier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604889  Zinsmaier    The signaling pathway of depolarization-dependent 
              neurotransmitter release is a product of trafficking  synaptic vesicles through
              repeated cycles of secretion,  membrane recycling, and vesicle genesis. Each
              stage of this  cycle requires the cooperative action of proteins. This 
              proposal  studies the cysteine-string protein (csp)  intrinsic to synaptic
              vesicles.  The loss of csp protein in  Drosophila mutants progressively reduces
              evoked  transmitter  release at higher temperatures, but not spontaneous
              release.  Such a failure of neurotransmitter release in csp mutants  could be
              due to a  defect at any stage of the vesicle cycle.  To gain a better
              understanding of  csp function this  proposal will determine which stage of the
              vesicle cycle  requires csp function by imaging the dynamics of the  synaptic
              vesicle cycle in the csp mutant flies.    From earlier studies it has been
              proposed, that csp might  serve as a cofactor to catalytically recruit an
              unknown  protein to cooperate protein  interactions critical for  evoked
              neurotransmitter release. To explore this working  hypothesis the proposal
              plans to identify protein domains of  csp  which are critical for its function
              by genetic  engineering. In addition, a strategy has been designed to 
              determine the molecular components that interact with csp  combining the
              purification of interacting proteins and the  isolation of mutations
              interacting with the csp mutation.  The  identification of critical parts of
              the csp protein and  its interacting partners will provide the basis to develop
               more specific ideas to directly  elucidate csp function.  Given the numerous
              signaling pathways conserved from flies  to mammals, Drosophila will serve as a
              model system to  illuminate basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal synaptic 
              transmission.
