Title       : Intracellular Sorting and Translocation of Proteins into Plant Peroxisomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1997     
File        : a9604501

Award Number: 9604501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47275              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Trelease TRELEASE.DICK@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604501  Trelease    Technical  Compartmentation of metabolic pathways within
              cellular organelles is a major aspect of the regulatory mechanisms that operate
              within eukaryotic cells. Proper intracellular sorting and translocation of
              proteins into the correct organelle are essential components of subcellular
              compartmentation. Peroxisomes conduct a diverse array of metabolic functions
              which depend on the cell or tissue type in which they reside. The overall goal
              of the research is to experimentally define the means by which glyoxysomes (a
              specialized type of peroxisome) in plant cells acquire proteins from their site
              of synthesis in the cytosol. Experiments will be done with the
              well-characterized in-vivo protein import system, namely suspension-cultured
              tobacco BY-2 cells. Objective 1 will be to determine the C-terminal positioning
              and variation of amino acid residues which are sufficient for proper sorting of
              chimepic proteins to BY-2 glyoxysomes via the PTS1 pathway. Objective 2 will be
              to elucidate the positioning and variation of amino acid residues within a
              N-terminal nanopeptide which sorts proteins to glyoxysomes via the PTS2
              pathway. In concert with these objectives, studies will be initiated to
              identify and characterize putative membrane proteins involved in translocation
              of proteins through the boundary membrane of plant glyoxysomes.   
              Non-technical  Plant cells contain an intracellular organelle termed peroxisome
              that functions in the metabolism of sugars and fatty acids. How the peroxisome
              is assembled has been a major controversy in cell biology. The mechanism of how
              proteins are directed to various subcellular compartments is through targeting
              sequences that are an intrinsic part of the protein. Dr. Trelease will conduct
              research to determine the exact sequences necessary to target proteins to be
              incorporated into peroxisomes.  ***
