Title       : Rapid Signaling Pathway for Corticosteriods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9604200

Award Number: 9604200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miles Orchinik m.orchinik@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9104,9187,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9604200  Orchinik           Steroid hormones are among the most powerful
              regulators  of brain function and behavior known.   For this reason, 
              understanding the mechanism for steroid actions is a  fundamental problem for
              neuroendocrinology and behavioral  neuroscience.  Until recently, steroids were
              thought to act  through a two-step process.  Steroids, such as estradiol, 
              testosterone, and corticosterone, first enter the brain and  bind to specific
              receptors found within target neurons.  The  steroid-receptor complex is then
              activated and binds to DNA,  which in turn, regulates gene expression and
              alters protein  synthesis.   It is the increase or decrease of proteins that 
              bring about the physiological and behavioral response to the  steroid hormones.
               This is referred to as the genomic  mechanism of steroid action and the time
              frame of action  requires anywhere from hours to days.  A conceptual problem 
              exists since many neural actions of steroid appear and  decrement very rapidly.
              This is especially true for  corticosterone, an adrenal steroid, that is
              released during  stress.  Indeed, it has been known for years that under 
              stressful conditions, corticosteroids levels rise  dramatically within 2-5
              minutes, peak within 30 minutes, and  return to basal levels almost as quickly
              with the cessation  of the stressful event.   Dr. Orchinik believes that under 
              acute stress conditions, corticosteroid is acting through a  non-genomic
              mechanism and this award addresses this  important question.  He hypothesizes
              that corticosteroids  are eliciting rapid neuronal responses by first binding
              to  receptors in the neuronal membranes rather than within the  neuron.  Dr.
              Orchinik will carry out a series of studies  that systematically investigate
              the molecular mechanisms  that underlie neurophysiological and behavioral
              responses to  corticosteroid that are too rapid to be accounted for by the 
              genomic mechanism of action.  Initial studies will establish  and characterized
              the presence of corticosterone r   eceptors  in neuronal membranes.  The
              membrane-bound and intracellular  corticosteroid  brain receptors will then be
              compared.  Using an array of techniques, Dr. Orchinik will then examine  the
              events that occur after corticosterone binds to the  membrane receptors.  He
              will determine whether the signal  transduction initiated by the membrane-bound
              steroid  involved receptor interactions with GTP binding proteins,  similar to
              the action of neurotransmitters.  The results  from these studies will identify
              the biochemical pathways  involved in the rapid corticosteroid action.  The new
               knowledge gained from these studies will help us decipher  both the genomic
              and non-genomic mechanisms of steroid  action which is essential if we are to
              understand of how  hormones modulate brain function and behavior, in 
              particular, neural responses to stress.
