Title       : Metabolic Organization in Neurospora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a9604620

Award Number: 9604620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Weiss weiss@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604620  Weiss   This research project will characterize the structure, assembly
              and inter-relationships of the feedback sensitive enzymes of arginine
              biosynthesis in Neurospora crassa. The first seven biosynthetic enzymes,
              including the feedback-sensitive enzymes, acetylglutamate synthase and
              acetylglutamate kinase, are localized in the mitochondria. These enzymes are
              products of the unlinked arg-14 and arg-6 genes. The latter encodes a
              polyprotein precursor of acetylglutamate kinase and acetylglutamyl-phosphate
              reductase; the precursor is cleaved into separable proteins upon entry into the
              mitochondrion. A molecular analysis will be performed to investigate the
              biological role and evolutionary origin of the polyprotein precursor of
              acetylglutamate kinase and acetylglutamylphosphate reductase. The structural
              and catalytic properties of acetylglutamate synthase will be determined. The
              structural and functional relationships between acetylglutamate synthase,
              acetylglutamate kinase and acetylglutamyl-phosphate reductase will be
              investigated to evaluate various models for coordination of feedback
              inhibition, enzyme synthesis and assembly. Genetic and biochemical analyses
              will be performed to ascertain the role(s) of acetylglutamate kinase in
              synthesis, processing, assembly and functioning of acetylglutamate synthase.
              Mutants with a phenotype consistent with defects in arginine transport from the
              cytosol to the mitochondrial matrix will be isolated and characterized. The
              results will be of significance in understanding metabolic regulation and the
              assembly of mitochondria (and other organelles) in eukaryotic cells.  %%%  The
              cells of complex organisms such as man are distinguishable from lower organisms
              such as bacteria by the presence of machinery for both the synthesis and
              breakdown of common biological molecules. In order to prevent the simultaneous
              occurrence of these potentially competing processes, they are often separated
              by intracellular membranes, with one of the processes confined to a mem
              brane-enclosed organelle. These differences require mechanisms to move
              molecules across intracellular membranes and the utilization of novel
              mechanisms to contol metabolism. Defects in intracellular localization can have
              serious consequences for the survival of the organism. This project will
              characterize the mechanism used to control the synthesis of the amino acid
              arginine and the importance of transport of arginine across an intracellular
              membrane as a first step in understanding the unique regulatory mechanisms
              characteristic of complex cells and organisms.  ***
